S/PV.9218

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9218

th meeting
Monday, 12 December 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Kamboj. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Liang Hengzhu
Mr. Olmedo
Mr. Mibissa
Mr. Korbieh
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. Alshamsi
Ms. Jacobs
Mr. Kelley

Agenda
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-74235 (E)
*2274235*

S/PV.9218

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the outgoing Chairs of the subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council: Ambassador Fergal
Mythen, Permanent Representative of Ireland, Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
751 (1992); Ambassador Mona Juul, Permanent
Representative of Norway, Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) and Chair
of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict;
myself, Permanent Representative of India and Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011) and Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011);
Ambassador Michael Kiboino, Deputy Permanent
Representative of Kenya, on behalf of the Chair of
the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention
and Resolution in Africa; Ambassador Juan Ramón
de la Fuente Ramírez, Permanent Representative of
Mexico, Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) and Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017); and
Ambassador Trine Heimerback, Deputy Permanent
Representative of Norway and Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Mythen.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I have the privilege of chairing
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 751 (1992), concerning Al-Shabaab. I want
to begin my remarks by acknowledging the effective
skill and leadership shown by my predecessor as Chair,
Ambassador Geraldine Byrne Nason. It has been an
honour to exercise this important role, and I am very
grateful for the opportunity to share my reflections
and observations, particularly for the benefit of the
incoming elected members of the Security Council.
Before remarking on the specifics of the bodies, I
would like to thank the staff of the Security Council
2/11

12/12/2022

Affairs Division and its Subsidiary Organs Branch for
their invaluable advice and enduring courtesy over the
past two years. They were instrumental in supporting
me and my team and their tireless work in managing
the daily tasks of both bodies. That ensured that their
mandates were implemented proficiently.
As Chair of the Somalia, and now the Al-Shabaab,
Sanctions Committee, Ireland has tried to be as
innovative as possible in the role, including by
broadening the scope of Committee discussions. We
looked for new voices to brief the Committee. To take
one example, we invited the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten, to provide her perspective. That
was the first time that the Special Representative on that
important and relevant topic had briefed the Committee.
There has been a dramatic increase in conflict-related
sexual violence violations in Somalia, mostly affecting
women and girls. The Committee has the tools at
its disposal to deliver on justice and accountability
measures, and the Special Representative called on us
to use them. The relationship between gender rights
and sanctions is one that should be considered in other
United Nations sanctions regimes.
Similarly, we were the first to invite the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative for Children in Armed
Conflict, Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, to brief
the Committee. Grave violations against children have
been consistently highlighted in Somalia, and there is a
clear link to the work of the Committee. In that meeting,
Special Representative Gamba de Potgieter said that the
level of violations against children had been high and
alarming and, like Special Representative Patten, she
called on the Committee to use the tools at its disposal
to provide accountability. We believe that that is a
briefing that should take place more regularly in the
future in the Committee.
Another innovation during Ireland’s tenure as
Chair was a joint meeting with the Yemen Sanctions
Committee. The meeting came at the recommendation
of the Yemen Panel of Experts and was a successful
example of coordination between different, but linked,
regimes. For example, it was clear that there are links in
terms of illicit smuggling routes and that the respective
Panel of Experts should continue to coordinate and
share information. Again, that type of collaboration,
and the building upon synergies, should be considered
by future Chairs.
22-74235

12/12/2022

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Sanctions must be a dynamic tool. Dialogue and
engagement with key stakeholders is critical if regimes
are to remain effective and evolve in line with changes
on the ground. We commend the United Kingdom
for its work during the most recent mandate renewal
to reinforce the focus on engaging with Somalia to
support its capacity to tackle key challenges, including
degrading Al-Shabaab. During our time as Chair,
four senior Al-Shabaab members were listed under
targeted sanctions. That shows the utility of the regime
and the fact that it can be used as an accountability
tool in Somalia. Unfortunately, we did not manage to
visit to Somalia during our time as Chair, due in part
to restrictions imposed as a result of the coronavirus
disease pandemic. I recommend that the visit should
take place as a priority in 2023.
The preservation of the humanitarian space has
been an overarching priority for Ireland for sanctions
regimes. In that regard, we recognized the immense
value of the Somalia humanitarian carveout. We were
therefore very proud to build on that by acting as
co-penholder with the United States to introduce a draft
resolution bringing forward a carveout across all United
Nations sanctions regimes (resolution 2664 (2022)).
I would like to commend the outgoing Somalia
Panel of Experts and sincerely thank them for their
invaluable work and investigations. Ireland strongly
supports the work of the sanctions-monitoring experts,
and we sincerely appreciated their thoughtful meetings
and engagement with us.
Finally, speaking as Chair of the Committee
overseeing sanctions on Somalia, my predecessor and
I have enjoyed very good relations with the Permanent
Mission of Somalia to the United Nations. I would like
to commend the commitment shown by the Federal
Government of Somalia in its dialogue with the
Committee and the Panel during our mandate. This
continued spirit of partnership will be very important
as Somalia moves toward peace and stability.
I will now conclude with a few brief remarks on my
role as Facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) on Iran. Building on the excellent work
of previous Facilitators, and with the support of the
Secretariat, Ireland has done its utmost during the past
two years to support and improve the implementation of
the resolution. Our work included facilitating dialogue,
promoting the procurement channel and effectively
engaging with all Member States in support of the Joint

S/PV.9218

Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). I would like to
thank all Council members for placing their trust in us.
Despite sometimes difficult challenges, Ireland
sought throughout to maintain its role as an honest
broker. I urge everyone to continue to support all
efforts to restore the JCPOA. I hope that the sides can
reach agreement to ensure that the JCPOA can achieve
its goals for the benefit of all.
Finally, I would like to extend my sincere thanks to
the staff of my own Mission, whose skill, professionalism
and dedication have been crucial in supporting me in
my role. I wish every success to my successors.
The President: I thank Ambassador Mythen for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Juul.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Over the past two years, I
have had the honour of serving as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006) concerning the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, and as Chair of the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict.
First and foremost, let me thank the Secretariat
and my team at the Mission for their crucial work and
support. I would also like to thank the Committee and
Working Group members for their cooperation during
the last two years.
Turning first to my role as Chair of the 1718
Committee, there has been a deeply troubling
increase in the number of ballistic-missile tests by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. These launches
are unprecedented in frequency, diversity and scale,
and the nuclear rhetoric of the Democratic People’s
Republic’s State media is cause for grave concern.
Against this backdrop, the sanctions regime
remains an important instrument to curb the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s ability to fund its illegal
programme to develop weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) and their means of delivery. As Chair, I have
worked to put the effective implementation of the
sanctions regime front and centre and to maintain and
push forward consensus in the Committee. This has
admittedly not always been easy, but some progress has
been made:
My predecessor, Ambassador Heusgen of Germany,
stressed the importance of the Committee reaching
agreement on a conversion rate for the consideration

22-742353/11

S/PV.9218

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

of the restrictions on the delivery of refined petroleum
products — the so-called oil cap. I am pleased to note
that the Committee was able to find consensus on
this issue.
Yet there are still many steps the Committee could
take to ensure more effective implementation of the
sanctions regime. A starting point would be to update
the weapons control lists, and particularly, the WMD
ballistic-missile dual-use lists, which the Committee
is mandated to update annually. In my view, it would
also be beneficial for the Committee to seek further
designations of vessels and individuals who obviously
contribute to sanctions evasions by the Democratic
People’s Republic.
The humanitarian situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has also been a constant
focus for the 1718 Committee. As Chair, I have been
committed to the expedient processing of humanitarian
exemptions
aimed
at
facilitating
important
humanitarian assistance to the North Korean people.
All Committee members have also shown a strong
commitment to granting exemptions expeditiously.
However, there is an unfortunate contrast between the
many exemptions granted and the reports of only a
small amount of humanitarian assistance reaching the
Democratic People’s Republic because of the border
closures imposed by the country’s Government.
In general, I believe it is important to separate
the issue of humanitarian impacts of sanctions from
other political considerations. Sanctions should
not be portrayed wrongfully as an explanation for
serious problems that are caused by other factors. The
responsibility for the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea remains with
the country’s regime.
Let me also highlight the importance of the work of
the Panel of Experts to the 1718 Committee. The Panel’s
reporting provides relevant information about sanctions
evasion by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and its weapons programmes. It is therefore important
that all Member States cooperate with the Panel and
that the Panel be able to work in an unhindered manner.
In my view, the Committee would benefit from even
closer cooperation with the Panel, including through
receiving briefings or reports when developments
require it, or when requested by Member States.
Finally, I hope the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea will reverse its path and reply positively to
4/11

12/12/2022

the many attempts for dialogue. I strongly believe
that diplomacy is the right and only way forward for
sustained peace and stability on the Korean peninsula.
Let me now turn to my time as Chair of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict: In this context,
I would like to especially thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Virginia Gamba and her
Office for their engagement and excellent leadership.
I would also like to thank UNICEF, the Department of
Peace Operations and the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs for their close collaboration and
tireless work.
Children are among the most vulnerable in war and
armed conflict, and the Working Group is evidence
of the Security Council’s shared commitment to
protecting them. To this end, I have built on the work
of my predecessor, Ambassador Kridelka of Belgium,
and of his country, by creating an ambitious work
plan. During the past two years, the Working Group
has successfully adopted conclusions on a number of
country situations, with the constructive engagement
of all Council members. It has been important to me as
Chair to consistently strive for conclusions that are fit
for purpose, practical and instruments for real action.
Please be assured that we will continue to work right
up until our Chairpersonship is finished at the end of
this month.
To stay alert of recent developments, we have also
received and reviewed regular global horizontal notes,
and we have had briefings on situations of concern,
including on Ukraine. Furthermore, together with the
Niger, Norway proposed the first ever stand-alone
resolution on the protection of education in armed
conflict. Resolution 2601 (2021) was unanimously
adopted (see S/PV.8889), and the importance of the
subject has been demonstrated again and again over
the last year. We have seen how political instability
and regime change in several country situations on the
Children and Armed Conflict agenda — as well as the
war in Ukraine — have affected the dynamics of the
Working Group.
Against this difficult backdrop, my goal as Chair
has been to ensure that the Working Group stays active.
The potential impact of the Working Group cannot be
overstated. Its contact with the country task forces and
the Governments of the countries concerned should get
even more attention.
22-74235

12/12/2022

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Norway works actively through its Embassies and
the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict
to promote the implementation of the conclusions.
Norway has also worked in its national capacity within
the Security Council to strengthen the protection of
children in mandate renewals and all other relevant
Council products.
The Security Council must continue to mainstream
child protection throughout its work, ensuring adequate
and dedicated capacity in United Nations missions as
well as sufficient funding. This work is too important
for the Council not to do so.
The President: I thank Ambassador Juul for
her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of India.
Please allow me to share a few reflections from my
side as Chair of three subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council, namely, the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism;
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya; and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). Although
I only became the Chair of those three Committees in
August, for my reflections today I will also draw on the
assessments and experience of the previous Chair and
my predecessor, Ambassador Tirumurti.
Let me start with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC). We have chaired that important committee
since January of this year. The Committee draws its
mandate from resolution 1373 (2001) and more than 20
subsequent counter-terrorism related resolutions of the
Council, aimed at ensuring the implementation of those
resolutions by Member States, facilitating technical
assistance to them and organizing regional and thematic
briefings on emergent counter-terrorism issues.
The Committee remained active throughout the
year and has organized 28 meetings that have included
open and closed briefings, plenary meetings, a special
meeting and a press conference. During the year,
10 assessment visits were conducted in Africa, the
Americas, Central Asia, Europe, the Middle East, the
Pacific and South-East Asia, and presentations of the
reports and on the visits were made to the Committee.
The Committee is also planning to organize an
open briefing on 20 December and a plenary and a
closed meeting on 21 December 2022. Besides that,

S/PV.9218

the Chair of the Committee participated in nine
meetings on behalf of the Committee. A record 510
communications in the form of internal notes and
outgoing correspondence were issued during the year.
The Committee issued 154 notices of preparation for
concept notes, background notes, draft agendas and
invites, reports, country assessments and stocktaking
documents for the consideration of the Committee and
a subsequent adoption.
From our perspective, the highlight for the CTC was
the special meeting of the Committee in Mumbai and
New Delhi on 28 and 29 October. The Committee paid
homage to the victims of the 26 November 2008 terror
attacks in Mumbai at a solemn wreath-laying ceremony
at the site of the attacks. It also adopted the Delhi
declaration, on countering the use of new and emerging
technologies for terrorist purposes, following the
special meeting. We have worked out recommendations
mentioned in the declaration and have circulated them
for consideration by Committee members.
Throughout the year we tried to promote coherence
between the various United Nations agencies through
a One United Nations approach, encouraging the
participation of civil-society organizations, women,
young people and other private stakeholders in the
CTC’s counter-terrorism discourse.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya had an equally hectic
period. A few facts related to its functioning show how
much work was transacted in the last two years. There
were seven meetings; 575 written notes, averaging
more than one every single working day; 26 exemption
requests, which were dealt with, and 70 mandated
reports, which were considered by the Committee. The
Chair briefed the Council seven times, and I am slated
to brief it again one last time, this coming Friday.
The work transacted in the Libya Sanctions
Committee is partly a demonstration of a fervent
desire among Committee members to ensure that the
Committee supports the overall political objective of
securing peace and stability in Libya. The enormous
number of documents and exemption requests processed
during that time also reflects the Committee’s
determination to ensure that Libyan wealth remains in
Libyan hands. The Sanctions Committee cooperated
closely with the Libyan Permanent Mission in New
York. It also provided opportunities for the Libyan
Investment Authority to present its point of view to the

22-742355/11

S/PV.9218

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Committee. In my assessment, the work would not have
been possible without the excellent cooperation with the
Chair extended by all the members of the Committee,
including those who served on it in 2021.
Turning to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), as
Council members know, the main task of the Committee
is to administer asset freezes, travel bans and arms
embargo measures against individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities associated with the Taliban in
constituting a threat to the peace, stability and security
of Afghanistan. The implementation of sanctions was
faced with a major political shift after the Taliban took
power in August last year. While the political situation
in Afghanistan has changed, the work of the Committee
remained as important as ever. India held the presidency
of the Security Council in the month of August 2021.
Under our presidency, the Council met three times to
discuss the evolving situation in Afghanistan, resulting
in four outcome documents. They included three press
statements and a landmark resolution — resolution
2593 (2021), adopted by the Council on 30 August 2021
(see S/PV.8848) — which comprehensively addressed
the key pending issues relating to Afghanistan. The
resolution is aimed at ensuring that Afghan territory
is not used to threaten or attack any country, to shelter
or train terrorists or to plan or finance terrorist acts,
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999).
In November 2021, we organized a briefing by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) to Committee members to discuss issues
related to the delivery of humanitarian assistance
to the people of Afghanistan and how to overcome
those difficulties. Subsequently, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2615 (2021) (see S/PV.8941), which
clarified that the provision of humanitarian assistance
to Afghanistan does not constitute a violation of
paragraph 1(a) of resolution 2255 (2015) and permitted
the processing of payments of funds, other financial
assets and economic resources and the provision of
goods and services needed to support humanitarian aid
delivery. We are happy to note that the humanitarian
carve-out provided by that resolution is being utilized
by humanitarian service providers. Under our chairship,
we organized a subsequent briefing by OCHA in April
to enable Committee members to get an overview of the
working of the resolution.
On the other hand, a travel ban exemption granted
in April 2019 to a group of listed Taliban members,
6/11

12/12/2022

with a view to enabling them to engage in peace and
stability discussions in a range of countries, expired in
August of this year. There were concerns expressed by
Committee members about the situation of human rights
in Afghanistan. Subsequently, the travel ban exemption
was not extended, as the Committee was unable to
reach a consensus on it. However, the Committee did
stand ready to grant exemptions on a case-by-case basis
and we, as Chair, sought to facilitate that. In the final
analysis, it is well known that as a contiguous neighbour
and a friend of the people of India, Afghanistan is close
to our hearts. At the same time, we tried to steer the
affairs of the Sanctions Committee with impartiality,
objectivity and neutrality.
I would like to present the following broad takeaways
from our time as Chair of those Sanctions Committees:
First, when incoming Security Council members
express a preference for taking on the responsibility of
chairing a particular subsidiary body, and if there is a
consensus on it among the other incoming members,
it is important that the five permanent members of
the Council respect the consensus of the 10 elected
members and take their preferences seriously.
Secondly, the function or dysfunction of a subsidiary
body depends on the cooperation of its members. We
have been fortunate enough to have received excellent
cooperation from everyone during our tenure.
Thirdly, we need to work out a solution for
bringing predictability to the scheduling of Committee
meetings. Throughout the year, the subsidiary bodies
had to reschedule meetings on several occasions,
mainly due to clashes with the work of the Council and
the resultant unavailability of interpretation, which
caused great inconvenience to visiting participants
and speakers. A more workable solution, such as the
confirmed availability of a second team once a week on
a given day, could be made a practice.
Fourthly, the functioning of the Committees is
still not transparent. They are shrouded in mystery,
especially to non-Council members. It is important to
enhance the transparency of the Council’s functioning
if its credibility is to be maintained.
Fifthly, the credibility of a Committee also
depends on how objective and fair its decisions are
perceived to be. Any impression that decisions are
being taken based on a political preference rather than
22-74235

12/12/2022

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

objective, evidence-based reasoning will damage a
Committee’s credibility.
Sixthly and finally, our work as Chair would not
have run as smoothly if it were not for the assistance
and cooperation provided by the Secretariat. I would
therefore like to acknowledge in particular the
cooperation extended to us by the secretariats of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the 1970 Sanctions
Committee on Libya and the 1988 Sanctions Committee,
as well as the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate
My grateful thanks also go to the Monitoring Team of
the 1988 Committee and the Panel of Experts on Libya.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Ambassador Kiboino.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Chair of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa, who is away. I thank members of the Security
Council for the honour, privilege and confidence
bestowed on Kenya in chairing the Ad Hoc Working
Group for the past two years.
As set out in presidential statement S/PRST/2002/2,
the mandate of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa is both advisory
and analytical in supporting the work of the Security
Council on issues pertaining to peace and security
in Africa. A significant portion of the agenda of the
Security Council focuses on African countries and
issues. At the start of our chairmanship of the Ad
Hoc Working Group, we resolved to be sensitive to
the perspectives and opinions of those countries most
affected by instability and insecurity. In that regard,
as our guiding principle for the identification of topics
and the conduct of the meetings of the Ad Hoc Working
Group, we adopted the theme “Listening better to
African country perspectives and learning lessons
from successes in conflict prevention, resolution
and transition”.
As a first step, we asked ourselves several
questions, including the following. What needs to
be understood better and taken into account by the
Security Council according to African countries on its
agenda? What lessons can we learn from countries and
regions that have successfully managed to transition
from protracted conflict situations into political
stability and peace? And how can the Security Council

S/PV.9218

effectively take those lessons into account as it shapes
peace operation mandates and engages with country
and regional political processes and dynamics? Guided
by those questions, Kenya first embarked on bilateral
consultations with African countries that are at different
stages of the peace-conflict continuum. The aim of the
listening exercise was for the Ad Hoc Working Group
to identify, proactively engage and provide nationally
and regionally owned recommendations that would
enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of the Security
Council in responding to the challenges of peace and
security in Africa.
In order to enrich our discussions, Kenya invited
the countries concerned to participate in the meetings of
the Ad Hoc Working Group and share their experiences
and perspectives on the topics under consideration. We
also ensured that key cross-cutting issues — including,
but not limited to, women and peace and security;
young people peace and security; peacebuilding;
children in situations of armed conflict; and the
protection of civilians — were part of the discussions
and were contextualized and reinforced through a call
for national ownership and leadership in addressing
their related challenges.
Kenya also endeavoured to strengthen the
partnership between the Security Council and the
African Union (AU) Peace and Security Council, in
keeping with the Charter of the United Nations and the
principles of complementarity and respect for African
ownership and leadership in seeking solutions to the
challenges of peace and security on the continent.
During the past two years, we were able to convene nine
meetings of the Ad Hoc Working Group. Two meetings
were dedicated to the respective annual programmes of
work; three meetings were dedicated to the preparations
for the fifteenth and sixteenth annual joint consultative
meetings between the members of the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council; and four
meetings were dedicated to discussions on the following
thematic issues.
The first meeting was dedicated to better
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) — or DDR+. The objective of the meeting was
to identify the issues, trends and challenges relating to
DDR in Africa. We evaluated emerging lessons related
to DDR design and implementation when dealing with
militant and terrorist organizations, whose arsenal
includes the ideological conditioning of fighters.
Members made recommendations on how to better

22-742357/11

S/PV.9218

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

deploy and support DDR, with the “+” allowing space
for consideration of what is further needed for the
evolving security landscape in Africa.
The second meeting was dedicated to the
implementation of the Secretary-General’s reports
on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in
Africa — the peace-security-development nexus. Its
objective was to consider the nexus between conflict
and underdevelopment, using as a starting point the
Secretary-General’s reports on the causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa. Kenya partnered with the Office
of the Special Adviser on Africa and the Peacebuilding
Commission to comprehensively identify key trends and
opportunities for the Security Council’s constructive
intervention in hotspots where such linkages between
conflict and development are most pressing.

12/12/2022

and the AU Peace and Security Council, held from
13 to 14 October. Kenya is particularly pleased that
the two Councils were able to discuss and agree
on the way forward with regard to several issues,
including the strengthening of working methods and
having a common vision for Africa; the promotion
of peacebuilding for sustaining peace in Africa; the
strengthening of AU and United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Africa, including an exchange of views on
predictable and sustainable financing for AU-led peace
support operations through United Nations-assessed
contributions, which needs follow-up and finalization;
combating terrorism and violent extremism conducive
to terrorism in Africa; and the issue of imposing
sanctions in conflict situations in Africa

The fourth meeting was dedicated to peace
processes and peace agreements and policies, strategies
and approaches to conflict resolution in Africa. The
objective was for members to exchange views and
assessments of the achievements and challenges of
the agreements and strategies that the United Nations
has used in peace processes in Africa. The outcome
included proposals on how and when peace processes
may be advanced through better utilization of existing
regional initiatives and the role of peers.

The activities just mentioned include many firsts
that we strongly urge the Security Council to remain
seized of. The causes of conflicts, as well as strategies
that could be deployed for their prevention and
resolution, are multifaceted. The Working Group serves
as an important forum for discussion and reflection on
the emerging systemic threats that affect the continent.
Today efforts to prevent violent conflicts from breaking
out or escalating and preventing resolved situations
from relapsing must involve an array of institutions,
actors and strategies. In particular, collaboration and
coordination between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations is critical. Kenya
therefore ensured the participation of representatives
of regional and subregional organizations, civil society,
academia, women, young people and national actors
from Africa in the interactive meetings of the Ad Hoc
Working Group, which is critical for ensuring that the
Ad Hoc Working Group serves as a forum for relevant
stakeholders to discuss strategies for enhancing
coordination and coherence in their activities. We are
pleased that together we have managed to reinvigorate
and strengthen the partnership between the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council.
However, much more remains to be done.

The Ad Hoc Working Group also facilitated the
successful hosting and consensual adoption of two
substantive communiqués during the sixth informal
joint seminar and the fifteenth annual joint consultative
meeting between the members of the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council, held from
16 to 17 December 2021, and the seventh informal joint
seminar and the sixteenth annual joint consultative
meeting between the members of the Security Council

Moving forward, I would encourage the incoming
Chair of the Ad Hoc Working Group, with the support of
Council members, to work on modalities through which
the discussions and recommendations of the Working
Group can be followed up on to add immediate value to
the work of the Council. The discussions would benefit
from more active engagement at the ambassadorial
level as well. The Working Group is a good platform
through which the Council and the AU Peace and

The third meeting was dedicated to addressing
national conflict situations involving terrorist
groups and illegal armed groups with a transnational
character. That meeting assessed the threat, scope
and destabilizing power of transnational illegal armed
groups and terrorist groups; the existing and possible
measures that the Security Council could utilize in
addressing such situations; and the key strategy, policy
and technical elements of cross-border coordination
that are required to address the challenges posed by
transnational terrorist groups and illegal armed groups.

8/11

22-74235

12/12/2022

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Security Council can hold more regular meetings
and maintain close dialogue on emerging issues to
supplement the discussions held during the annual
joint consultative meetings. It could also be utilized
for horizon-scanning briefings on emerging global
issues that impinge on peace and security in Africa.
To enrich its deliberations, the Working Group should
consider utilizing field visits, which could involve
synchronizing joint field visits, including conducting
them with other committees. We recommend that the
Chair of the Working Group consider making an annual
trip to Addis Ababa to gain an enhanced understanding
of the AU’s work on the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts.
In conclusion, I want to express Kenya’s deep
gratitude to all Council members for their cooperation
and support. I thank the experts who brought much
value to our discussions with their experience, concrete
proposals and recommendations during our meetings.
We are also grateful to our colleagues at the Department
of Peacebuilding and Political Affairs and the Security
Council Affairs Division, as well as the United Nations
and AU officials, briefers and resource persons and all
the States Members of the United Nations, for their
contribution, support, time and cooperation.
The President: I thank Ambassador Kiboino for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador De la Fuente
Ramírez.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I will now provide a brief overview
of Mexico’s chairmanship of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2374
(2017) concerning Mali.
Our chairmanship of the 1540 Committee took place
at one of the most interesting periods in the Committee’s
work — amid the second comprehensive review on the
status of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
It must be acknowledged that it was a very complex
process. The Security Council approved two technical
extensions of the Committee’s mandate to enable it
to continue its work and conclude the comprehensive
review, while acknowledging the long-term impact
created by the coronavirus disease pandemic. The
pandemic resulted in decreased participation in
outreach events — and when that failed, meetings that

S/PV.9218

were entirely virtual — and limited even the possibility
of holding in-person Committee meetings. As a matter
of fact, the very first in-person meeting of a subsidiary
body once that work resumed following the pandemic
was held by the 1540 Committee.
Along with the activities of the comprehensive
review, the Committee continued its work of
coordinating and providing assistance to States.
There are currently 20 requests for assistance from
18 Member States. In addition to providing technical
assistance, the Committee participated in several
workshops to provide follow-up on various offers. The
Group of Experts participated in numerous outreach
events in every region of the world, which helped to
strengthen the Committee’s cooperation with Member
States, international and regional organizations,
academic institutions, industry forums and others.
From 31 May to 2 June, the Committee was able to
hold open consultations here in New York with the
entire membership, as well as with international and
regional organizations and civil-society and industry
members. That was one of the core components of the
comprehensive review — ensuring that the Committee’s
deliberations and decisions were aligned with countries’
general approaches and concerns, beyond those of the
15 members of the Security Council.
In addition to conducting a thorough analysis
of the measures undertaken by States in line with
their obligations under resolution 1540 (2004), the
Committee undertook a review of the lessons learned
over the past five years and formulated proposals for
its future mandate, while bearing in mind various
challenges and emerging threats that would have been
difficult to imagine in 2004, when resolution 1540
(2004) was adopted. The long comprehensive review
process culminated in November with the adoption of
a final report, which contains a wealth of analytical
and statistical information, as well as conclusions
and recommendations that reflect positions expressed
not only by the members of the Committee but by the
general membership of the United Nations. It should be
acknowledged that the support of the Group of Experts
was key in the drafting of that document.
Less than two weeks ago, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2663 (2022), extending
the mandate of the Committee and the Group of Experts
for 10 years. In addition to reflecting the priorities
identified in the comprehensive review, the extension
will further strengthen the assistance that States need

22-742359/11

S/PV.9218

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

to meet their obligations. And for the first time, the
Security Council encouraged the Committee to pay due
attention to the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women in all its activities.
I again thank all members of the Council for their
flexibility and the constructive spirit that made it
possible to reach a consensus. It will be up to whoever
is at the helm of the Committee to implement the new
measures contained in the resolution, as well as in
the corresponding comprehensive reviews, in order to
maintain the 1540 Committee’s relevance. We believe
that the Committee should pay particular attention to
developments in the areas of science and technology.
As we conclude our term of office at the helm of the
1540 Committee, Mexico is satisfied that the subsidiary
body will continue to support Member States in their
efforts to prevent non-State actors from having access
to weapons of mass destruction.
With regard to the 2374 Committee concerning
Mali, I want to begin by noting that in the past two
years, the situation in Mali has been affected by the
coups d’état that took place in 2020 and 2021. In that
context, and despite the pandemic-related challenges,
the Sanctions Committee continued to meet regularly
to monitor the implementation of the sanctions regime
established at the request of the Malian authorities
through resolution 2374 (2017).
The Committee’s work focused on two issues. First,
the Committee members held informal consultations
to discuss the progress and final reports of the Group
of Experts concerning Mali. The reports provided
valuable insights into the challenges associated with the
implementation of the targeted sanctions imposed by the
Committee. Furthermore, while the Security Council’s
attention at meetings on Mali was focused on assessing
the deteriorating security situation and the effects of the
suspension of constitutional order in the country, the
work of the Group of Experts enabled the Committee to
provide timely follow-up on the implementation of the
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which
is a key tool for stabilizing the country.
Secondly, the Committee held meetings with
representatives of Mali and other countries and
organizations in the region with the aim of promoting
better coordination, which is necessary for the
implementation of the sanctions regime. Those
meetings enabled us to identify areas of opportunity
for enforcing the ban on international travel, to which
10/11

12/12/2022

the eight individuals on the current sanctions list are
subject. We noted that greater support is needed from
the Committee and the Secretariat in order to ensure
that the countries of the region have the technical tools
to fully implement those sanctions.
Mexico also prioritized dialogue with the Malian
authorities throughout its chairmanship of the
Committee. In that context, and in response to the
concern expressed by the Government of Mali, the
Committee provided the Permanent Mission of Mali
to the United Nations in New York with access to the
final reports of the Group of Experts prior to their
publication. In my capacity as Chair, I also transmitted
to all the members of the Committee Mali’s comments
on the final drafts of those reports. Similarly, as the
co-penholder with France on resolution 2649 (2022),
which renewed the sanctions regime concerning Mali,
Mexico worked to promote better coordination with the
Malian authorities through a focal point in Bamako.
In the light of what I have mentioned, we encourage
the incoming Chair to continue working to support the
countries of the region in systematically building the
capacity to implement sanctions.
We call on Mali’s authorities and the countries of
the region to facilitate the work of the Group of Experts
that assists the Committee. The visits by experts to Mali
and the region are key to the Committee’s ability to
receive objective and reliable information. In addition,
direct dialogue between the authorities and the Group
of Experts is essential for ensuring that the points of
view of the Governments of Mali and the neighbouring
countries are taken into account in the preparation
of the reports. I am confident that, with the support
of Member States, the 2374 Committee will continue
to contribute in accordance with the peacekeeping
mandate in Mali.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the experts and
the Secretariat staff, as well as my colleagues in the
Permanent Mission of Mexico to the United Nations, for
their professional work throughout the past two years in
support of the proper conduct of both Committees.
The President: I thank Ambassador De la Fuente
Ramírez for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Heimerback.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank you, Madam
President, for this opportunity to share some reflections
on my experience over the past two years as Chair of
22-74235

12/12/2022

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253
(2015), concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities. It has been a privilege, and
I thank my team and the Norwegian Mission for their
support and constructive work.
During the past two years, the Committee has
added four individuals and two entities to the sanctions
list. It has also delisted three entities and 14 individuals,
mainly as part of the annual review or upon the
recommendation of the Ombudsperson. Let me offer a
few personal reflections on that work.
The unity of the Council on countering the threats
posed by Al-Qaida and ISIL (Da’esh) affiliates remains
high, and the 1267 Sanctions Committee, with the
support of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, remains a well-functioning and
effective tool for combating ISIL and Al-Qaida.
However, maintaining that unity requires the continuous
efforts of all the members of the Council, both elected
and permanent. It is therefore important to keep the
work of the Committee focused on its core tasks. For
example, I believe the sanctions regime would have
benefited further if the Committee had been able to
agree on more of the designation proposals it had under
consideration. Using the sanctions regime as a tool to
promote other agendas will only harm its effectiveness
and legitimacy. I also regret that the focus on core tasks
has yet to lead to the Committee agreeing to an update
of its guidelines. In my view, the Committee would
also have benefited from expanding its view to assess
and discuss the sexual and gender-based violence
committed by ISIL and Al-Qaida and its affiliates.
Turning to the role of the Ombudsperson, I
am very pleased that the Committee was able to
agree on the proposed appointment of the current
Ombudsperson, Mr. Malanjum, without the undue
delays that were experienced in the past. I would like

S/PV.9218

to commend the Secretariat and the Committee itself
for their efforts to support a timely and transparent
process for his appointment. As Chair, I witnessed the
Ombudsperson’s instrumental role in safeguarding due
process, and thereby ensuring both the effectiveness
and legitimacy of the sanctions regime. Based on that
experience, it is my firm view that expanding the
mandate of the Ombudsperson or introducing similar
procedural guarantees in the context of all United
Nations sanctions regimes would benefit the overall
effectiveness and legitimacy of those regimes. I am
therefore very pleased that the Council, by its recent
adoption of resolution 2653 (2022), concerning the
situation in Haiti, made clear its intention to consider
authorizing the Ombudsperson to ensure due process
beyond the 1267 regime.
Let me also use this opportunity to welcome the
adoption last week of resolution 2664 (2022), on
humanitarian carveouts. Avoiding unintended negative
consequences of Security Council sanctions, including
for humanitarian action, is crucial. I find it particularly
important that the exemption also applies to the 1267
sanctions regime.
Finally, let me extend a warm thank you to my
colleagues, the Committee members, the Secretariat,
the Ombudsperson and the Monitoring Team. During
this period, all of them in their respective capacities
contributed to the important work of the Committee
and the United Nations counter-terrorism architecture.
It has indeed been a pleasure to work with everyone,
and I thank them for their cooperation.
The President: I thank Ambassador Heimerback
for her briefing.
On behalf of the Security Council, I take this
opportunity to express appreciation to the outgoing
Chairs for the manner in which they have discharged
their important responsibilities on behalf of the Council.
The meeting rose at 4 p.m.

22-7423511/11
