S/PV.8770

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8770th meeting

Thursday, 15 October 2020, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia/Ms. Evstigneeva . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Kridelka
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Auväärt
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Aougi
Ms. King
Mr. Mabhongo
Mr. Ben Lagha
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Craft
Mrs. Nguyen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-26989 (E)
*2026989*

S/PV.8770

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen; and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock are joining today’s
meeting via video-teleconference.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council. I would
like to start with an unusual comment in saying that
we have some good news in Yemen today. As you
probably know, since this morning, the skies of Yemen
have seen what I like to refer to as an airlift of hope.
The parties have started releasing prisoners and
detainees following the agreement that they reached in
Switzerland on 27 September. That process will lead to
the release of more than 1,000 individuals, all returning
to their families. That will bring immense relief and
comfort to all those families who have waited so long to
be reunited, as well as to other families, close relations,
friends and members of their communities.
That is an extraordinary number to be released
during the conduct of hostilities. Indeed, I understand
that it is the largest such operation of its kind in the
history of the conflict in Yemen. As the Council
may imagine, I am personally very grateful to the
International Committee of the Red Cross and its
President, Peter Maurer, for working with us to reach
that agreement and, in addition, for so diligently and
expeditiously working on the implementation of the
agreement — itself a densely complicated task. I want
2/22

15/10/2020

to thank the Swiss Government for hosting the meeting
to which I have referred in a supportive environment,
especially at a time when face-to-face meetings are
so difficult to organize. I would also like to take this
opportunity, unusually, to congratulate my deputy,
Mr. Muin Shreim, for his persistence and his mediation
in reaching that agreement. I am very grateful to him,
as are all of us in our mission.
More importantly perhaps, I commend the parties.
We know that their respective leaderships stepped
up to the plate and made the commitments necessary
to send their delegations to Switzerland for the talks
and, during the period of the negotiation, to negotiate
constructively and successfully at length, day and
night, to reach the agreement concerning those more
than 1,000 individuals.
Of course, this prisoners’ agreement does not
include many thousands more Yemenis detained
during the course of this conflict and it is therefore our
obligation and the obligation of the parties to convene
very soon to discuss further releases, in line with the
commitment that they made in Stockholm in December
2018 to release all conflict-related prisoners and
detainees. Indeed, the first time I met President Hadi,
this was the first topic that he raised with me — the
need for all prisoners to be released.
I would also like to reiterate my call on the
parties to unconditionally and immediately release all
arbitrarily detained civilians, including journalists and
political prisoners. Here, I pay tribute to the Yemeni
activists, actors and civil society organizations that
have determinately, continuously and, many times,
successfully, in situations of peril, advocated for the
release of civilians and for uncovering the fates of
the forcibly disappeared. We hope, of course, that the
implementation of disagreement will build confidence
and, indeed, momentum by demonstrating a simple
truth — that peaceful dialogue and negotiation between
the parties can deliver the road back to peace.
I should also like to take note today of the return
yesterday of injured Yemenis to Sana’a, who had gone
to Oman for medical treatment around the time of the
Stockholm talks in 2018. This is very good news for
those who are finally returning home.
My Office continues to negotiate the agreement
between the parties on a joint declaration. Both parties
remain engaged in those negotiations, but they have yet
to agree a final text. I would like to say that I am neither
20-26989

15/10/2020

The situation in the Middle East

surprised nor, frankly, discouraged by this. We are, in
fact, asking a lot from the parties. I have just returned
from a visit to Riyadh myself, where I had very useful
and extensive meetings with the Government of Yemen,
of course, and President Hadi, as well as the leadership
of the Arab coalition.
Now, I am not surprised. I am not discouraged. We
are asking a lot. The joint declaration is an ambitious
set of agreements, as President Hadi pointed out to
me, which covers, as members know, a nationwide
ceasefire, economic and humanitarian measures and
the resumption of the political process — perhaps the
most important of the three. So, I do understand the
reasons why the parties take their time to cross that
crucial line. Negotiations have been conducted, after
all, in the midst of a global pandemic. We started in
March, as Council members will remember, as a result
of the Secretary-General’s call for global ceasefire and
subsequent call for ceasefire in Yemen.
In the midst of a global pandemic and lockdown,
and while the war raged, perhaps even more ferociously,
across the battlefields of Yemen, the negotiations have
been conducted solely through shuttle diplomacy.
The mediator, myself, has become the negotiator. The
meetings have been mostly virtual due to coronavirus
disease restrictions, and the parties have not yet met
face to face to discuss the joint declaration. We know
now that virtual means may take us a long way, but they
still do not replace the necessity of parties negotiating
with each other to understand the commitments they
will make to each other. This is what made the prisoner
meeting so important and, I hope, such a precedent.
The primary goal of the joint declaration is to end
what I call the shooting war and to open the gateway
to peace. Resuming this process, as I have just said,
is an imperative and, frankly, an obligation for the
people of Yemen. In Riyadh yesterday I met a group of
Yemeni women, mostly from the south, who confirmed
again — as we always hear, every time, in meetings
with civil society and women’s groups — that enough
is enough. This war has gone on years longer than it
needed to.
I cannot stress enough through you, Sir, and
through the Council, the need for the parties to act
with a sense of urgency to conclude the negotiation
on this joint declaration. What we have learned from
the Yemen conflict — and perhaps it is a general
proposition — is that, as time goes on in such internal

S/PV. 8770

conflicts, resolution becomes more difficult. Actors
fragment and multiply. State institutions, of course,
erode. The conflict becomes more entrenched and
more the new normal. The war economy threatens the
national economy, creating financial incentives for
those who want to continue fighting. Interference from
outside the country grows as opportunities present
themselves. And in Yemen, as elsewhere, the longer
the conflict goes on, not only does the suffering of the
people continue, but it also makes it harder to reverse
the circumstances in which they live.
On the military front, the intensity of the fighting
in Ma’rib —we have often discussed the campaign
in Ma’rib — has decreased in recent days. This is
important, but the situation remains volatile, and
I reiterate my call for the attacks on Ma’rib to cease
completely and immediately.
Allow me also to express my concern about the
situation in Al-Hudaydah. While my colleagues in
the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement, continue their efforts to reactivate the
Redeployment Coordination Committee and the joint
mechanisms contained in the resolution to implement
the Hodeidah Agreement, the military situation in
the city and the governorate has recently deteriorated
significantly since my last briefing (see S/PV.8757).
During the first week of October, clashes in the south
of Al-Hudaydah, particularly in Durayhimi and Hays
districts, developed into some of the most intense
fighting since the signing of the Stockholm agreement
in December 2018. We understand that this caused
many, many civilian casualties, as well as those among
combatants. The Mission and I, in their support, have
engaged extensively with both sides and issued public
calls to stop the fighting, following which the situation
now seems tense but calm. I hope that the parties will
sustain this calm and avoid putting the local population
at further risk, as well as threatening the validity and
continuation of the Hodeidah Agreement.
I want to comment today on the situation in
Taiz, an historic place in Yemen, as members know,
that has experienced far too much suffering. It has
been a battlefield these many years, and the people
living there have lived in that war zone all this time.
A solution is desperately needed for Yemen, but a
solution is also needed to unlock the impasse among
the various forces — and there are a number of
them — in Taiz. Such a solution should bring together
all stakeholders — including, particularly but not only,

20-269893/22

S/PV.8770

The situation in the Middle East

civil society and women’s groups, famously active in
Taiz — to contribute to reconciliation, to cross-line
efforts, to protecting schools, to allowing workers to
go to work and trade to resume at least a small part of
the life of those communities and thus to alleviating the
suffering. That is of great importance.
I want to turn to two other issues that require urgent
action to prevent even more widespread suffering
in Yemen.
I know, and as we will hear from Mark, that the
fuel shortages in Ansar-Allah-controlled areas are
having evidently detrimental impacts on the civilian
population. Prices are rising, and vital services are
being affected. The Government of Yemen has in the
past day or so cleared a number of fuel ships to enter
Al-Hudaydah this week, which is a positive step. But
a mutually agreed solution is needed. We have been
working with the parties for months, frankly, to agree a
set of arrangements that will ensure the uninterrupted
flow of fuel into and around Ansar-Allah-controlled
areas to allow essentially for the flow of humanitarian
assistance to reach the people who need it. I urge
the parties to please engage with me on the current
proposals in front of them to make this happen.
Secondly, with respect to the SAFER oil tanker, I
acknowledge the positive public message from Sana’a
on this matter in recent days, and I express my gratitude
therefor. I will not repeat what Mark and I have said
on numerous occasions to the Council about the vital
importance of the United Nations, through the United
Nations Office for Project Services, being granted
permission to assess and undertake urgent initial
repairs of the tanker. We all know what is at stake. The
people in Yemen know what is at stake, and it is more
urgent by the day.
Twenty years ago, the Council adopted resolution
1325 (2000), the landmark resolution on women and
peace and security recognizing women’s contributions
to peace as well as the disproportionate effects of
armed conflict on women and girls. In Yemen, as in all
such situations, women have worked tirelessly, mostly
behind the scenes and always below the radar, to stop the
war, reduce violence, release detainees and build back
peace. They do this against all odds, with a courage we
can only imagine, and often under circumstances that
threaten their lives, their livelihoods and their families.
On this anniversary, I would remind all parties
to the conflict in Yemen to take special measures to
4/22

15/10/2020

protect women and girls and human rights defenders
from all kinds of violence and threats. I hope that they
will, as we will, heed the consistent calls of Yemeni
women, as I said, heard just yesterday once again
in Riyadh for a just and equitable peace – not just a
peace, but a just and equitable peace. I call on them
to strengthen the meaningful participation of women,
including by ensuring at least 30 per cent representation
in their negotiating delegations. I remind us all of the
extraordinary record in the national dialogue in Yemen
of such participation, when Yemen was an icon of
female participation in national dialogues.
Finally, I want to refer, perhaps a bit eccentrically,
to the issue of education. I refer to it not, perhaps, purely
as humanitarian but as an illustration of the costs of
war. I was prompted to say this to you, Sir, and to the
Council through reading about one particular school in
Taiz where the children risk their lives to go to school
and yet go there; where they go to school where there
are few, if any, materials; where the teachers, I am sure,
have rarely been paid and yet go there. This struggle
to continue an education for the next generation is
remarkable; we see it in every conflict, and we are
seeing it in Yemen. It is a testament to the courage of
Yemeni families and the plight of Yemeni children.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: While, as Martin has just said, there
is a glimmer of hope on the political side, experts are
increasingly worried that the window to prevent famine
in Yemen is closing.
I will again brief the Council today on five priority
issues that, when acted on two years ago, successfully
prevented famine: protection of civilians, humanitarian
access, funding of the relief operation, support for the
economy and progress towards peace.
I turn first to the issue of the protection of civilians.
Since we last briefed the Council (see S/PV.8757), we
have seen a further escalation of conflict. There are
now 47 active front lines across Yemen — the most
ever recorded. In recent weeks, the heaviest clashes
have occurred in Al-Hudaydah, Ma’rib and Al-Jawf. In
September, civilian casualties reached the highest levels
recorded this year. As Martin alluded to, in recent days,
hostilities have subsided a little bit, but it is not enough.
20-26989

15/10/2020

The situation in the Middle East

Approximately 1 million displaced people
are sheltering in and around Ma’rib city. A major
confrontation there, as we said before, would be
disastrous. The escalating violence in Al-Hudaydah
is also very worrying. Al-Hudaydah, of course,
remains the lifeline for northern Yemen, and anything
jeopardizing its smooth and continuous functioning
would put millions of lives at risk.
Violence also continues to force people from their
homes. Nearly 150,000 people have fled this year, most
of them in Ma’rib. The International Organization for
Migration estimates that 80 per cent of people displaced
in the last two months have had to move into already
overcrowded shelters.
Critical civilian infrastructure is still coming
under attack. Just yesterday, a civilian was killed and
seven were injured when a local market in Ma’rib was
hit by missiles. On 11 October, in Taiz, artillery shells
struck a school, killing a child and injuring others. And
despite Yemen’s hunger crisis, farms are attacked with
alarming regularity. The Norwegian Refugee Council
estimates that air strikes and shelling have hit farms
more than 900 times since 2018; that is about once
every day.
So I repeat: Yemen needs a nationwide ceasefire,
one that covers Ma’rib, Al-Hudaydah and everywhere
else. That has been our message for many months.
All parties must take constant care to spare civilians
and civilian objects throughout military operations.
There should be accountability for violations. We
welcome the recent mandate renewal of the Group of
Eminent International and Regional Experts, which was
established by the Human Rights Council to document
violations and promote greater accountability.
The second point is unimpeded humanitarian
access. In the south, front-line humanitarian staff
continue to face challenges due to insecurity, including
harassment by armed groups. Discussions with the
Government of Yemen to streamline bureaucratic
processes to approve aid projects are still continuing,
as they have done for the last six months. We hope that
a resolution can be expedited.
In the north, agencies are grappling with more
severe access challenges, mainly the result of
restrictions imposed by the Ansar Allah authorities.
Since my most recent briefing, they have taken concrete
steps to reopen Sana’a airport to humanitarian flights,

S/PV. 8770

which is welcome. That means that aid personnel
and cargo should again be able to come in and out
of northern Yemen. Reopening the airport has also
enabled the return home on 4 October of 29 Yemeni
patients and their carers who had travelled to Jordan for
medical treatment, using the air bridge established and
facilitated by the World Health Organization.
More broadly, donors and agencies continue to
engage with the Ansar Allah authorities with the
aim of improving the operating environment for
humanitarian agencies. More progress is needed there.
The European Union and the Government of Sweden
will convene senior officials in November to take stock
of developments on this issue and to look to the future.
On a separate note, as Martin touched on, we
continue to speak to the Ansar Allah authorities about
the SAFER tanker. The discussions have accelerated in
recent weeks, and, as he indicated, we hope to receive
formal written approval in the coming days for the
United Nations mission to conduct a comprehensive
assessment of the vessel and to undertake initial repairs.
The third point concerns funding for the
humanitarian operation. Since my last briefing, funding
for the Yemen humanitarian response plan has increased
from 30 per cent to 42 per cent. That is obviously to be
welcomed, but at this time last year, the response plan
was 65 per cent funded. Funding shortages still mean
that more key programmes are at risk of shutting down.
Just last week, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations was forced to close
a livestock vaccination programme that was serving
3 million rural families. Aid agencies are now reaching
only about 9 million people a month in Yemen, down
from more than 13 million at the start of the year. What
is to be the fate of the 4 million people we no longer
have the money to help?
I said earlier that the window to prevent famine in
Yemen is closing. Increasing support for the response
plan, starting with fulfilling unpaid pledges, but also
increasing support back to last year’s levels, is the
fastest way to help.
The fourth point concerns Yemen’s economy,
which remains a key determinant in the risk of famine.
Commercial food imports have remained largely stable
in recent months, with more than 380,000 metric tons
entering Al-Hudaydah and Saleef in September, but the

20-269895/22

S/PV.8770

The situation in the Middle East

cost of food and other basic goods means that they are
out of reach for millions of families.
Fuel shortages also persist in the north. They are
driving up the price of fuel, which in turn is exacerbating
humanitarian needs. Only 20,000 metric tons of
commercial fuel entered Al-Hudaydah in September.
That is the third-lowest figure ever recorded and 76 per
cent less than in August. Currently, 20 commercial fuel
ships are waiting to enter the port and discharge the
equivalent of three months of imports. The Government
is blocking their entry due to an ongoing dispute with
the Ansar Allah authorities over the management of
import revenues. The Government has periodically
cleared vessels to enter Al-Hudaydah on an exceptional
basis, including a number this month, as Mr. Griffiths
mentioned. But that modest and temporary exception
to the fuel blockade does little to solve the problem. I
therefore reiterate the Special Envoy’s request for the
parties to work urgently with his team to find a solution.
Fuel is essential to providing life-saving assistance to
millions in need.
I turn now to the exchange rate. In September, the
Yemeni rial reached an all-time low, trading in the south
at 850 to the dollar. This means fewer people can afford
food and other essential goods, nearly all of which
have to be imported. Yemen needs regular foreign
exchange injections to help stabilize the rial, subsidize
commercial imports and pay salaries. That worked in
the past and it can work again. The economic support
we saw in 2018 was critical to the famine-prevention
effort. Given current conditions in Yemen, I am not
convinced that humanitarian agencies, even if they had
more funding, could prevent famine now if there is no
accompanying support for the economy.
My final point is progress towards peace. The crisis
urgently needs a political solution. That is what would
help move the country back from the edge of famine.
Indeed, food security data show clearly that the worst
hunger is concentrated in areas affected by conflict.
The Council has just heard Mr. Griffiths summarize
developments on the political track. The Council’s
support on that and on the other issues I have raised has
never been more important.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
6/22

15/10/2020

Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Special Envoy
Griffiths for their briefings.
It is not often that we start Yemen discussions with
reasons to hope, so let me begin by welcoming the
news of the prisoner release. The first flights happened
today following the agreement, on 27 September, by the
parties to release 1,081 prisoners. I particularly applaud
the efforts of the International Committee of the Red
Cross in that regard.
Today’s news is not just about that specific
confidence-building measure; it also demonstrates that
dialogue can lead to positive outcomes. That momentum
now needs to be carried into the political tracks. The
parties must urgently agree to the United Nations joint
declaration. On the Riyadh agreement, I welcome the
leadership of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia towards
achieving a resolution, and urge the parties to rapidly
form a Government.
As we mark the twentieth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) this month, I want to echo what Mr. Griffiths
said about the importance of the inclusion of women in
political processes, including in Yemen.
I also welcome his assessment that the violence
in Ma’rib has decreased recently, and echo his call
for it to stop completely. That violence has entered its
sixth month and has had an untold cost on the lives of
many Yemenis — young and old, men and women. The
fighting that has now opened up in Al-Hudaydah is
not only in clear breach of the Hodeidah Agreement,
but is needless and will only lead to further instability
in a country that is staring down the barrel of disease
and famine.
Today, I call for renewed and urgent engagement
with the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement and the Special Envoy in order to reach
a ceasefire. I stress that the Yemeni parties — which
means the Government of Yemen just as much as it
means the Houthis — should cooperate with the Special
Envoy to agree to his joint declaration proposals as soon
as possible. I want to reiterate the United Kingdom’s
full confidence in the United Nations-led process and
in Special Envoy Griffiths.
On 22 September, Brigadier General Shekarchi, a
spokesman for the Iranian armed forces, admitted that
Iran had provided technical assistance and training to
the Houthis. That represents an evident breach of the
20-26989

15/10/2020

The situation in the Middle East

arms embargo. It is deeply concerning and reaffirms
our concerns about Iran’s destabilizing activities in
Yemen and the wider region. We call on Iran to cease
such activities, which risk escalating the conflict, and
to support a political solution to the conflict in Yemen.
We must prevent Yemen from tipping into famine.
We welcome the recent positive steps taken by some
donors to provide humanitarian funding, including new
commitments from the United States, Kuwait and some
European Union member States, as well as Saudi Arabia
signing agreements with United Nations agencies.
The United Kingdom itself recently announced over
$65 million in additional funding, taking us to over
$250 million this year and building on $300 million last
year. Funding levels remain alarmingly low at 42 per
cent, however, with less than half the level of funding
compared to this time last year.
Meanwhile, severe access constraints — some in the
south, but mainly in Houthi areas — continue to prevent
the delivery of life-saving assistance. That is recklessly
driving up the risk of famine. As of 27 September,
94 non-governmental organization (NGO) projects,
with a cumulative budget of $218 million, remained
unimplemented, largely due to Houthi restrictions.
All barriers to humanitarian access in the country, no
matter where, must immediately be removed and the
Houthis must give the United Nations and NGOs the
permissions they need to operate and save lives across
the north.
Mr. Lowcock welcomed the reopening of Sana’a
airport for humanitarian cases. I agree with him and say
that it is essential that Sana’a airport and Al-Hudaydah
port be kept open and that both parties come to an
immediate agreement on fuel imports, as Mr. Griffiths
laid out.
If we are to avoid famine, it is also essential that
the Central Bank of Yemen be swiftly provided with
external financial assistance so that it has sufficient
hard currency to sustain food imports and stabilize
prices. Food affordability, rather than availability,
seems to be the main driver of hunger at present. The
exchange rate in the south has reached its lowest level
since the conflict began and food security is rapidly
deteriorating. The proportion of people unable to find
sufficient amounts of food increased from 28 per cent
in May to 43 per cent in August. The Government of
Yemen has a critical role to play here, too. It urgently
needs to develop a credible and transparent economic

S/PV. 8770

plan that reassures donors of its ability to implement
economic reform.
Finally, I want to welcome the tentative news that
the United Nations Office for Project Services and the
Houthis appear to have agreed, in principle, to a mission
to conduct an assessment and subsequent light repairs.
I understand that it could take well over a month for
the experts’ work to be completed, so any unnecessary
delay must be avoided. I look forward to next month’s
briefing and hope that we will have news then that the
mission is under way. I also want to thank Germany,
the Netherlands and France for joining the United
Kingdom and Saudi Arabia in providing funding for
the initial mission.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would
like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their
important updates.
I would also like to congratulate the World Food
Programme on winning the 2020 Nobel Peace Prize.
This speaks volumes about its crucial work, including
in Yemen. It has delivered food assistance to 13 million
people, despite many challenges.
We would also like to applaud the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the Special Envoy’s
and his deputies’ efforts to finalize arrangements
for the release of 1,081 detainees, as part of the
important confidence-building measures and of the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement. We
hope that this commitment will soon translate into
more implementation.
What Mr. Griffiths mentioned was good news: an
airlift of hope, hope for the families of the detainees.
It is an important first step, and we hope for more
to come soon. Nevertheless, the overall situation
remains bleak, as Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
alluded, with funding being the biggest challenge for
humanitarian assistance in the face of the coronavirus
disease pandemic. It is indeed not an easy time, and
we are very disappointed that the joint declaration has
not been agreed upon. In this regard, let me highlight
three points.
First, the escalation of violence needs to stop. It
is very unfortunate that the Houthis have intensified
their attacks, thereby increasing the level of violence

20-269897/22

S/PV.8770

The situation in the Middle East

across Yemen, despite the calls for de-escalation by
the Secretary-General and resolution 2532 (2020).
This intensified fighting is particularly worrying
for Ma’rib and Al-Hudaydah. The Special Envoy has
warned us that fighting in Ma’rib will undermine
hopes for the political process and push hundreds of
internally displaced persons to move. Furthermore, the
military escalation in Al-Hudaydah undermines the
Stockholm Agreement.
We have consistently expressed our deepest
concerns for these attacks by the Houthis, including to
Saudi Arabia. They pose a serious threat to regional
security, and we reiterate our call for immediate
de-escalation across Yemen. Parties must also comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law and fully protect both civilians and humanitarian
personnel. I would like to underline the point that
Mr. Lowcock mentioned on the unimpeded access for
humanitarian workers. In our view, further restrictions
by anyone sends a signal of not caring about the plight
of the people of Yemen.
My second point is the imperative of an inclusive
political process. While it seems that the military
approach is the preferable choice, it only brings greater
suffering to the Yemenis. Since April, the Special Envoy
has offered a choice for peace through his three-point
proposal in the joint declaration. Without a doubt, only
through an inclusive political solution can the crisis and
the conflict in Yemen be solved. The joint declaration
provides the building blocks for that. In that regard,
Indonesia once again urges all parties, the Houthis and
the Government, to agree on the joint declaration and
resume dialogue towards a comprehensive political
settlement. It is not an easy task, we know, but the
people of Yemen deserve a ceasefire — a holiday from
violence — and long-lasting peace. It is the right thing
to do, and to quote Mr. Griffiths, “enough is enough”.
My third point is our concern over the humanitarian
situation and the risk of famine. The continued battle
complicates the movement of humanitarian workers as
well and will increase the number of people who need
assistance. In the shrinking economy where financing
has been a major challenge for humanitarian assistance,
we are worried that programmes may be cut back. We
do hope that we will find a more sustainable approach
to easing the humanitarian situation in Yemen,
including addressing the cost of the economic crisis.
We would also like to reiterate our support for the
five urgent priorities updated by Mr. Lowcock, while
8/22

15/10/2020

emphasizing the importance of safe and unhindered
humanitarian access.
Again and again, we continue to talk about the FSO
SAFER oil tanker. We understand that there are some
details involving the need for the assessment team to
repair the vessel. We hope that there are no further
hindrances to the United Nations team starting its work
to avoid a potential catastrophe.
In conclusion, the 13 million Yemenis who will go
hungry if they do not receive food assistance deserve a
chance for peace and, for once, not to worry about food.
We hope that there will be an immediate cessation of
hostilities, and that the parties will start finding a
sustainable solution to solve the crisis their country. We
in the Security Council are united in finding a solution
and in seeking peace in Yemen. It is now up to the
people of Yemen and its leaders to also seek peace for
future generations of Yemeni children. It takes courage
and it takes compassion.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock for their briefings.
In the past two years, the situation in Yemen has
seen twists and turns. The international community and
the parties in Yemen have made great efforts to find a
political solution to the Yemeni issue. With the adoption
of the Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh agreement,
some progress has been achieved. Meanwhile, we have
also noted that the relevant agreements have not been
effectively implemented. Recently, conflicts in many
regions of the country have escalated. A severe lack of
mutual trust among the parties and a political process in
deadlock are combined with a worsening humanitarian
crisis. China finds these facts deeply worrying. We
hope that the parties in Yemen will have a greater sense
of urgency and show political will to jointly promote a
breakthrough in the peace process in the country.
First, a ceasefire must be achieved as soon as
possible. In the general debate of the seventy-fifth
session of the General Assembly, Secretary-General
Guterres reiterated his appeal for a global ceasefire,
calling for such a ceasefire by the end of the year. China
supports the Secretary-General’s appeal and hopes that
the Security Council and the international community
will play an active role to increase mediation efforts
in conflict situations such as the one in Yemen and
provide strong support to the work of the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Envoy.
20-26989

15/10/2020

The situation in the Middle East

Both the Yemeni Government and the coalition
have expressed support for the Secretary-General’s
ceasefire appeal, which deserves our recognition. We
hope that all parties in Yemen will put the interests of
the people and future of the country first, respond to the
people’s desire for peace and stability and immediately
stop using force and return to the track of dialogue
and negotiation.
China is concerned over the missile and drone
attacks against Saudi Arabia and the escalation
encompassed in such areas as Al-Hudaydah. The United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
should implement its mandate to monitor the ceasefire
in accordance with the request set forth in resolution
2534 (2020).
Secondly, political commitments must be honoured.
The Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh agreement
have shown the tremendous efforts made by all the
parties and therefore cannot be left as empty words.
The parties to the conflict cannot always go back and
forth between the battlefield and the negotiating table
in a vicious cycle of fighting and talking. The key is to
implement the agreements reached. This is conducive to
building mutual trust among the parties. It also serves
as the basis for new progress.
Properly solving the problem in the south has a
bearing on the overall situation in Yemen. China highly
commends Saudi Arabia’s contribution to advancing the
implementation of the Riyadh agreement and supports
Saudi Arabia in continuing its important work.
Through the mediation of the Special Envoy and
the International Committee of the Red Cross, the
Yemeni Government and the Houthis recently reached
an agreement on the prisoner exchange. Today we see
major progress in the exchange of prisoners. China
greatly welcomes that, and we hope that additional
confidence-building measures will be taken.
Thirdly, with regard to strengthening the regional
security dialogue, a political solution to the Yemeni issue
requires a conducive regional security environment.
China advocates that regional issues be resolved
through dialogue and consultation among the countries
in the Gulf region by building a platform for dialogue
among the countries of the region in order to forge a
new consensus around maintaining regional peace and
stability. Other countries have also put forward similar
ideas. We see agreement on the general direction. We
should therefore work together to realize such ideas and

S/PV. 8770

promote the regional peace process. China encourages
the relevant countries in the region to make use of their
own advantages so as to positively influence the parties
in Yemen and contribute to the political settlement of the
Yemeni issue. At the same time, Yemen’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity should be
fully respected and safeguarded.
Fourthly, with regard to striving to alleviate the
humanitarian crisis, currently more than 20 million
people in Yemen face the threat of food insecurity. At
least 1 million women and 2 million children are severely
malnourished. The Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations and the World Food Programme
have repeatedly issued famine warnings. More than
2,000 cases of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) have
been confirmed in Yemen, while the actual number of
those infected is much higher. China urges all parties
concerned to abide by international humanitarian law,
put people and their lives first, protect civilians, in
particular the vulnerable groups, and provide safe and
unhindered humanitarian access, including allowing
the United Nations to conduct a safety assessment of,
and repairs to, the FSO SAFER oil tanker as soon as
possible. The international community, particularly
donor countries, should provide sufficient funding to
the Yemen humanitarian response plan by honouring
their pledges as soon as possible. Every effort should be
made to prevent a famine in Yemen, protect farmland
and agricultural production facilities, keep commercial
ports operating and effectively deal with the plague of
locusts and floods. We must support the World Health
Organization in playing a leading role in fighting the
pandemic and saving lives.
China has always stood by the Yemeni people. We
have provided several batches of food aid to Yemen,
covering most of its provinces. Since the outbreak of
COVID-19, we have donated several batches of supplies
for the pandemic response to the Government and
the people of Yemen and have proactively shared our
experience in fighting the pandemic. In future, we will
continue to provide rice, medical equipment and other
humanitarian assistance to the Government and the
people of Yemen and work with the Gulf countries and
the international community to contribute to easing the
humanitarian crisis on the ground.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
We wish to express our gratitude to Martin Griffiths
and Mark Lowcock for their updates and continued
cooperation with the Security Council. We also

20-269899/22

S/PV.8770

The situation in the Middle East

15/10/2020

commend their unwavering dedication to the people
of Yemen and their efforts to find a lasting solution to
the conflict.

do more before it is too late. I implore the actors within
Yemen to work with the Special Envoy, in good faith, to
resume negotiations.

I begin by reiterating that Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines stands in solidarity with the people of
Yemen, who have suffered, and continue to suffer,
immeasurably. We underscore yet again that the only
viable solution to the crisis is an inclusive Yemeniled and Yemeni-owned political process. That cannot
be overstated. We continue to see that attempts at a
military solution are counterproductive and come at the
expense of the Yemeni people.

We welcome the additional funding that has been
pledged and encourage all donors to disburse funds as
soon as possible. We regard the recent prisoner-exchange
agreement, and the advancements made towards it, as a
huge breakthrough in the political process and a muchneeded confidence-building measure.

As Mr. Lowcock said in his briefing, much is being
asked of the parties, but we need to ask a great deal
of them because enough is enough. Let us put this
protracted conflict into perspective. We need to truly
grapple with the magnitude of its impact. The people of
Yemen have been enduring this conflict for far too long
and, while no one within Yemen has been left unscathed
by it, we know that the children of Yemen have been,
and will continue to be, the most affected.
The children of Yemen will suffer psychologically
and to an unfathomable extent, even after the conflict
finally comes to an end. Too many children in Yemen go
to sleep hungry as the country suffers an unprecedented
humanitarian crisis. Too many children in Yemen,
some of whom can sooner describe the sound of a gun
and pangs of hunger and of grief than they can spell,
read or write their own name, have been deprived of
their education. Too many Yemeni children have never
known peace. Too many Yemeni children have only
ever known war. Let us allow that to sink in. Those are
the children for whom we are meant to guarantee peace
and security.
Yet, under our watch, schools continue to be
attacked, children continue to be maimed and killed,
and there continue to be reports of sexual assault and
humanitarian access denied. Far too many children, if
they survive, will be forever scarred. We are failing
them, and that can never be justified. It is time to heed
the call of Yemeni women.
We recognize that the world is overwhelmed by
the coronavirus disease and its consequences, but the
people of Yemen are fighting on too many fronts all
at once. They are our brothers, they are our sisters and
their children are our children, all of whom continue
to cry out for our help. On their behalf, today I make a
plea to the international community to do better and to
10/22

We appreciate the unstinting efforts of the Special
Envoy, Martin Griffiths, and his team, as well as the
work of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, the United Nations Mission to Support the
Hudaydah Agreement and all other organizations
operating to bring relief to the people of Yemen.
However, before closing, we must also reiterate our
continued concern for the lack of concrete progress on
the FSO SAFER oil tanker. That is an issue that must
be resolved as soon as possible if we are to avoid a
humanitarian and environmental catastrophe in Yemen
and the wider region.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock for their briefings.
The war in Yemen must be stopped. We reiterate that
the only solution is political. We therefore call on the
parties to the conflict to resume talks in coordination
with the Special Envoy, to whom France reiterates
its full support. The parties must agree on the draft
declaration proposed by the Special Envoy. They must
also seek a comprehensive political solution without
delay, allowing the effective participation of women
in that process. The agreement on the exchange of
prisoners reached in Montreux at the end of September
is a positive step. It now needs to be fully implemented,
and we welcome the first flights seen today. Further
confidence-building measures should follow soon.
In the north, we condemn in the strongest terms
the offensive against Ma’rib and the Houthi attacks
against Saudi territory. We are also very concerned
by the resumption of hostilities in the Al-Hudaydah
governorate, in violation of the Stockholm Agreement.
Pursuing a military solution will lead nowhere, serving
instead only to exacerbate the suffering of the Yemeni
people. The Security Council therefore reiterates its
clear call for a ceasefire, in line with resolution 2532
(2019).
20-26989

15/10/2020

The situation in the Middle East

In the south, the Riyadh agreement must be fully
and effectively implemented. That must lead to the
swift formation of a new Government that includes
representatives from the south of Yemen. The Yemeni
parties must show a spirit of compromise at this
crucial juncture.
The humanitarian situation continues deteriorating.
Amid worsening food insecurity, the coronavirus
disease pandemic and measles and polio epidemics, we
must collectively do all we can to tackle the growing
humanitarian needs. To that end, it is crucial that all
parties guarantee humanitarian access to all persons
in need. The protection of civilians, including the
protection of humanitarian and medical personnel,
as well as the protection of civilian infrastructure,
should also remain an absolute priority. Respect
for international humanitarian law is an obligation
applicable to all.
Turning, in conclusion, to the FSO SAFER oil
tanker, there is an urgent need to act. We call once
again on the Houthis to, without delay, permit access to
the tanker for the United Nations-mandated inspection
mission, to which France has contributed financially.
France will remain fully mobilized and committed
to achieving peace in Yemen and de-escalation at the
regional level.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We would also like also to thank
Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock for their briefings. Just
a few weeks ago, we enthusiastically welcomed the
news of a prisoner exchange agreement between the
Government of Yemen and the Houthis. We are pleased
that today we begin to see that agreement bear fruit.
We also draw hope from the fact that the situation in
southern Yemen may have begun to stabilize thanks to
the Riyadh agreement. However, clashes over recent days
in the governorates of Al-Durayhimi and Ma’rib have
increased, and the situation in the port of Al-Hudaydah
is seriously undermining the Stockholm Agreement as
well as the efforts of the Special Envoy to ensure that
the parties fully implement it. It is important to stress
that 70 per cent of Yemen’s imports pass through that
port, and that fighting in the surrounding area further
hinders humanitarian assistance operations.
We condemn this increase in hostilities, while at
the same time we stress that only a political solution
to the conflict could lead to lasting peace. According
to the information gathered by civilian population

S/PV. 8770

monitoring project, the number of civilian casualties
in Yemen in September was the highest since the last
November, with 67 dead and 123 wounded.
I would like to turn now to the most recent report of
the Panel of Expert on Yemen. Besides troubling reports
of illegal attacks against civilians, the report includes
evidence of the recruitment and use of child soldiers.
This is alarming and deeply worrisome. All parties to
the conflict must comply with the rules of international
humanitarian law, as well as having a moral duty to halt
hostilities immediately.
We are extremely concerned about the imminent
collapse of the economy. The falling value of Yemeni
rial and the fuel crisis mean that the few people
with access to capital cannot purchase food and that
the transport of people, supplies and goods is evermore precarious. And injection of foreign currency,
as performed in 2018, would be critical to avert
catastrophe. In addition, food insecurity worsens by
the day. We are deeply concerned that several areas in
Yemen are fast approaching conditions that amount to
famine and that additional factors, such as the locust
plague, increase the complexity and gravity of the
situation. The saddest aspect of this situation is that
we know how to resolve it. It is a completely avoidable
tragedy. International organizations have sounded the
alarm. Aid groups know what they have to do. We are
encouraged by reports that donor countries, especially
regional partners, are rising to the occasion, making
greater funds available to Yemen.
In that regard, and in conclusion, we would like
to urge donor countries to continue increasing their
support to mitigate this immense humanitarian crisis
and to step up their official development assistance
for those countries most affected by the pandemic
and its devastating consequences. We know that
the uncontrolled spread of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) continues in Yemen. And we call once
again for the vaccine and other health technologies
needed to tackle COVID-19 be made accessible in an
equitable manner and for assurances that they will be
distributed to all human beings around the world. Thus
the role of the World Health Organization, together with
donor countries and the private sector, is essential to
achieving this goal the spirit of cooperation, solidarity
and justice.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
our briefers for their insights. We appreciate Martin

20-2698911/22

S/PV.8770

The situation in the Middle East

Griffiths’ update on the prisoner release agreement.
That is an important achievement made possible by his
tireless efforts, together with those of the International
Committee of the Red Cross. We very much hope to hear
more positive updates on the parties’ implementation of
those commitments in the coming days and weeks.
Despite the promises the agreement holds, I am
deeply concerned that progress on the political front
is stalled because of the Houthis’ failure uphold their
commitments. Their continued offensive on Ma’rib
demonstrates they are not interested in a political
process and only want more years of war for the people
of Yemen. Ma’rib is home to many of Yemen’s internally
displaced people and has become a refuge for Yemenis
fleeing fighting throughout the war. The Houthi assault
on that refuge is deeply concerning, and we call on
them to cease that action immediately.
We are also extremely concerned about the recent
intensified fighting in Al-Hudaydah and offer our
condolences for the lives lost. Only a political solution
will bring stability, peace and prosperity back to
Yemen. Yet, sadly, the Houthis have been content
throughout this conflict to lose tens of thousands of
fighters on the battlefield. Of course the Houthis are
not doing it alone; Iran’s continued exports of weapons
to the Houthis, in contravention of the arms embargo,
have been extensively documented, including by the
Secretary-General’s most recent report (S/2020/531)
on resolution 2231 (2015). Iran’s role in this conflict,
which defies Security Council sanctions, is serving no
other purpose than to worsen this humanitarian tragedy
and prolong the suffering of millions.
This horrible destabilizing situation has persisted
for years. If Council members truly seek a mediated
settlement to this conflict, then they must join the
United States and others in calling on Iran to cease all
support for the Houthis immediately. As the world tries
its best to end this war, Iran’s provision of lethal aid and
training to the Houthis is doing nothing but ensuring
endless war. It must stop now.
I would also like to speak further about the SAFER
tanker, which, despite the concerted efforts of Martin
and his team, continues to threaten the Red Sea and
the people of Yemen with catastrophic consequences,
including severely reducing the import of commercial
food and humanitarian aid; lasting environmental
damage; and economic degradation.
12/22

15/10/2020

Last month, during the General Assembly’s highlevel week, the Council’s five permanent members plus
Germany, Sweden and Kuwait called on the Houthis
to urgently facilitate unconditional and safe access for
United Nations experts to conduct an assessment and
repair mission. The Council, too, has been calling on,
urging, pressing and admonishing the Houthis to do
this for months.
And still the Houthis stall. They set out new
demands, conditions and obstacles for the United
Nations experts – those who possess the expertise and
resources necessary to avert a serious disaster. That
the Houthis are willing to risk catastrophe for millions
of Yemenis — who rely so heavily on food, fuel and
other goods imported through Red Sea ports — to
gain political leverage demonstrates the cynicism and
heartlessness of the Houthis’ leadership.
Why would anyone expect any differently, given
how the Houthis continue to obstruct international
humanitarian assistance to Yemenis desperately in need?
The Houthis’ recent shutdown of Sana’a international
airport obstructed movement of the life-saving
humanitarian supplies and essential personnel that are
required in the most densely populated areas of Yemen.
Those Houthi actions halted the import of 2.4 million
doses of oral polio vaccine for their own areas, as well
as more than 200 metric tons of medical supplies related
to the coronavirus disease.
A temporary reopening of the airport is not a
sustainable reprieve. We urge the Houthis to end their
brinksmanship and reopen the airport to United Nations
flights on a permanent basis. This Houthi obstruction
is unconscionable, particularly as Yemenis face the
additional threats of rising prices and food insecurity.
We cannot and should not be silent in the face of such
unprecedented intransigence.
With famine a realistic prospect in Yemen in
the event of prolonged food-import disruption, we
encourage all donors to provide resources for ongoing
and emerging needs now. All parties to the conflict,
especially the Houthis, must enable actors to implement
critical life-saving programmes.
I would also like to take a moment today to
express our gratitude to our partners in Oman, Saudi
Arabia and the Government of the Republic of Yemen,
particularly the Sultan of Oman and the Crown Prince
of Saudi Arabia, for helping the United States facilitate
the release of two United States citizens in Yemen
20-26989

15/10/2020

The situation in the Middle East

and the return of the remains of another United States
citizen. The Trump Administration has made bringing
home Americans held hostage or wrongfully detained
overseas a top priority, and we will never waver in our
commitment to them and their families.
I thank the countries that have joined the United
States in supporting the World Food Programme, as
it plays a critical role in Yemen, providing 13 million
people in the country with emergency food assistance
and 1.1 million children and women with nutritional
support. The World Food Programme urgently needs
assistance to continue its life-saving efforts. The
United States provides 43 per cent of the World Food
Programme’s budget, and we are grateful for others
stepping up.
Finally, in my previous remarks before the
Council, I called on the Houthis to immediately release
wrongfully detained Yemeni citizen Levi Salem Musa
Marhabi (see S/PV.8757). Levi’s health continues to
decline in detention, where he remains wrongfully
held despite a Houthi “court” ordering his release in
September 2019.
We call on all Houthis to respect religious freedom,
stop oppressing Yemen’s Jewish population and
immediately release Mr. Marhabi.
Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): I would like to thank
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their briefings. I also
welcome the representative of Yemen to this meeting.
We are encouraged by the good news that
Mr. Griffiths reported at the beginning of the meeting
about the release of more than 1,000 individuals. That is
a very important step in facilitating the implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement.
However, we continue to have grave concerns about
the escalation of hostilities in recent days in Yemen,
where a number of people have been killed, including
women and children. We condemn the attacks and join
other members in expressing our deepest condolences
to the families of the fallen. We support the statement
made by Mr. Griffiths on 8 October in that regard.
Furthermore,
the
significant
increase
of
$450 million in financial contributions from donors is
a positive sign. However, we are concerned by reports

S/PV. 8770

that the current budget is inadequate for United Nations
humanitarian operations in the closing months of 2020.
The economic crisis, the prolonged conflict, food
insecurity and other issues have had dire impacts on
the humanitarian situation in Yemen. Moreover, the oil
from the SAFER tanker, reported to be leaking into the
Red Sea, constitutes an alarming threat to Yemen and
the Gulf region. It is therefore important to immediately
grant the United Nations technical team access to the
tanker for assessment and repair.
Against that backdrop, allow me to highlight the
following points.
First, we urge all concerned parties in Yemen to
heed the calls for a ceasefire. It is imperative that all
parties immediately put an end to military activities in
the country, with a view to halting the disproportionate
civilian suffering, facilitating humanitarian assistance
and resuming peace talks.
We cannot emphasize enough that there is no
military solution to the situation in Yemen. Council
members and the relevant parties should therefore
support the efforts of the Special Envoy in working
with the Government of Yemen and the Southern
Transitional Council to agree on a joint declaration on a
nationwide ceasefire across Yemen.
Secondly, safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian efforts in Yemen should be ensured. We
also urge the relevant parties to fulfil their obligations
under international law, including international
humanitarian law.
At the same time, we call for further efforts from
the international community, the United Nations and
donors to find a way out for funding for Yemen. Against
the backdrop of the 2020 pledged contributions, it is
necessary for the United Nations to work in advance
with the parties involved to begin planning for the
donor conference for Yemen, to be held in 2021.
Thirdly, we urge all parties to fully uphold
and implement the Stockholm Agreement and the
Riyadh agreement with United Nations mediation.
In that process, we reaffirm our support for Yemen’s
sovereignty, unity, independence and territorial
integrity. The meaningful participation of women
in the political process should be also ensured and
further promoted.

20-2698913/22

S/PV.8770

The situation in the Middle East

In conclusion, we commend Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths and the United Nations team for their tireless
efforts and support their proposals on peace in Yemen.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): It is very good to see
Martin Griffiths and Mark Lowcock on the screen. I
just want to say that we still have one coronavirus-free
seat here and that it would be great if perhaps next time
one of them could be here in our midst.
I wish to echo what Martin said at the beginning
when he described how we are currently witnessing
this airlift of hope. I would also echo what he said
with regard to the relief and comfort that this brings to
not only those in the planes but also to their families
and friends. I thank him, his Deputy, his team and in
particular the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) and President Maurer. It is incredible what the
ICRC is doing not only there but also in other places
around the globe.
We share Martin’s wish that on the basis of this
airlift of hope, we can now build momentum and
confidence that we can actually embark on a road
to peace and start with a final agreement on a joint
declaration on the shooting war, or as Mark Lowcock
said, that we have a nationwide ceasefire. We and the
parties owe that to the people. In that regard, I would
like to commend Mr. Griffiths, as I did last time, for
his ongoing meetings with members of civil society and
women. We have to involve them and listen to them.
As Ms. King repeated earlier, civil society says that
enough is enough.
That is in contrast with what is developing with
the airlift and what is happening in Ma’rib. We see a
deterioration of the situation in Al-Hudaydah, which is
alarming, and Taiz. With regard to Taiz, I support the
Special Envoy’s efforts to work with civil society and
highlight what civil society does with regard to schools
and education, for example. Women’s participation in
all peace talks, at both the local and national levels,
are very important. Mr. Griffiths mentioned how
much more enduring peace agreements are when
women participate.
On the humanitarian front, we are repeating
ourselves. Nevertheless, we must repeat it — Yemen is
the worst humanitarian situation of all the conflicts we
deal with here in the Council. The people are suffering
and, as Mr. Lowcock has highlighted, famine is looming.
His overview was dire. As in many conflicts, women,
children and marginalized people are the ones suffering
14/22

15/10/2020

the most from this conflict. Some might remember that
under the German presidency in July we had Ms. Raja
Abdullah Ahmed Almasabi, Chairwoman of the Arab
Human Rights Foundation, as a briefer (see S/PV.8753).
She highlighted the fate of people with disabilities.
Before she left, she pointed to us and said that we can
do more and we can do better. I still have that ringing in
my ears. I would therefore like to plea with colleagues
who are standing in the way of highlighting the dire
situation of persons with disabilities in the statement
that we are preparing. I hope we will be able to agree to
highlight the fate of people with disabilities.
On humanitarian aid, we heard Mr. Lowcock’s
figures. I am happy that some are now paying. The last
time we spoke about this issue I pointed particularly at
the members of the coalition. I am very happy to hear
that Saudi Arabia is now contributing financially. We
hope that the United Arab Emirates will do likewise.
Germany has disbursed all $150 million it
committed towards the Yemen humanitarian response
plan. In addition, we are contributing $100 million to
the World Food Programme and the United Nations
Office for Project Services. I mention to Mrs. Craft,
incidentally, that Germany is the second-largest donor
to the World Food Programme, which we believe does a
wonderful job. We all recall when David Beasley briefed
the Council on the situation in Yemen (see S/2020/930).
With regard to the distribution of support, I would
like to echo what others, like Mrs. Craft, said today,
that it is unacceptable that the Houthis are blocking
humanitarian aid. I recall that Mr. Beasley emphasized
how the Houthis were diverting humanitarian aid.
However, I would also like to point the finger
a bit to the other side. Mr. Lowcock mentioned that
some humanitarian aid is not reaching Al-Hudaydah
because the Government of Yemen is blocking it due
to certain questionable import duties. I would like to
plead here for the Government of the Yemeni people
to not withhold humanitarian aid to its people. Perhaps
the Yemeni Ambassador would like to say something in
that connection.
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock
for their detailed briefings, which keep us informed
about the situation in Yemen on a monthly basis.
The Niger has been following with great interest
the recent developments in the conflict in Yemen,
20-26989

15/10/2020

The situation in the Middle East

in particular the agreement reached in Switzerland
between the Government of Yemen and the Houthis
on 27 September, including the exchange of more than
1,000 prisoners. In an entrenched war like the one in
Yemen, and in view of the escalation observed in recent
months, that agreement, which the Niger welcomes, is
the glimmer of hope that we have been waiting for in this
conflict of disastrous humanitarian consequences. We
commend the parties for having reached an agreement.
Through that agreement, the Yemeni parties have
shown goodwill and, above all, commitment, which
is an encouraging sign. Despite the tensions on the
ground, it is a promising step forward that could pave
the way for the resumption of the political process and
an agreement on a joint ceasefire declaration.
Faced with this turning point in the conflict, we
must do our utmost to maintain that positive momentum
and use every opportunity to silence the weapons, stop
the bloodshed and bring the parties to make peace in
the country. Only a commitment to a truce will enable
the parties to maintain the trust they have built, which
remains essential for the resumption of peace talks.
In that regard, we call upon regional actors and the
members of the Security Council with influence on the
parties to the conflict to spare no effort to bring them
to honour their commitments made in the Stockholm,
Riyadh and, recently, Geneva agreements, and to agree
to support the Special Envoy’s efforts towards a joint
declaration of a national ceasefire so that the Yemeni
people can enjoy peace, reconciliation and a return
to progress.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, my
delegation remains concerned about the lack of funding
for United Nations agencies in the context of aid
programmes that ensure the survival of several million
people in Yemen. That lack of international assistance
is forcing the United Nations to reduce services in
health centres, and even to partially or totally close
those facilities. We deplore the continuing obstacles
to the delivery of humanitarian aid and the continued
fighting in several localities, including Al-Hudaydah,
where most of the humanitarian aid and imported goods
pass through. In order to avert the looming disaster, we
call on the international community to show greater
solidarity with the suffering population of Yemen.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to express
its deep concern about the situation of the FSO SAFER
oil tanker, whose advanced state of disrepair, in

S/PV. 8770

conjunction with the delay in inspections and repairs,
place Yemen and the countries bordering the Red Sea
at imminent risk of an environmental disaster with
incalculable consequences, exposing Yemen and the
countries bordering the Red Sea. Given the situation,
urgent action is needed to avert the worst from
coming to pass. We call on the Houthis to honour their
commitments and issue the necessary authorizations to
the United Nations team in charge of the inspection of
the tanker.
Mr. Ben Lagha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to begin with words of gratitude to Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their
important briefings on recent developments in Yemen.
We wish to reiterate our support for all efforts aimed at
arriving at a comprehensive political settlement to end
the crisis currently plaguing Yemen and the suffering
of the fraternal Yemeni people through a solution
that safeguards the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of the country.
The years of conflict have unleashed an acute
humanitarian tragedy and resulted in the collapse of
infrastructure, the deterioration of the socioeconomic
situation and a worsening of the living conditions of
the Yemeni people — all of which has had negative
consequences for peace, security and stability in
the region.
Tunisia welcomes the prisoner exchange
agreement, which is an important step forward towards
implementing the Stockholm Agreement. However,
we emphatically condemn the military escalation at
the port of Al-Hudaydah, which has led to the loss of
many civilian lives, including women children. It has
also compounded the humanitarian crisis and led to a
worsening of human rights violations and breaches of
international humanitarian law. In that regard, Tunisia
reaffirms the fact that a military solution is no solution
at all and that the solution to this crisis, which has been
ongoing for many years in Yemen, can be achieved only
through a political process based on dialogue and peace
negotiations. Any political settlement must embrace
of the overriding interests of the Yemeni people and
place their interests above any other considerations, in
fulfilment of the agreed benchmarks, namely, the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation
Mechanism, the outcome of the National Dialogue
Conference and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, including resolution 2216 (2015).

20-2698915/22

S/PV.8770

The situation in the Middle East

Tunisia wishes to reiterate its support for the
efforts undertaken by the Special Envoy to advance
the political settlement process. We are in agreement
with the Special Envoy: the longer the crisis lasts, the
more complicated it is and the more difficult it will be
to reach a settlement, and the worse off the Yemeni
people will be. We therefore wish to reiterate our call
for the stakeholders in Yemen to respond favourably
to the proposals under the joint declaration, so as to
begin a new stage in the negotiations that paves a
path towards a comprehensive transition agreement to
guarantee political stability and improve conditions in
the country.
We wish to reiterate the importance of compliance
with the ceasefire and of bringing an end to all hostile
acts. We also reaffirm the importance of political
negotiations to incorporate all stakeholder groups
within Yemeni society, especially to ensure the
meaningful participation of both women and civil
society representatives.
We are very concerned by the unprecedented
humanitarian crisis in the country, especially in the
light of the suspension of the delivery of humanitarian
goods and of the obstacles that continue to stymie the
provision of humanitarian assistance. This bodes ill
with regard to the further deterioration of the situation
and greater risk to the lives of Yemenis, especially
given the ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic.
We call for a redoubling of international efforts to
alleviate the suffering of the people as a result of the
humanitarian crisis. This is an urgent priority, hence
the need to continue to mobilize the necessary funds
to finance the humanitarian response aimed at ending
the suffering of the fraternal Yemeni people. In that
vein, we commend those countries that have honoured
their commitments, in particular such countries as the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
The FSO SAFER oil tanker situation requires an
immediate intervention to carry out the necessary and
urgent repairs to the vessel and avert a very dangerous
and serious humanitarian, environmental and economic
disaster. We call upon the Houthis to grant the United
Nations experts access to inspect the tanker and take
the necessary measures.
In conclusion, the Tunisian delegation is of the
view that the Yemeni crisis has lasted for far too long
and that the Yemeni people have therefore suffered for
far too long. This is intolerable. Enough is enough, as
16/22

15/10/2020

Mr. Lowcock said. We also believe that the Security
Council today is duty-bound to redouble its efforts in
support of the Special Envoy so as to ensure that all
parties genuinely and meaningfully respect the choice
for peace and negotiations.
Mr. Auväärt (Estonia): I would like to thank
Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock for their briefings.
The continuing violence in the conflict in Yemen
is deeply worrisome. It results in a growing number
of civilian casualties and the exacerbation of the
humanitarian crisis. The military escalation in Ma’rib is
threatening hundreds of thousands of displaced people
and puts the United Nations peace process at risk.
The recent escalation in Al-Hudaydah, which has
caused a substantial number of civilian casualties, is
another worrisome setback and risks jeopardizing the
peace efforts. We call upon the parties to immediately
stop fighting, return to the implementation of the
Hodeidah Agreement and engage with the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement’s
joint implementation mechanisms.
It is clear that violence will only undermine the
prospects for a long-term solution to the conflict.
We call upon all parties to come to an immediate
nationwide ceasefire and agree to the United Nations
proposal of a joint declaration without further delay.
We fully support the efforts of Special Envoy Griffiths
in mediating the negotiations.
On a positive note, we welcome the agreement
reached by the parties on the exchange of over 1,000
prisoners and the first swap, which took place today. This
is an important humanitarian and confidence-building
measure and a key step in implementing the
Stockholm Agreement.
We also remind all parties of their responsibility
to comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
and to ensure accountability for all violations and
abuses. All parties must take the necessary measures
to protect civilians, especially vulnerable groups, such
as women and children. In that context, we welcome
the renewal of the mandate of the Group of Eminent
Experts on Yemen.
Turning to the humanitarian situation, we fully
share the concerns stressed by Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock regarding the grim situation that
20-26989

15/10/2020

The situation in the Middle East

Yemenis are facing, including the possible famine. The
funding gaps in the humanitarian programmes must be
filled, and Yemen’s economy must be strengthened. In
that regard, we welcome the organizing of the virtual
high-level side event on the humanitarian situation in
Yemen, which took place on 23 September. We also call
for intensified efforts to find a long-term solution to
ensure the import of fuel and commercial items through
the ports.
Lastly, we call on the Houthi authorities to
finalize the agreement for allowing the United Nations
mission to gain access the FSO SAFER oil tanker
safely and without further delay, in order to prevent a
large-scale catastrophe.
Mr. Kridelka (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Special Envoy Griffiths and UnderSecretary-General Lowcock for their relevant briefings,
including on the importance of the role of women and
the courage of Yemeni children and their teachers.
I will focus on three issues today: the rising
violence in Al-Hudaydah, the recent prisoner exchange
agreement and the findings of the Group of Eminent
Experts on Yemen, particularly with regard to violence
against children.
Belgium is very concerned about the recent
escalation of violence in Al-Hudaydah and the
ongoing fighting in Ma’rib. This violence increases the
pressure on an already exhausted civilian population.
It undermines the efforts of Special Envoy Griffiths.
For months, we have been waiting for a joint statement
that would put the parties back on the path to peace.
The lack of progress on the joint statement leads us to
question the true political commitment of the parties.
Only dialogue can put an end to the war and resolve
the profound differences in the country. We urge all
actors to remain engaged in the peace talks under the
auspices of the United Nations and to implement the
Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh agreement.
Once again, I would like to place particular
emphasis on the issue of the oil tanker FSO SAFER. No
one can ignore the ecological disaster that would occur
in the event of a spill. We urge the Houthis to provide
access to the United Nations team as soon as possible.
The agreement between the parties to exchange
more than 1,000 prisoners is good news. It has the
potential to contribute to increased confidence, which
is fundamental to progress towards lasting peace.

S/PV. 8770

We commend all those involved in achieving that
agreement, in particular the International Committee
of the Red Cross.
Let me draw attention to a closely related
and particularly worrisome aspect of the war in
Yemen — the fate of civilians arbitrarily detained and
forcibly disappeared, people who have disappeared
because of their political views, profession, activism
or religious affiliation. Since 2016, the independent
Yemeni organization Mwatana for Human Rights has
documented a total of 1,605 cases of arbitrary detention
and no less than 770 cases of enforced disappearance.
As the American investigative journalist Patrick
Radden Keefe writes in his book Say Nothing:
“Perhaps the cruelest feature of forced
disappearance as an instrument of war is that it
denies the bereaved any closure, relegating them to
a permanent limbo of uncertainty.”
Belgium urges all parties to the conflict in Yemen to
respond to the appeals of the families of the victims,
to reveal the fate and whereabouts of those forcibly
disappeared and to urgently release all those arbitrarily
detained, including journalists.
I would like to welcome the renewal of the mandate
of the Group of Eminent International and Regional
Experts on Yemen, as endorsed by the Human Rights
Council in Geneva last week. The report of the Group
of Eminent Experts on the situation of human rights in
Yemen (A/HRC/45/6) is fundamental to the work of the
Security Council. Human rights and accountability for
serious human rights violations are inextricably linked
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
Belgium is particularly concerned about the
conclusions of the Group of Eminent Experts regarding
children. Over the past year, there has been a high rate
of casualties among children in several cases of illegal
attacks against civilians, including during air strikes
that the Group has been able to investigate. Children
account for almost one third of civilians killed or
maimed in armed violence in the first half of 2020.
Those figures are horrific. The violence must
stop. Accountability must be ensured. The Yemeni
people have suffered for too long. They deserve peace
and stability.

20-2698917/22

S/PV.8770

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): We thank Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock for their briefings this morning.
South Africa would like to reiterate that the dire
humanitarian situation in Yemen, intensified by
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, is
indistinguishably linked to the political impasse. As
such, our intervention today focuses on the humanitarian
as well as the political situation.
On the humanitarian situation, South Africa
continues to express its concern regarding the
devastating effect of the conflict on the people of Yemen,
in particular women, children, the elderly, internally
displaced persons and those living with disabilities.
We express our concern that the surging violence
risks worsening the widespread human-made hunger
crisis in Yemen, where two thirds of the population
require food aid. Although there has been ongoing
humanitarian assistance, more than 20 million Yemenis
still face the harsh reality of food insecurity. Millions
of Yemenis do not know where their next meal will
come from, or are in acute need of assistance to obtain
drinking water, and millions of children require
treatment for malnutrition.
South Africa calls on all parties to the conflict to
agree to a unified set of measures to counter the spread
of the COVID-19 pandemic, improve the delivery of
humanitarian aid and provide impetus to the overall
political negotiations to end the war and alleviate the
suffering of the people.
We have consistently highlighted the importance
of all parties abiding by their obligations and
responsibilities under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law and taking all
the measures necessary to end and prevent violations
against civilians.
On the political impasse, South Africa is concerned
that the fighting in Yemen has intensified in recent days,
threatening to unravel an already stalled peace process
and deepen the world’s worst humanitarian catastrophe.
This past week, Al-Hudaydah saw the worst
escalation in violence since the truce two years ago. The
number of civilian casualties nationwide in September
was the highest since last November, with 67 killed and
123 injured.
18/22

15/10/2020

We therefore urge all parties to the conflict to
immediately cease hostilities in line with the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a global ceasefire and resolution
2532 (2020), and to also agree on confidence-building
measures, such as the payment of civil servants. The
reopening of Sana’a airport and the lifting of the siege
are required to restart the peace process.
We reiterate our position that the military response
is not a viable solution, and we call on all parties to
approach the resumption of political negotiations
in a spirit of compromise, placing the interests of
all Yemenis at the centre of a negotiated political
settlement. We appeal to parties to avoid the stance of
going for absolute positions in the negotiations.
South Africa calls on all parties to engage in good
faith and without preconditions with Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths in order to reach a comprehensive,
negotiated settlement to end the conflict, and that this
be done in parallel to continued efforts to implement
the Stockholm and Riyadh agreements.
We applaud the progress made under the Stockholm
Agreement, which led to the exchange of more than 1,000
prisoners. We urge the parties to rapidly implement that
agreement and for further measures to be taken towards
implementing the Agreement. We also are encouraged
that such progress can resolve the lack of access and
inspection of the FSO SAFER oil tanker so that this
looming threat will be dealt with on a purely technical
basis, without politicization.
In conclusion, South Africa reiterates that the only
solution to the conflict in Yemen is an inclusive Yemeniled and Yemeni-owned political settlement that delivers
on the hopes of the people for a strong economic and
political future. In that context, we also call for the full
and meaningful participation of women in all aspects of
an inclusive political process.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We thank Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for their overview of the political and
humanitarian situation in Yemen. We are concerned that
fighting continues in various parts of Yemen, affecting
civilians in particular. The situation in the country,
widely acknowledged as the worst humanitarian
crisis in the world today, continues to deteriorate.
20-26989

15/10/2020

The situation in the Middle East

Humanitarian problems and challenges have come to
the fore, requiring an immediate response from the
international community.
At the same time, humanitarian assistance is being
delivered intermittently. We are concerned that the
United Nations programmes to provide basic assistance,
including food security, access to water and health
services, are being curtailed due to a lack of funding.
We are deeply concerned about the current health
situation. The vital infrastructure has been almost
completely destroyed, and there is an acute shortage of
medicines and equipment. That is compounded by the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
Our country is providing assistance to Yemen
through United Nations agencies. We call on donors,
including from the region, to increase the necessary
support. At the same time, we recall that humanitarian
assistance must be impartial and that assistance must
be distributed on a non-discriminatory basis to the
entire population in all parts of the country, regardless
of who controls a particular area.
We consistently advocate that the parties to the
Yemeni conflict should as soon as possible renounce
violence and move towards a political settlement of their
differences. We see no alternative to resolving issues
through an intra-Yemeni dialogue. We note with regret
that the parties have not yet signed the joint declaration.
We support Special Envoy Griffiths’ tireless efforts
in these circumstances. He has steadfastly sought to
establish discussions among the belligerents in order to
end hostilities, establish confidence-building measures
and tackle urgent humanitarian, socioeconomic and
political matters.
We welcome the agreement on the exchange of
prisoners and the beginning of its implementation. We
very much value the role of the International Committee
of the Red Cross in that process — a development that
shows that the parties are indeed able to negotiate. We
trust that will enable them to build trust and establish a
comprehensive dialogue.
Among the issues where progress can be achieved
is the situation concerning the FSO SAFER oil tanker.
We urge the stakeholders, including the United Nations
Office for Project Services, to look after one another’s
interests and cooperate constructively with a sharp
focus on achieving solutions acceptable to all. On
our part, we will pursue contacts with all interested

S/PV. 8770

Yemeni and external parties. We will urge them to
seek compromise and support the efforts of both the
United Nations and Mr. Griffiths personally. We will
also support the efforts of the United Nations Mission
to Support the Hodeidah Agreement. We trust that our
Security Council colleagues and the entire international
community will do the same.
In conclusion, we would like to note that the
situation in Yemen has a direct bearing on the Middle
East, the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea regions. In
order to achieve de-escalation in the region, we urge
the international community to engage in constructive
cooperation in pursuit of peace and stability throughout
the Middle East, including on the basis of resolution 598
(1987). The Russian blueprint for collective security in
the Persian Gulf region remains relevant in that regard.
It provides for an inclusive and collective approach
for resolving problems. We object to attempts to pin
blame for all developments in the region on one side
alone. We reiterate our call for all stakeholders to begin
comprehensive dialogue to create favourable conditions
for cooperation.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to extend my congratulations
to the Ambassador of the Russian Federation on his
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We wish him and his friendly delegation
every success. We also wish everyone good health
and safety.
The Government of Yemen, under the leadership
of His Excellency President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour, continues to work towards ending the war
imposed on the Yemeni people by Houthi militias
since 2014. The main task for the Government and
the people of Yemen is to achieve fair, lasting and
sustainable peace based on the terms of reference for
a political solution, namely, the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
the outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, in
particular resolution 2216 (2015).
Peace is an irreversible option, but it will
materialize only through ending the coup and restoring
the institutions of the State, which looks after the

20-2698919/22

S/PV.8770

The situation in the Middle East

interests of all its citizens. In order to achieve that
sublime goal, the Government has spared no effort to
provide support for the efforts of Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths and has engaged positively with all options for
peace. Recently, the Government of Yemen displayed
additional flexibility and made further compromises to
respond positively to all calls and suggestions aimed at
achieving progress in the comprehensive peace process,
including the draft joint declaration. Unfortunately,
however, as always, the Houthis have continued to
come up with new conditions and preconditions.
The Government of Yemen welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a ceasefire and has unilaterally
observed one, so as to provide an opportunity for
Mr. Griffiths’ efforts to arrive at a permanent and
comprehensive ceasefire and resume the political
process. We have extended our hand and shown all
possible flexibility in dealing with peace options. We
have made many compromises, for we want to save
our war- and disaster-ravaged country — our humane
and historic civilization. Our hand is still extended
for peace.
However, unfortunately, it is met only with
impertinence and intransigence by the Houthi
militias towards all agreements and understandings, as
always. This is in addition to the obstacles they create
and their insistence on subversion and taking advantage
of the suffering of the Yemeni people and blackmailing
the international community. All of that has amplified
the suffering of the Yemeni people. The intransigence
of the Houthi militias is evident in the absurdity
whereby the economic issue is manipulated and the
national currency is undermined. Added to that is the
stealing of civil servant’s salaries, the weaponization
of humanitarian assistance, the blackmailing of the
international community through the FSO SAFER
tanker issue and military escalation in densely
populated cities, in addition to disrupting agreements
and seizing resources.
The Houthi militias do not believe in peace
or dialogue. Why do I say that? Because we have
experiences with these militias. There was a political
process in Yemen. The was a transition period in Yemen
in 2011. There was the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism. The
Houthis participated in the Comprehensive National
Dialogue. Unfortunately, however, they took advantage
of the peaceful atmosphere to mobilize and take control

20/22

15/10/2020

of several areas, including Sana’a, thereby actually
rebelling against the outcomes of the National Dialogue
Conference and the aspirations of the Yemeni people.
President Hadi and all the political segments of
Yemeni political society tried as much as possible to
salvage the political process and the transition period,
spare Yemeni blood and avoid plunging Yemen into
war, as is the case now. As all members are aware, the
partnership and peace agreement was signed, and the
Houthis participated in the Government. However, they
controlled all Government institutions because they are
armed — they never gave their weapons — and they
rebelled against the Government, putting the President
under house arrest. They continued war and escalation.
They are the cause of all of the suffering of the Yemeni
people today.
The Houthi militias did not stop with those
violations. They continue to tear apart social cohesion
along abhorrent sectarian and ethnic lines. They disrupt
State institutions and target the education sector.
The Yemeni Government upholds the Stockholm
Agreement and has responded positively to all calls
and initiatives throughout the past five years, so as
to achieve peace and alleviate the suffering of the
Yemeni people. However, the results on the ground
since the Stockholm Agreement clearly point to the
indifference of the Houthis to the implementation
of the agreement. They are even indifferent to the
timelines and deadlines of the agreement, so much so
that it became meaningless. They continue to pursue
military escalation in the Al-Durayhimi district of
Al-Hudaydah, and prior to that in Ma’rib, Al-Jawf
and Taiz. They work to pre-empt this agreement, and
in particular Al-Hudaydah agreement. They continue
to violate the ceasefire. They use Al-Hudaydah as a
platform to launch rockets and booby-trapped drones
against civilian neighborhouds. They launch barbaric
attacks against public and private economic institutions,
lay mines, target shipping routes, smuggle weapons and
steel humanitarian aid.
All of this is taking place in flagrant violation
of the Stockholm Agreement. The recent shelling
by the Houthis of an economic or industrial complex
in Al-Hudaydah, and the resulting aggravation of
the humanitarian crisis, are yet further evidence of
the disregard of the Houthi militias for the lives and
livelihoods of the Yemeni people. They also obstruct
the work of the United Nations Mission in Support

20-26989

15/10/2020

The situation in the Middle East

of the Hodeida Agreement. For that reason, we again
call for relocating the Mission to an area not under the
control of the Houthis.
Under the guidance of His Excellency President
Abdrabbuh Mansur Hadi, and with the support of
our Saudi brethren, the Yemeni Government has
made strides in the implementation of the Riyadh
agreement, which aims at achieving stability and
restoring State institutions, as well as unifying
national efforts to put an end to the militias’ coup and
the Iranian project in Yemen and the region. From
the very outset, the Yemeni Government has been
quite willing to provide all the necessary support for
the implementation of the agreement, for we believe
in the importance of concerted efforts towards
reconstruction and development under the authority of
the State. The consultations carried out by the interim
Head of Government, Mr. Maeen Abdulmalek, with
the various political stakeholders have resulted in
progress towards forming a new Government that will
uphold — not undermine — national values, foremost
among which are the unity, stability and territorial
integrity of Yemen, along with a focus on providing
basic services, safeguarding the national currency and
implementing the necessary reforms for the functioning
of State institutions.
We have incurred great economic losses due
to the coup by the Houthi militias. It has hampered
the development process and reversed decades of
gains, destroyed the private sector, causing the worst
humanitarian crisis, and pushed millions of Yemenis
to the brink of famine and poverty. It has also created
the largest wave of internal and external displacement,
the likes of which Yemen has not seen in its modern
history. The outbreak of the coronavirus disease
pandemic has aggravated the humanitarian crisis and
put further pressure on the health sector, which was
already vulnerable and lacking the resources to address
the pandemic.
Notwithstanding the efforts by the Government
to alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people, the
challenges remain enormous. We call on the international
community to support the Government’s efforts to
address the economic and development challenges
and bolster the national currency in order to stabilize
livelihoods. The Government of Yemen stresses its
commitment to the implementation of the agreement
recently concluded in Switzerland and to release the
first group of prisoners and detainees. We believe in

S/PV. 8770

the importance of releasing all prisoners, detainees,
forcibly disappeared persons and those under house
arrest, including the four covered by Security Council
resolutions. The Government emphasizes the principle
of all for all under the Stockholm Agreement, given the
humanitarian importance of the matter. We call upon
the Special Envoy, the International Committee of the
Red Cross and all international mediators to uphold the
Stockholm Agreement and hasten its implemention.
The subversive acts and piracy of the Houthi
militias and their use of the FSO SAFER oil tanker as a
ticking time bomb threaten both Yemen and the region.
The Houthis have repeatedly denied the United Nations
team access to the tanker to assess its condition and
carry out initial repairs and offload its contents in order
to avert an environmental, economic and humanitarian
catastrophe in the Red Sea and the region. That is further
egregious defiance of the international community
and the Security Council’s determination to avoid an
impending catastrophe, one that draws closer with each
passing day. We reiterate our call on the Council to
shoulder its responsibility and adopt a strict position
in order to spare Yemen and the region a catastrophe
whose effects could last for decades. The Council
should exercise pressure on the Houthis, who continue
to procrastinate and to manipulate the situation to use
this issue for political blackmail.
In response to what my friend the representative of
Germany said, I would reiterate that the Government
of Yemen is a Government of all Yemenis. The
Government spares no effort, within the available
resources, to alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni
people throughout all governorates — without
discrimination — including those controlled by Houthi
militias. The Government provides all the facilities
necessary for the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
those in need throughout Yemen. Unfortunately, it is the
Houthis who are obstructing and withholding aid in the
areas they control. They also misuse oil products to sell
on the black market. They are pillaging port revenues to
finance their futile war and for personal gain. They are
trying to create shortages of fuel products in the areas
they control. They are also depriving civil servants
of their salaries and causing food prices to soar. We
reiterate that we in the Government stand ready to
take all the measures necessary to provide unimpeded
access to humanitarian assistance and alleviate the
suffering of the Yemeni people.

20-2698921/22

S/PV.8770

The situation in the Middle East

In conclusion, our great people look forward to an
end to this unjust war, the alleviation of the people’s
suffering and the achievement of fair, equitable,
comprehensive and sustainable peace, which they well
deserve, and which is enshrined in all regional and
international terms of reference.

22/22

15/10/2020

The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

20-26989
