United Nations

S/PV.4921

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-ninth year

4921

st meeting
Thursday, 4 March 2004, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De La Sablière . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (France)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Aho-Glele
Mr. Valle
Mr. Muñoz
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Akram
Mr. Baja
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Arias
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Negroponte

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Letter dated 19 February 2004 from the Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2004/124)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

04-25920 (E)

*0425920*

S/PV.4921

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Inocencio Arias, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

I give the floor to Mr. Inocencio Arias.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Letter dated 19 February 2004 from the
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2004/124)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Belarus, Cameroon,
Canada, Costa Rica, Cuba, Egypt, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, Israel, Japan, Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein,
Mexico, New Zealand, the Republic of Korea, South
Africa, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Ukraine in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Inocencio Arias, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Inocencio Arias to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

2

begin

its

Mr. Arias (spoke in Spanish): It is a pleasure for
me to address the Council in my capacity as Chairman
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
At today’s meeting, I will address three important
issues. First of all, I should like to inform the Council
about the work done by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) during the last three months of the
past year. Secondly, I should like to point out the
principal themes of the tenth programme of work for
the current trimester. And, last but not least, I wish to
share with the Council the main aspects of the CTC’s
report of 19 February on its own revitalization.
Before I begin, however, I would like to say that,
as members are aware, it is customary to hold this kind
of meeting every three months, but that, at the request
of several members of the CTC, the meeting was
delayed because it was believed that it would be
preferable for the report on revitalization to be ready
when I addressed the Council.
Let me begin with the CTC’s work during
October, November and December 2003. In the
Committee’s ninth working programme, we stated that
we would complete the review of 70 reports from
Member States and others on their implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). The CTC has approved 44
reports and its sub-committees have reviewed and
considered 37 reports. Secondly, we will continue to
circulate the matrix on a monthly basis, with a view to
identifying assistance needs and offers, which we have
done. Thirdly, we will continue to update the CounterTerrorism Committee web site, which we have also
done. Fourthly, we will send to the Security Council
the list of States that submit their reports late, which I,
as Chairman of the CTC, have done.
Last but not least, the ninth working programme
also contains the commitment of the Chairman to
submit a report by 15 November on the problems
encountered by States and the CTC itself in
implementing the important resolution 1373 (2001).
The report from the Chair was sent to the Security
Council on 14 November and takes into account the
opinions expressed by the members of the Committee,

S/PV.4921

describing the main problems encountered and the
challenges to be met for the proper and full compliance
with resolution 1373 (2001) by States, the effective
operation of the CTC itself and the strengthening of the
Security Council with respect to the implementation of
the resolution.
Another important aspect of our work is that we
have continued to expand our contacts and cooperation
with
international,
regional
and
subregional
organizations, as outlined in the action plan agreed by
the Committee. The Committee has continued to
encourage and participate in meetings between
international and regional organizations, such as that
which took place in Washington, D.C., on 7 October,
organized by the Organization of American States and
its Inter-American Committee against Terrorism. I take
this opportunity to express our gratitude for the work of
the Organization of American States and its Committee.
The Washington, D.C., meeting reaffirmed the
commitment of all participants to pursuing further
coordination among their programmes in order to avoid
duplication and better to assist States in their efforts to
implement resolution 1373 (2001). The next follow-up
meeting is scheduled for next week, 11 and 12 March,
in Vienna and will be hosted by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. At the same time,
I have continued sending letters to various international
organizations suggesting the specific areas in which
such cooperation can be strengthened.
In pursuit of this policy during the period I have
referred to, I undertook a trip to strengthen the
Committee’s connections to various organizations
headquartered in Europe. Over the course of four days,
I visited four capitals and met with eight organizations.
I met in Paris with the Counter-Terrorism Action
Group of the G8 and, in Vienna, with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the International
Atomic Energy Agency and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. In Brussels, I
pursued contacts with the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, the European Union Working Party on
Terrorism and the World Customs Organization.
Finally, I met in Strasbourg with the Council of
Europe. In every one of those meetings, we explored
better ways to increase cooperation between the CTC
and those organizations and to improve coordination
with their programmes in the fight against terrorism,
with the principal aim of avoiding overlapping.

As to the second issue, the main lines of the
CTC’s current working programme are as follows. The
Committee will continue to study Member States’
reports on their implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). It has also been established that the CTC will
approve a report on the measures to be taken to tackle
the problems identified in its 14 November report. This
touches on the third issue, which I will address later.
It is also important that we review the
conclusions of next week’s meeting between
international and regional organizations in Vienna. In
this regard, I am pleased to announce that we are
preparing a final joint declaration to be signed by all
participants, which will include concrete ways to
enhance our work in the fight against terrorism and
which will announce the establishment of a joint
assistance matrix that will be the responsibility of the
CTC and would give States and international
organizations alike an overall picture and a practical
tool for making better use of the technical assistance
programmes available.
Thirdly, and no less important, I wish to comment
on the main aspects of the 19 February report of the
CTC on its own revitalization, which has been circulated
today as a public document of the Security Council.
First of all, it is relevant to stress that the idea
behind the revitalization of the CTC has its origin in a
dual conviction — first, that terrorism is one of the
majors threats to international peace and security, and
secondly, that the United Nations must continue to play
the lead role in the fight against that threat and that the
role of the Security Council, through the CTC, must be
maintained and reinforced. The goal of the
revitalization is therefore to provide the CTC with the
means to become more operational, more proactive and
more visible. The revitalization of the Committee is
urgent and absolutely necessary to strengthen the fight
against terrorism by giving the CTC further means to
fulfil its mandate of monitoring the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001).
The report from the Chair, approved on 14
November, shows that the current procedures and
structures of the CTC must be reconsidered. That is
particularly true given that the CTC has evolved to
assume a more proactive role in the dialogue with
Member States, in evaluating the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), in facilitating technical
assistance to Member States and in promoting closer

3

S/PV.4921

cooperation with regional and subregional organizations.
All those challenges make it imperative to revitalize the
CTC.
The revitalization described in the 19 February
report gives the CTC the appropriate means to fulfil its
task within the existing United Nations structure. It is
also useful to point out the main goals of the
revitalization.
First, we must step up our efforts to promote and
monitor the implementation of all aspects of resolution
1373 (2001) through dialogue on the basis of its
guiding principles of cooperation, transparency and
even-handedness.
Secondly, we must strengthen the facilitation of
technical assistance to States.
Thirdly, we must strengthen the contacts and
coordination with other United Nations bodies and
enhance cooperation and coordination among
international and regional organizations.
Fourthly, we must improve the capacity to collect
information on the efforts of Member States and to
facilitate the provision of appropriate technical
assistance, including visits on the ground, always with
the approval of the State concerned.
Fifthly, we must improve the Committee’s
capacity
to
make
practical
and
concrete
recommendations to the Security Council in all areas
related to resolution 1373 (2001).
Sixthly and finally, we must expedite our work and
simplify procedures, adopt a proactive communication
strategy and develop and maintain a high degree of
capacity in all areas relevant to the resolution.
On the basis of those criteria, we have agreed that
the proposal for the new structure should be as follows.
The revitalized Committee will maintain the current
structure: the plenary, composed of Security Council
member States, and the Bureau, composed of the chair
and the vice-chairs. As an important addition, a
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
will be created, under which the current staff of experts
and Secretariat personnel will be reorganized.
The plenary will focus on policy and strategic
decisions, while the Directorate will be the executive
branch of the CTC and will be part of the Secretariat.
The staff of the new Directorate will be assigned to a
technical assistance and assessment office and an

4

information and administration office. To ensure the
necessary financial responsibility, the Committee’s
financial resources will be subject, obviously, to United
Nations rules and regulations.
It is important to emphasize the main features of
this revitalization. First, it is consistent with Security
Council practice under the Charter and United Nations
rules and regulations. Secondly, it will not be a
permanent structure and will not set a precedent for
other Security Council bodies. We have agreed to
establish a sunset clause for 31 December 2007, under
which the Directorate will continue to exist only if the
Security Council so decides. For full implementation of
the revitalization, we need a Security Council resolution
one which, I stress, will not modify resolution 1373
(2001) or other existing relevant resolutions.
In the work before us, I appeal to all
representatives of Member States to continue and
strengthen their support, which is needed to fight
terrorism. The battle against this scourge, which, I
repeat — it is not a cliché — is one of the greatest
threats to peace and security in our time, cannot be
won without the full commitment and conviction of the
United Nations and the international community.
To this day, the Counter-Terrorism Committee is
the only comprehensive and general instrument within
the United Nations to help Member States implement
the measures contained in resolution 1373 (2001); that
is why we must strengthen it. In the words of the
Secretary-General, “The work of the CounterTerrorism Committee and the cooperation it has
received from Member States have been unprecedented
and exemplary” (S/PV.4453, p. 2). To maintain that
state of affairs and to be effective, the Committee must
be revitalized.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Arias for his briefing.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I remind all speakers to limit
their statements to no more than five minutes in order
to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the full texts in writing
and to deliver a condensed version when speaking in
the Chamber.
Mr. Aho-Glele (Benin) (spoke in French): This
public meeting enables us to assess the activities of the

S/PV.4921

Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and to discuss
the paths to follow and the means to employ to make
the international community’s fight against the scourge
of terrorism more effective. The odious attacks of 11
September 2001 revealed, by their magnitude and their
cruelty, the gravity of the threat and the challenge that
terrorism poses to international peace and security. The
threat of terrorism has increased considerably with the
possibility that terrorist organizations have access to
weapons of mass destruction, which cause us to fear
the worst for humanity.
There is real consensus among States on the need
to fight terrorism through concerted action within the
framework of multilateral cooperation. The United
Nations has played the leading role as the best
framework for coordinating the efforts of Member
States. By shouldering its statutory responsibilities, the
Security Council has rightly taken the lead in the fight
against terrorism.
In the light of the resolve of States to pool their
efforts to stem the threat of terrorism, the Security
Council has given specific content to this fight by
defining the main guidelines for a coherent strategy to
destroy the underpinnings of the apparatus of terrorism
and to break the links that feed its worldwide network.
In that context, resolution 1373 (2001) is a
fundamental reference, in that it formulated clear
measures to guide the conduct of States and to provide
the international community with an appropriate
instrument to guide the implementation of the strategy
adopted. That instrument, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, has proved its worth. The CTC has built
international solidarity in the face of the terrorist
threat, both at the State level and at the level of
international, regional and subregional organizations.
The need to strengthen the CTC’s means of action
to enable it to deal more effectively with this threat has
prompted Council member States to draft an important
revitalization plan. The Chairman of the Committee has
just outlined it very clearly, for which we thank him.
The proposal includes innovations that must be proved
in practice. We endorse the objectives assigned to the
Executive Directorate, which must be part of the
Secretariat, in conformity with the Charter. We urge
Member States to support the Directorate when it is
established, because all States have an interest in making
the world in which we live a safer and better place.

That said, the fight against terrorism should not
make us lose sight of the factors from which terrorism
derives its pretext and which it uses to justify itself.
Among those factors — which are numerous — my
delegation would highlight the clash among
civilizations, which must be overcome by promoting
cultural diversity and a dialogue among cultures. Other
factors are extreme poverty and the injustice of the
current international economic system, which dooms
the majority of humanity to destitution and disease. In
addition, there is the persistence of the Palestinian
conflict, which has been going on for more than half a
century. We also note the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons, which is a factor in the
destabilization of entire regions.
As it mobilizes against terrorism, the
international community would gain in credibility if it
consistently implemented the Millennium Declaration
and the outcomes of the major conferences held under
United Nations auspices — particularly the Brussels
Programme of Action for the Least Developed
Countries, to prevent an increase in the number of socalled failed States, which easily fall prey to mafia
networks of all kinds. Such an approach would help to
improve the climate of current international relations.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ambassador Arias for his excellent
briefing and for his efforts to enable the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) to fully carry out its
mission. I would also like to thank him, as well as the
other members of the CTC, for the reports of 14
November 2003 and 19 February 2004 (S/2004/70 and
S/2004/124) on the revitalization of the CTC.
I would like to point out that in the report of 14
November 2003 the Chairman of the CTC clearly
identified both the difficulties encountered by States in
implementing Security Council resolution 1373 (2001)
and those linked to the operation of that body. The
difficulties have become so serious that if they are not
quickly remedied, they could compromise the
operation of the CTC in the long term. That is why my
delegation cannot but provide its support to any effort
to instil a new dynamic in the work of the CTC. After
more than two years of existence and having made
convincing progress, the Committee seems to have
reached it limits and to be running out of steam. That
can be overcome only if we renew our political will
and our collective determination to combat the scourge
of terrorism.

5

S/PV.4921

My delegation therefore reaffirms its firm
commitment to combat terrorism and to support the
proposals to revitalize the CTC, in particular through
rationalizing its work and setting up new
administrative and budgetary arrangements. In fact, we
believe it is urgent to “debureaucratize” the
Committee’s structure in order to give it more
flexibility in carrying out its work, by means of an
executive body that would take care of the daily tasks,
including procedural matters, in order to enable the
plenary body to devote itself efficiently to strategic and
policy matters. The establishment and operation of
such a body must be done, as much as possible, with
full respect for the rules and procedures of our
Organization and in accordance with the spirit and
letter of the Charter.
In supporting the efforts underway to revitalize
the CTC, we would like to stress that since terrorism is
now recognized as a threat to international peace and
security, the struggle against it warrants special
treatment. In that respect, besides not sparing any effort
to fully implement resolution 1373 (2001), on the basis
of possible subsequent developments, we must also
begin a thorough discussion aimed at the extension of
the CTC mandate beyond what was conferred upon it
by resolution 1373 (2001).
I would like to take the opportunity offered by this
debate on the revitalization of the CTC to recall three
proposals submitted by my Government to the Security
Council bodies charged with the fight against terrorism.
The first proposal addresses the right of asylum.
In that respect, we believe that countries that have a
strong tradition of granting asylum, where terrorist
networks have developed that now threaten their own
security, should urgently review their procedures for
granting asylum and should inquire, in particular, of
the countries of origin of the asylum seekers
concerning their status.
The second proposal addresses the monitoring of
funds belonging to individuals, entities or organizations
that are suspected of being sources of funding for
terrorist groups, which monitoring should be done in a
more rigorous manner. Here I stress the particular
responsibility of financial institutions and banks, with a
view to more strictly controlling movements of capital
that are suspected of being linked to acts of terrorism. I
would like to recall that, besides its legal and regulatory
arsenal for fighting violations in the area of currency

6

exchange and capital movements, Algeria has set up a
unit on handling financial information, an independent
structure under the Ministry of Finance, whose primary
mission is to combat the financing of terrorism and
money-laundering
Lastly, with respect to international cooperation
against terrorism, my delegation, would like to call for
the fulfilment of a proposal that we consider extremely
important, that of setting up an international fund to
support the fight against terrorism. It would provide
multifaceted aid to developing countries to help them
adapt and harmonize their national legislation and help
with technical assistance and with the acquisition of
necessary equipment for an effective global response to
terrorism. We are especially convinced of the relevance
of that proposal since, of the 58 countries that were
indicated by the CTC Chairman in October 2003 as
being late in submitting their reports the great majority
belong to the developing world.
The threats that terrorism poses to international
peace and security are not limited or isolated, but are
increasingly interconnected and transnational in nature.
Hence, we need to adopt an integrated and global
approach that would take into account the political,
diplomatic and operational dimensions, including
international judicial cooperation and cooperation in
the exchange of information and the acquisition of
specific equipment for the fight against terrorism. We
believe that the CTC must evolve in order to take
control of that package of multifaceted relations.
Furthermore, the fight against terrorism must be
part of a coordinated scheme for establishing a new
system of collective security based on the principle of
the indivisibility of security and on the now wellestablished link between development and security.
Lastly, I would like to conclude by congratulating
Ambassador Arias, as well as the other members of the
CTC, for their satisfactory performance in carrying out
the work programme of the last three months and to
support them in implementing the work programme for
the current three months. We hope the Security Council
can very soon adopt a resolution that sanctions the
main points of the CTC report on revitalization.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First, I would like to thank Ambassador
Arias for the information he has given us on the work
of the last few months, and the proposals agreed to in
the Committee on its reform.

S/PV.4921

The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
remains an important instrument in pooling and
coordinating international efforts in the fight against
the global threat of terrorism and in implementing the
tasks set out in Security Council resolution 1373
(2001). The constructive nature and mutual
understanding that characterizes the work of the CTC
and its relation with all the Member States of the
United Nations are an important positive factor for
maintaining unity and for providing for the
Committee’s effectiveness. The CTC has consistently
continued its policy to create security mechanisms to
meet the new demands of the counter-terrorism fight.
Despite the difficulties, the process whereby States
adopt contemporary anti-terrorism legislation in
accordance with resolution 1373 (2001) is becoming
more effective.
An important positive outcome of the CTC’s
work is the significant momentum generated by the
universalizing of the 12 anti-terrorism conventions,
which is definitely helping to improve the international
legal basis for countering terrorism.
The mechanism being established for close,
regular interaction between the CTC and international,
regional and subregional organizations is acquiring
particular importance. We hope that the upcoming third
meeting to be held in Vienna on 11 and 12 March 2004
between those organizations and the CTC will lend
additional impetus to the regional dimension of the
Committee’s work and will help to increase the
concrete contributions of all cooperating organizations
to carry out a global anti-terrorism strategy.
At the same time, we cannot ignore the real
problems that have faced the CTC recently. Right now,
the Committee is moving on to a new stage in its work,
central to which are the practical activities of States in
counter-terrorism, in keeping with the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001). This in and of itself presents
the CTC with essentially new and important tasks. It is
clear that the multifaceted nature of the international
counter-terrorism agenda and the expansion of the
geographical area of terrorist activities — which
encompass, inter alia, countries that do not yet have
sufficient potential or resources to avert specific
terrorist threats — increase many times the demands on
the future work of the CTC. We welcome the fact that
the Committee has adopted a responsible approach and
has promptly realized the need to adapt to these new
conditions. It has conducted a thorough analysis of the

main problems confronting countries in carrying out
their counter-terrorism tasks and of the difficulties in
the work of the CTC.
All of this has been reflected in the report of the
Chairman of the Committee (S/2004/124, annex). In
order to resolve the problems enumerated in the report,
a structural reorganization of this subsidiary body of
the Security Council and a strengthening of its expert
and organizational capacities are of particular
importance. We support the proposals of the CTC to
revitalize and reactivate its work. We deem timely the
creation of a CTC Executive Directorate, which could
become an important instrument for providing effective
operational support to the CTC in its future work and
in carrying out its tasks as defined by the Security
Council.
We wish to actively work on a draft resolution on
the basis of the proposals contained in the 19 February
report of the Chairman of the CTC. We are sure that,
given the new conditions, this will help the Committee
successfully carry out the functions entrusted to it as
the key coordinator in the fight against terrorism.
Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): I
would like to join other members in thanking
Ambassador Arias for his report to us this morning and
to also congratulate him for the work that he has done
as the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) over the months.
Perhaps the most significant contribution by the
Security Council to the global campaign against
terrorism has been the adoption of resolution 1373
(2001), which established the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. Through its capacity-building and global
coordination initiatives, the Committee has become a
significant element of the worldwide campaign against
terrorism. It has helped energize States and
organizations around the world to pay more attention to
combating terrorism, whether through the adoption of
new — or the improvement of existing — counterterrorism legislation or the development and
implementation of counter-terrorism action plans.
While the Committee has performed admirably, much
work remains to be done.
In the two and a half years since the adoption of
resolution 1373 (2001), despite the global counterterrorism effort, the terrorists and their supporters have
continued to strike, whether in Bali, Moscow,
Casablanca, Riyadh, Baghdad, Istanbul, Haifa,

7

S/PV.4921

Jerusalem, Karbala, Quetta or elsewhere. Terrorism has
continued to spread, raising the spectre of further
deadly attacks on innocent victims and continuing
threats to international peace and security.
The Security Council must remain at the forefront
of the international community’s campaign to rid the
world of the scourge of terrorism. To do so, it must act
with a renewed sense of urgency and a commitment to
a sustained and determined effort to defeat this global
scourge. It must act as though 11 September took place
yesterday, not more than two years ago. It must not
wait for the next major terrorist act to occur to become
energized. The Council and its Counter-Terrorism
Committee must never forget that, as long as a few
States are not acting quickly enough to raise their
capacity to fight terrorism, we all remain vulnerable.
The Committee has initially responded to the
challenge. It has identified not only the difficulties
States are having in implementing resolution 1373
(2001), but it has also highlighted its own internal
structural problems that are preventing it from
performing more effectively. It must continue to
innovate and evolve.
After months of deliberations, the Committee has
agreed that restructuring its support staff is needed to
enable the Committee to carry out all of the current and
new tasks in its approved work programme,
particularly in the facilitation of technical assistance
and coordination among international, regional and
subregional organizations. The proposal presented by
Chairman Arias not only reflects the views of all 15
Committee members, but also takes into account
detailed discussions with the Secretariat.
Once the proposed restructuring becomes a
reality, the CTC can become more effective in fulfilling
its mandate of monitoring States’ efforts to implement
all of the provisions of resolution 1373 (2001). It will
be able to work more closely with States in identifying
gaps in their counter-terrorism capabilities and in
finding the necessary technical assistance to fill those
gaps. In addition, it will expand its efforts to galvanize
organizations worldwide to adopt and implement best
practices, codes and standards and to ensure that their
members are implementing the requirements of the
resolution. Of course, it will do this while respecting
what have become its hallmarks: transparency,
cooperation and even-handedness.

8

Finding innovative ways to address the ongoing
threat to international peace and security posed by
terrorism presents the Council with a unique challenge.
The Council must not become complacent in this
search. It must continue to explore ways to enhance its
contribution in this area. The adoption of resolution
1373 (2001) and the creation of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee were central elements of the Council’s
extraordinary response to this unique situation. We
view the CTC’s restructuring proposal as a
continuation of that response and as a managerial
reform after the experience of 30 months of work. The
CTC has fulfilled its responsibility by studying the
problem and proposing the solution. The Council must
now do its part and take the necessary action to make
the proposal a reality.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
would like to congratulate Ambassador Arias and to
thank him for his report (S/2004/124, annex) and for
his stewardship of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. I
would like to associate myself with the remarks to be
made subsequently by Ambassador Ryan on behalf of
the European Union.
I take this occasion to offer condolences to the
families of all those killed or injured in recent terrorist
attacks, from Baghdad to Karbala, from Quetta to
Moscow and in the Middle East, to name but a few.
There is a long list. Those chilling attacks are a
sobering reminder of why we are here this morning,
having this discussion. Those attacks show that
terrorists know no boundaries; they do not distinguish
between race, religion or geography, and they are
united in their disdain for life. That is a risk that affects
us all, and we need to face it together.
The fight against terrorism needs to be sustained,
effective and efficient. Combating and defeating
terrorism requires concerted and wide-ranging action.
Military action may be necessary. Better intelligence is
required; defensive systems need to be improved; some
organizations need to be proscribed; and we have to
tackle the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Financial flows to terrorists have to be cut off. Perhaps,
above all, we need to do better in tackling the
resentments that encourage terrorism, but can never
justify it. That is why we need a multilateral response,
and why the United Nations and its agencies have a key
role. Today we are addressing part of that role: the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).

S/PV.4921

In our view, the Committee has been successful
in four main ways: by maintaining unity; by
establishing and delivering momentum; by establishing
accountability; and by providing guidance to Member
States. In terms of unity, the Committee has helped to
ensure that Member States and the international
community have remained united and worked together.
Momentum has been established by keeping terrorism
high on the international agenda. The accountability
stems from the way in which the Committee has
examined Member States’ domestic legislation and
practice, helping to identify weaknesses and gaps.
Lastly, it has provided guidance through a system to
facilitate the provision of technical assistance to
Member States.
But there is no room for complacency. As the
representative of Algeria said earlier, we now need a
new dynamic. It is essential that the Committee be
strengthened and given the support it needs to help
Member States to implement resolution 1373 (2001).
The United Kingdom therefore very much welcomes
the proposal for the revitalization of the Committee.
That proposal will, in our view, give greater focus to
long-term goals. It will help the Committee to adopt a
more proactive communications strategy, and the
Committee’s expertise will be enhanced and properly
coordinated.
The goal is simple. It is to help Member States
implement resolution 1373 (2001) and ratify the United
Nations counter-terrorism conventions. That would
retain accountability, while providing greater guidance
on the complex range of issues which have emerged
since the Committee was first established.
But the proposals should not be misinterpreted.
They are simply a means to enhance and reorganize the
support structure of the Committee to help it better
achieve its objectives — objectives which we are all
signed up to. It is not about change for the sake of it,
and the proposals specifically do not seek to alter the
structure of the United Nations or to undermine the
Secretariat. In its deliberations, the CTC has taken care
to ensure that the revitalization is consistent with
United Nations rules and regulations and with previous
Security Council practices. As the representative of the
United States emphasized, the proposals have been
discussed at length, and thoroughly, with the
representatives of the Secretariat, whose views have
been taken into account.

I have a very simple vision of the proposed
Directorate. It will work with and for the Committee. It
will offer guidance and help to implement the
Committee’s wishes. Does that mean a degree of
responsibility to the Committee? Yes. Does it mean
that, in policy terms, the Committee will be directing
the work of the Directorate? Yes. In the view of the
United Kingdom, anything less would run counter to
any sensible delineation of responsibilities and would
undermine the efficiency of the Committee.
Let me stress that the overall substance and
working methods of the CTC would remain unchanged.
The Committee would retain the hallmarks that have
contributed so much to its success: cooperation,
transparency and even-handedness. The Committee’s
mandate — resolution 1373 (2001) — would remain
unchanged. The new structure is not intended to be
permanent. There will be a comprehensive review by
31 December 2005, and a completion date of 31
December 2007.
If terrorists are indefatigable in their endeavours,
then the United Nations and the Security Council must
match them. The Committee must be given the means
to continue and sustain the fight against terrorism, to
maintain the unity, momentum and accountability
which have been created and to provide guidance to
Member States to enable them to comply with
resolution 1373 (2001).
The United Kingdom urges all Member States to
be supportive of the revitalization proposals, because
they can contribute in no small measure to a more
effective effort to actually make the world a safer and
more stable place.
Mr. Valle (Brazil): I would like to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for having
convened this important meeting. The oral reports of
the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and the presentation of the Committee’s
quarterly programmes of work are opportunities for the
membership of the Organization as a whole to be
informed of the relevant work being carried out by the
CTC in the fight against terrorism. This meeting
acquires particular relevance, as the Security Council
will shortly be taking up the question of the reform of
the CTC. The open debate convened today provides an
excellent opportunity for learning what the broad
membership of the Organization has to say about an
issue of such magnitude.

9

S/PV.4921

I would like to commend Ambassador Inocencio
Arias, not only for his work as Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, but also for his efforts
in promoting the proposal for the reform of the
Committee. Without his determined commitment, it is
unlikely that we would be in a position to discuss a
concrete proposal for reform. We further extend thanks
for his comprehensive presentation on the work of the
Committee in the last quarter of 2003 and on the
programme of work for the current trimester. The main
issue in this debate, however, will undoubtedly be the
proposal for the reform of the Committee. In this
regard, I fully associate my country with the statement
to be delivered later by the Permanent Representative
of Argentina on behalf of the Rio Group. I would like
to add a few remarks in our national capacity regarding
the main issues involved in the creation of a new
structure for the CTC.
To begin with, the Brazilian Constitution provides
that our foreign policy should be guided by the
repudiation of terrorism in all its forms. Therefore,
Brazil has signed all the relevant conventions and
international instruments in the field of combating
international terrorism, and actively participates in
negotiations and initiatives on the subject.
The first issue to be addressed is the creation of
the new structure itself. The purpose of the report
presented to the Council (S/2004/124, annex) is the
restructuring of the Committee in order to correct
possible imbalances in its current structure and to
allow for a refocusing of the work of the CTC in
coordinating the capacity-building efforts of Member
States in the fight against terrorism. The main proposal
to that end is the creation of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate. As pointed out in the
report, the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee remains as defined in resolution 1373
(2001) and the subsequent ministerial declarations of
the Council annexed to resolutions 1377 (2001) and
1456 (2003).
As the Council considers the issue of the reform,
it is of particular importance that the alterations
proposed to revamp the Counter-Terrorism Committee
be strictly of a procedural and operational nature, and
that the decisions adopted in this regard be consistent
with such an approach. The Brazilian Government
understands that the fight against terrorism must be
carried out in strict accordance with international law,
in particular the commitments assumed in the area of

10

human rights and humanitarian law. The preservation
of the rule of law, of individual liberties and of
democratic principles and values is, itself, one of the
main objectives in the struggle against terror. Any
concession in this regard would clearly benefit those
who, through their dastardly acts of terrorism, show
nothing but contempt for human life.
The second point I would like to highlight is the
proposal for the appointment of an Executive Director.
The creation of that post addresses main areas of
concern. It allows for a better coordination of work
within the executive structure of the Committee itself
and better interaction between that structure and the
Committee, more precisely, the Member States
represented in it. During negotiations on the report,
Brazil attached priority to clearly establishing the
duties of the Executive Director in terms of reporting
and informing the Committee on the work of the
Directorate.
The appointment of an Executive Director will
also allow for better coordination of work with other
bodies — in particular the 1267 Committee of the
Security Council and the relevant branch of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, to name only
two — resulting in the multiplication of synergies and
a greater capacity to offer assistance to States in the
combat of international terrorism. We expect such a
task will be carried out by the Executive Director in
full coordination with the Chairman of the Committee.
A third consideration related to the Executive Director
is that the centralization of duties should make it easier
for Member States to have access to the Committee.
Finally, I would like to express my Government’s
satisfaction with the fact that the reform proposal
contained in the report of the Committee clearly
establishes that one of the functions entrusted to the
new structure is to establish a liaison with the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights and other
relevant human rights organizations in matters related
to counter-terrorism. That is a most positive step in
ensuring that measures adopted at the national level are
in strict accordance with the extensive body of
international legislation dedicated to the protection and
promotion of the most basic human rights. In order for
that function to be carried out adequately, we favour
the appointment of a specialist in the field of human
rights on the staff of experts assigned to the
Committee.

S/PV.4921

The issue now ahead for the Council is to
adequately translate this proposal into a resolution
capable of reflecting all the improvements we want to
incorporate into the structure of the Committee, while
fully respecting the Charter of the Organization. We
reaffirm our continued and full commitment to the
achievement of that lofty goal.
Mr. Motoc (Romania): I would like to
congratulate Ambassador Arias of Spain and his team
for the report presented to the Council today
(S/2004/124), for their capable stewardship of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and for their
undertakings for reform. Let me also express our
appreciation for the work performed by all members of
the Committee in the process of negotiating the report
on the revitalization of the CTC.
As Romania aligns itself with the statement to be
made shortly by Ambassador Ryan of Ireland on behalf
of the European Union, I will confine myself to only a
few brief comments.
The international community faces a new and
most dangerous threat to peace and security: global
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
Combating special threats always requires special
measures, adopted at a global level and universally
implemented. The active participation of all members
of the international community is crucial. It is
primarily the responsibility of the United Nations and
the Security Council to act as a catalyst for all those
efforts. Likewise, by assuming the leading role in
fighting terrorism, the Security Council reconfirms its
capacity to deliver on its responsibilities under the
United Nations Charter.
Romania joined the efforts to fight terrorism at
the international, regional and subregional levels in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
applicable international law and the relevant human
rights provisions.
As the CTC is the Security Council’s specialized
subsidiary body in this area, we attach the utmost
importance to its revitalization and reinforcement. The
CTC must be provided with adequate means to carry
out the responsibilities arising from advancement to the
next stage of its work. Consequently, we consider the
finalization of the report and the timely adoption of the
draft resolution to be vital steps towards a more
effective CTC.

Enhancing the CTC’s ability to monitor
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) is the
cornerstone of the process for its revitalization,
currently under way, since full compliance with the
resolution’s provisions by all States is an essential
prerequisite for effectively combating terrorism. We
note with deep concern that many States continue to
face difficulties in fully implementing resolution 1373
(2001), including elaborating and presenting the
required reports to the CTC. One indicator in that
respect is the increasing number of States which are
late in submitting their reports.
This leads to my next comment, concerning the
importance of granting Member States the necessary
technical assistance. We trust that the establishment of
the new executive structure will generate a more
proactive role for the CTC in identifying needs and
facilitating technical assistance to Member States.
Romania acknowledges the important role played in
that respect by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in Vienna through its Terrorism Prevention
Branch.
Romania considers the signature, ratification and
full implementation of all relevant United Nations
conventions relating to terrorism to be an essential
component of the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). We encourage all Member States to become
parties to all those conventions as soon as possible. I
would like to inform the Council that Romania is in the
final stage of ratification of the last of those
conventions: the International Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings.
I would like to make one final point concerning
another important pillar of the future activity of the
CTC: increased cooperation and coordination with
other United Nations bodies and the relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations.
The goal of successfully combating the global scourge
of terrorism cannot be accomplished except through the
joint efforts of the international community as a whole.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): The Security
Council is meeting to consider the quarterly report
covering October to December 2003, presented by the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
and to assess the 90 days work of the first quarter of
2004. I would like to take this opportunity to commend
in particular Ambassador Arias for his outstanding and

11

S/PV.4921

dedicated work. I also thank members of the Committee
and the independent experts for the work well done.
We have taken note of the Committee’s work
regarding implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), in
the course of which it reviewed the reports submitted
by States, ensured the flow of information from States
in compliance with resolution 1373 (2001) in the field
of technical assistance, took a more proactive approach
to the provision of technical assistance to States facing
difficulties in complying with resolution 1373 (2001)
and strengthened cooperation with and among
international, regional and subregional organizations
with anti-terrorist programmes.
The period under review marks an important
turning point in the short but rich life of the
Committee. The report presented on 14 November
2003 (S/2003/1084) by the Chair of the CTC on the
problems encountered in the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) identified a number of
important operational issues faced by the Committee.
The CTC took a more proactive role in the dialogue
with Member States, in evaluating implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), in facilitating technical
assistance to Member States and in promoting closer
cooperation and coordination with international,
regional and subregional organizations.
The report concluded that some problems are
being encountered in the implementation of the
resolution at both the State and CTC levels, and that
those problems should be tackled in a comprehensive
way due to the close interlinkage between them and the
urgency of the task.
Today we are seized of the report on the
revitalization of the CTC, endorsed by the Committee.
We take good note of the Chairman’s strategic direction
for the proposed reforms and of the commitment of
Committee members to finding the best means of
forging ahead with the launching of the bases for the
revitalization of the Committee — a need felt by all
members of the Council.
The Chairman of the Committee has outlined the
main thrust of the reform that we are undertaking. Like
all reforms, it will take some time before its effects are
felt. As a precautionary measure, a wise decision was
taken: a trial period was provided for, set to end 31
December 2005, to review the effectiveness of the
reform, along with a sunset clause set for two years
later.

12

A large number of developing countries — the
most affected and the most vulnerable — have joined
with confidence the fight against terrorism. Many of
them have enacted anti-terrorist legislation, but the
scarcity of their resources — financial, technical and
human — impedes the implementation of such a
legislative framework. Moreover, such countries lack
the executive machinery and the capacity to deal
effectively with security, border controls, the
movement of criminals, the illegal circulation of
firearms, and terrorist networks.
It is not a lack of political will that is affecting
their action. Rather, it is a situation of a shortage of
resources, a gap which we have the means to close. I
hope that our Committee will continue to act in such a
way as to enable that gap to be effectively closed
through the provision of technical assistance.
We are pleased that the CTC, in its programme of
revitalization, has as one of its priorities the
strengthening and facilitation of technical assistance to
States. In fact, without long-term assistance that is
focused on national and regional capacity-building in
areas related to resolution 1373 (2001), the developing
countries will be unable to meet international standards
in order to face the grave challenges ahead. It is only
through a concerted effort and with international
assistance that they will be able to strengthen their
capacity to wage an effective combat against terrorism.
We welcome the Committee’s commitment to
strengthen the provision of such assistance to countries
in need and its decision to adopt this more proactive
approach to its delivery.
The African Union has set a pioneering example
by adopting the Convention on the Prevention and
Combating of Terrorism in Africa, generally known as
the Algiers Convention of 1999. Through that
Convention, the African countries are pursuing a
shared objective through common action at the
intergovernmental level involving the exchange of
information on the activities and movements of
terrorist groups in Africa and the undertaking of
actions designed to step up the fight against terrorism.
International cooperation is a vital prerequisite for
building capacity in the African countries, allowing
them to act more effectively at the national,
subregional and continental levels against the financing
of terrorism, in the tracking of terrorist networks, and
in apprehending and bringing terrorists to justice.

S/PV.4921

The international community at large should
reinforce its cooperation programmes with continental
and subregional organizations and with the African
countries in areas related to Security Council resolution
1373 (2001), in order to strengthen their capacity to
fight terrorism. That will make it possible to deal with
one of the weakest links in the global fight against
terrorism.
We are pleased that the Committee will be able to
adopt the proposed reforms as presented by the
Chairman, Ambassador Arias, and we are convinced
that this is the way to forge ahead in implementing
resolution 1373 (2001) and to stay on course with our
actions against terrorism.
Mr. Baja (Philippines): Mr. President, I would
like to thank you and your delegation for having
organized this important debate on the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC). This meeting is taking
place at a critical juncture for the Security Council and
aims to take stock of the continuing threat of
international terrorism and to find ways to improve the
Council’s response to this menace, primarily through
the unique work of the CTC. I thank most sincerely
Ambassador Arias, Chairman of the CTC, for his report
today on the Committee’s work and on the innovations
needed to revitalize the CTC.
There is broad agreement that terrorism is one of
the defining threats to international peace and security
in the twenty-first century. The catalytic moment in
everyone’s consciousness regarding the seriousness of
that threat occurred on 11 September, even though the
Security Council has been confronting that menace for
many decades, starting from the assassination in 1948
of Count Bernadotte, the United Nations mediator in
Palestine.
The international community is beginning to
understand the full extent of the distinct and formidable
challenge posed by terrorism to international peace. We
all realize that the threat of terrorism necessitates a
creative and determined response that is outside of the
usual box from which we draw ideas. Terrorism
operates on a paradigm that is based on the use of
modern technology, which otherwise provides creature
comforts to many. Terrorist information is acquired and
conveyed through e-mail and the Internet. Terrorist
money is transferred through banking facilities or the
use of the telephone and other convenient modes of
communication. Terrorists themselves travel by

aeroplane and have, tragically, used them as weapons
to attack. Terrorism has a very different feel from
twentieth-century causes of conflicts, because it
proceeds from a radical and ideological framework that
defies the standard political and military calculations
applied to traditional threats to the peace.
In the face of such an enemy, nothing short of a
global war that relies on strong international
partnership and cooperation is required. Terrorism has
no rational leadership with which negotiations for
peace are possible. It is, rather, a different form of
warfare, in whose context the Security Council’s
methods should be as creative, inventive and
imaginative as those employed by terrorists, who take
advantage of post-modern amenities in their actions.
While we recognize the need for innovation in the
fight against terrorism, our efforts — even if they are
based on Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter —
must be established on and rooted in the bedrock of
cooperation and synergy among all Member States. The
Security Council must emphasize the fact that the
international community’s capacity to overcome the
challenge of terrorism should be energized by States’
finding common interests and purposes rather than by
legalistic ideas of enforcement and mandatory
obligations.
Resolution 1373 (2001) has been the cornerstone
of the Security Council’s counter-terrorism measures.
We are now in the tenth quarterly work programme of
the CTC. The past two and a half years have shown the
need to improve the working methods and structure of
the CTC. This transformation will require innovative
changes, which are outlined in the 19 February report
of the CTC and have been ably presented by
Ambassador Arias. We hope that the Council can adopt
a resolution along the thrusts and structural changes
outlined by Ambassador Arias.
The fight against terrorism poses a huge
challenge to the United Nations, particularly the
Security Council. The institutional and legal
instruments that our 1945 forebears have bequeathed us
under the Charter to respond to threats to peace,
breaches of the peace and acts of aggression might not
have foreseen the serious threat which terrorism
presents today to international peace and security.
However, while the Charter would appear limited in
that sense, it is, at the same time, sufficient to provide

13

S/PV.4921

the Security Council with appropriate means to meet
that challenge.

the Permanent Representative of Spain, Ambassador
Arias, for his briefing.

As the Security Council deliberates on various
proposals to improve the working methods and
structure of the CTC, we hope that Member countries
will embrace the changes that may seem outside the
usual mould but are required to help States wage an
effective battle against terrorism. In the same vein,
while employing innovation and creativity in carrying
out some degree of transformation of the CTC, the
Council should continue to uphold the important and
timeless principles enshrined in the Charter to ensure
the full cooperation of everyone in the important task
of combating terrorism.

China commends the CTC for its efforts to
facilitate the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001)
by all countries and to help developing countries to
improve their counter-terrorism capacity-building. We
support the CTC in its coordination and cooperation
with the relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations to fight terrorism. At the
same time, we hope that the CTC will step up its
efforts to provide counter-terrorism assistance and do
its utmost to meet the needs of the developing
countries.

I would like to end by emphasizing one theme.
The global effort against terrorism requires the
Security Council and the rest of the membership of the
United Nations to remain committed partners if success
is to be achieved in eradicating the scourge of
terrorism.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): My
country fully supports the report of the CounterTerrorism Committee, presented by the Chairman. I
will refer very briefly to the important need to
revitalize the Committee.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee has carried out
praiseworthy work that may nonetheless prove to be
sorely inadequate in the short term. I say this in full
knowledge of the situation. The United Nations cannot
and should not spare any effort in combating that very
serious threat to peace. The report approved by the
Committee and summarized earlier by the Chairman
seeks precisely to strengthen most seriously the
flexibility, visibility and, above all, effectiveness of the
Committee and the United Nations in the fight against
terrorism.
Terrorism and the campaign against it require a
concerted and operative effort on the part of the
international community. The report before us,
avoiding rhetoric and cosmetic proposals, seeks the
objective of achieving a united, operational and more
effective Committee. I therefore reiterate our support
for the report.
Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like to begin by thanking you, Sir, for
convening today’s open meeting. I also thank the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),

14

The current effort to revitalize the CTC has
drawn the attention of the overall membership. After
repeated consultations, the CTC has issued a formal
report, which it has circulated as a document of the
Security Council. After more than two years of
operation, the CTC’s existing structure and working
methods have revealed their shortcomings, such as the
overburden of reporting on the part of the Member
States and a surfeit of meetings and documents. Its
efficiency must be improved and there is a lack of
coordination among the experts. We therefore fully
support the necessary reform of the CTC and endorse
the package of measures contained in the report,
including the establishment of an executive directorate.
We hope that the existing problems will be duly
addressed as soon as possible, in particular the issue of
overreporting on the part of the Member States. It
should be noted that revitalization and reform are an
ongoing process. No matter how reform is undertaken,
the CTC should maintain its policy guidance over the
work of the executive directorate. All decisions should
be taken through consensus in the CTC plenary.
Mr. Pleuger (Germany): My delegation, too,
thanks the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), Ambassador Arias, for his detailed
and substantial report.
The fight against terrorism within the broadest
possible international coalition remains one of
Germany’s most important policy objectives. Our
internationally recognized contributions to that fight
are well known and need not be elaborated here. While
we fully subscribe to the forthcoming statement by the
presidency of the European Union, we would like to
highlight the following points.

S/PV.4921

The Counter-Terrorism Committee has done
impressive work and deserves our recognition. We
support the CTC’s new work programme, as we have
always supported its work, and will remain committed
to close cooperation. Some weeks ago, we submitted
our fourth report under resolution 1373 (2001). We
have actively contributed to the current efforts to
improve the CTC’s effectiveness by strengthening its
support structure. In our view, this reform must be
undertaken in an open and consensual atmosphere, in
close cooperation with the Secretariat and the General
Assembly and in full respect for the United Nations
Charter. In that context, we strongly suggest that the
views expressed by the Secretariat in its letter to the
Chairman of the CTC, dated 3 March 2004, be
carefully analysed and duly taken into account.
Besides strengthening the CTC’s internal work
structures and procedures, the reform must contribute
to further enhancing the CTC’s legitimacy in the
perception of all United Nations Member States, which
have up to now placed their trust and confidence in that
major counter-terrorism instrument of the United
Nations. This, in our view, also means including an
appropriate human rights perspective by appointing a
human rights expert as a staff member of the new
support structure.
Most important of all, the CTC should improve
its capacity to deepen its continuous dialogue with all
United Nations Member States on key counterterrorism issues under resolutions 1373 (2001) and
1456 (2003). The quality, impartiality and intensity of
that dialogue are unprecedented in United Nations
history and remain a valuable asset on which we can
build.
In that context, let me repeat a suggestion that we
made during the last open debate. CTC experts could,
with the help of the enhanced structure, form joint
teams with members of specialized international
organizations and actively assist countries in key areas
of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1456 (2003), such as in
professionalizing their financial control, border
protection, weapons control or law enforcement
sectors.
In conclusion, I would like to express our
appreciation of the fact that a great number of Member
States are taking the floor today in order to present
their views and suggestions on the CTC reform efforts.
We can assure them all that we will do our outmost to

give their points due consideration in the ongoing
consultations on a draft resolution on this matter.
Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), Ambassador Inocencio Arias, for submitting
the Committee’s programme of work for the tenth 90day period (S/2004/32, annex) and particularly for his
effective leadership of that important body. My
delegation aligns itself with the statement to be made
by the representative of Argentina on behalf of the Rio
Group; we shall now make a few observations in our
national capacity.
My country places priority on the global fight
against terrorism and resolutely supports the activities
being carried out by the CTC in its work to verify the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). We
welcome the fact that the Committee has continued to
broaden its contacts and its cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations.
We believe that that line of action is an important
component of the fight against terrorism.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Al
Qaeda and Taliban sanctions Committee — which I
have the honour to chair — have appeared in various
international forums, as powerful instruments of the
Organization in the global fight against terrorism. A
recent opportunity was the presence of the CounterTerrorism Committee and of the sanctions Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) at the
Bali Regional Ministerial Meeting on CounterTerrorism, held on 4 and 5 February and organized
jointly by the Governments of Indonesia and Australia.
Technical assistance for those States that need it
must continue to be one of the Committee’s priorities.
We take note of the progress achieved in that area,
particularly the preparation of a valuable guide to
information and sources of assistance for the fight
against terrorism, which is available on the Internet.
The report on revitalization of the CounterTerrorism Committee (S/2004/124, annex), which we
are considering today, contains concrete proposals to
improve the Committee’s structure and procedures in
order to respond more effectively to the mandate
conferred on it by resolution 1373 (2001). The
proposals are intended to strengthen technical
assistance and dialogue with States, to increase
contacts with the relevant international organizations in
the fight against terrorism and, in general, to provide

15

S/PV.4921

better tools and capacity to the Committee in carrying
out its mandate. That is why we support them.
I should like to emphasize that the report
adequately addresses a concern of my delegation that
was raised in resolution 1456 (2003): the obligation of
States to ensure that the anti-terrorism measures they
adopt meet all their obligations under international law,
particularly norms related to human rights, to refugees
and to humanitarian law. We are pleased to see that the
restructured Committee will maintain regular contacts
with the United Nations Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and with other human
rights organizations.
I should like to refer briefly to the CounterTerrorism Committee’s relationship with the Al Qaeda
and Taliban sanctions Committee from the perspective
of its future work. Since I assumed the chairmanship of
the Al Qaeda and Taliban sanctions Committee, we
have maintained close ties with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee through periodic meetings with its
Chairman and through contacts between our respective
panels of experts. That approach should continue, as
envisaged in resolution 1526 (2004), adopted recently
by the Security Council, which reaffirms the need to
establish close coordination and a concrete exchange of
information between the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and the CounterTerrorism Committee.
I should like to conclude by reaffirming our
country’s support for the report on revitalization of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, adding that it would be
naïve to think that we have won the fight against
terrorism. I fear that we will see many more terrorist
acts in various parts of the world. But, for countries to
gain ground in the fight against terrorism, the CTC’s
contribution is of the utmost importance. We believe
that, with the proposed changes to the Committee and
with the will of Member States, the international
community will be able to make decisive progress in
the fight against the scourge of terrorism.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): The Pakistan delegation
would like to join previous speakers in expressing its
gratitude to Ambassador Arias for his briefing and for
his leadership of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC). We have welcomed the work that has been
accomplished in the Committee and the submission of
its tenth 90-day work programme (S/2004/32, annex).
Important progress was made during the past quarter

16

under Ambassador Arias’s leadership. We are confident
that the Committee will maintain its momentum and
that it will implement its work programme.
Over the past 25 years, Pakistan has been a
principal victim of terrorism. Since 11 September
2001, we have been at the forefront of the global
campaign against terrorism. Confronted by terrorist
attacks against innocent people in our cities —
including attacks against the President of Pakistan —
my Government is steadfastly committed to achieving
success in the war against terrorism. We believe that,
with determination and cooperation — but also with
wisdom — that war can be fought and won.
Even as we speak, Pakistani forces are engaged in
operations to wipe out what remains of the Taliban and
Al Qaeda elements on the frontier between Pakistan
and Afghanistan. This is the first time in Pakistan’s
history that our armed forces have been deployed in
such large numbers — 70,000 — in the tribal areas of
Pakistan bordering Afghanistan to interdict and hunt
down Al Qaeda and Taliban elements. Pakistan has
developed an effective intelligence network and a
quick-reaction force for that purpose. We have captured
more than 500 Al Qaeda and Taliban operatives in this
campaign. Needless to say, Pakistan has paid a high
human and economic cost in pursuing this anti-terrorist
campaign.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee was set up
after 11 September 2001, when the Security Council
determined that international terrorism, as a
phenomenon, constituted a threat to international peace
and security. The CTC was designed as a unique body
and was directed to address what was an amorphous,
sometimes undefined phenomenon — a threat whose
specific manifestations were not always clear or
anticipated.
Since its establishment, the CTC has
accomplished valuable goals: among other things,
ensuring general adherence by Member States to
international counter-terrorism conventions, energizing
States to adopt important legislation, ensuring timely
reporting of such national and international efforts to
combat terrorism and enhancing coordination among
States in the campaign against terrorism. The CTC’s
accomplishments have been due, in no small measure,
to the energy and commitment of its two Chairpersons,
first Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock of the United
Kingdom, and currently Ambassador Inocencio Arias

S/PV.4921

of Spain. There is no doubt that the Committee’s wideranging responsibilities and, especially, the need to
ensure timely implementation and reporting of the
means adopted by Member States to combat terrorism
have imposed a heavy burden on the successive
Chairmen and their delegations, as well as on the small
Secretariat support staff assisting the CTC. Therefore,
Pakistan supports the efforts of the CTC Chairman to
revitalize the work of the Committee, as reflected in
the CTC’s report on its revitalization (S/2004/124,
annex).
In our view, the revitalization of the CTC should
focus on substance, rather than on form. It is important
to assess and encourage concrete actions by States
against terrorism, rather than to focus on the evaluation
of reports and documents. The CTC should also be
enabled to promote a comprehensive approach to
combat terrorism, addressing the current and mutating
nature of the terrorist threat, the greater and vigorous
emphasis on intelligence and information sharing,
intelligence analysis, early warning and appropriate
law enforcement, administrative and political actions
against terrorist threats, including strengthened
policing of borders, prevention of terrorist financing
and building capacity within States for combating
terrorism and extremism. The CTC also needs to
address the root causes of terrorism: economic and
political injustice, foreign occupation, poverty and
extremism.
The Chairman’s report has been the subject of
extensive discussions in the CTC at the level of
experts. We believe there is need to carefully consider
the approach outlined in the report and in the draft
resolution circulated by the Chairman. We should
create institutional or Secretariat structures which
conform to the provisions of the Charter and respect
the prerogatives and responsibilities of the SecretaryGeneral and the General Assembly.
It can be argued that the CTC needs the assistance
of an operational body for discharging certain specific
tasks within a limited period of time, such as
monitoring the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001), by Member States. Therefore, we would be
prepared to consider the creation of a supplementary
and special group to assist the Committee with that
task. Such a special body should be created for a
limited period of time and should not set a precedent
for other future structures. We are therefore heartened
by the remarks made by the Chairman of the

Committee that the proposed structure will be of a
special nature and will not set a precedent for the
future. Those assurances should be appropriately
reflected in the draft resolution which is to be adopted.
In that context, we also welcome the views
conveyed by the Secretariat in a letter to the Chairman
of the CTC yesterday. We trust that further
consultations on the proposed draft resolution will
involve close interaction with the Secretariat, and that
its views will be taken into account, and will bring the
provisions of the draft resolution in line with the
requirements of the Charter. Similarly we hope that the
views expressed by non-members of the Security
Council in this debate today, will also be taken into
account in finalizing the draft resolution. Through such
a transparent and interactive process, we look forward
to the adoption by consensus of the draft resolution on
the CTC’s revitalization.
The President (spoke in French): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
My delegation fully associates itself with the
statement to be made by the representative of Ireland
on behalf of the European Union.
We thank Ambassador Inocencio Arias, for the
particularly important report that he just presented to
us as Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), in particular concerning the question of the
revitalization of the Committee.
My country attaches great importance to the work
of the Committee, and we believe that since its
establishment a little more than two years ago the
Counter-Terrorism Committee has been playing a
central role, one that has been rightly recognized by all,
in monitoring the due implementation of Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001). In the light of that
experience, however, we must acknowledge that this
role needs to be strengthened, if we want to enable the
Committee better to carry out the task entrusted to it.
That is the thrust of the report of the CTC dated 19
February 2004 (S/2004/124, annex), on its
revitalization, to which my delegation lends its full
support.
It is essential to increase the means available to
the Committee quantitatively and qualitatively, first
and foremost in terms of expertise and logistics. That

17

S/PV.4921

will determine the effectiveness of the international
community’s efforts in combating terrorism.
My delegation feels that the Committee now
needs to be in a stronger position to assess, in practice,
the nature and effectiveness of anti-terrorism measures
taken by States pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001). It
can no longer merely consider in New York, national
reports submitted by States, however essential that may
be. Moreover, the Committee needs to be better
equipped to assess the real needs of States for technical
assistance. Technical assistance is the essential
complement to the normative work being done by the
international community. That is the spirit in which the
Group of Eight Counter-Terrorism Action Group —
which coordinates the provision of technical assistance
depending on the needs expressed by States and in
close cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee — has been working.
My delegation attaches great importance to the
proposal for field visits — with the agreement, of
course, of the States concerned — in order to intensify
the dialogue with States.
The Committee also needs more effectively to
play its role of coordination and cooperation with
respect to regional and international institutions and
organizations, in order to maximize all of our efforts to
root out the scourge of terrorism.
Accordingly, the field missions of CounterTerrorism Committee experts could, for example,
usefully include, depending on need, experts from
other regional and international institutions or
organizations concerned. In particular, I am thinking of
the experts from the Terrorism Prevention Branch of
the Vienna-based United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, who are already doing an outstanding job in
helping States to become parties to the 12 international
counter-terrorism instruments and to adopt national
legislation to enable them to implement those
instruments.
The fight against terrorism requires more than
ever before — and recent events that have occurred in
various parts of the world clearly prove this — an
increased effort on the part of the international
community. It is therefore important to give the
Counter-Terrorism Committee the means it needs to
enable it to discharge the mandate entrusted to it by the
Security Council, in full compliance, of course, with
the provisions of the Charter.

18

My delegation will be working actively to make
the revitalization of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
a reality through the upcoming adoption of a draft
Council resolution.
I now resume my capacity as President of the
Security Council.
I would like to recall that yesterday, when the
Security Council convened its first meeting of the
month of March, on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, speakers expressed gratitude to China for
its leadership as President of the Council during the
month of February, and congratulated France on its
assumption of the presidency for the current month. I
have always appreciated formulas of courtesy, which I
believe reflect the good relations that exist among
delegations at the United Nations, and we all know that
through courtesy our work is made easier. But, given
the long list of speakers, perhaps participants would
agree to limit, or even to refrain from conveying, any
congratulatory words so that the Council can continue
its work with the desired diligence.
As another measure to optimize our use of time,
and in order to allow as many delegations as possible
to take the floor, I will not invite speakers individually
to take seats at the Council table and then to resume
their seats at the side of the Chamber. When a speaker
takes the floor, the conference officer will seat the next
speaker on the list at the table. I thank participants for
their understanding and cooperation.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Ireland, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia, the candidate countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey, the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and
Montenegro, and the European Free Trade Association
countries Iceland and Norway, members of the
European Economic Area, align themselves with this
statement.
The European Union wishes to express its
appreciation for the briefing provided to us this
morning by Ambassador Arias, Chairman of the

S/PV.4921

Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). The European
Union attaches real importance to these periodic open
debates of the Security Council in which we review the
work and progress of the CTC. Today’s debate is of
particular significance, as members’ views and
suggestions will provide valuable, concrete input into
the revitalization process, including in the Council’s
ongoing deliberations on the draft resolution on this
matter. Such a transparent debate will contribute to a
key goal of the reform: that is, to maintain and,
hopefully, to strengthen the CTC’s general acceptance
by — and perceived legitimacy with — all members of
the United Nations family.
The European Union welcomes the report of the
CTC on its revitalization (S/2004/124, annex). No
organ is immune from the passage of time and its
effects. Responding to the changing nature of this
global threat requires agility and flexibility in our
thinking and in our structures. In formulating this
report, the CTC has expressly recognized this reality
and has responded in a considered and constructive
way. It is our sincere hope that a revitalized CTC may
play an even more prominent role in the fight against
terrorism.
The European Union fully supports the CTC in
discharging its mandate. The report recommends a set of
measures — in particular the establishment of a
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate —
that would enable the CTC to fulfil its mandate of
monitoring the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001), facilitating technical assistance to Member
States and promoting closer cooperation and
coordination with international, regional and subregional
organizations. We consider those functions to be crucial
to the fight against terrorism and to the central role that
the United Nations has in this regard. The European
Union takes this opportunity to reaffirm its commitment
to cooperate with the CTC, and urges those Member
States that have not yet done so to submit their reports to
the CTC at the earliest opportunity.
We are all familiar with the contents of this
report. I do not propose, therefore, to engage in a
review of all of its aspects, but instead will focus on
certain components that the EU believes deserve
particular mention.
First, the revitalization report makes clear that
this proposal does not modify Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001) or other existing relevant

resolutions. The Security Council is not embarked,
here, on an overhaul of the substantive provisions of
those resolutions. The current reform mainly concerns
structural issues.
Secondly, any proposal to establish new bodies or
structures within the United Nations system is often
met with a degree of hesitancy or resistance. While
there are often many reasons for this, one of those
reasons, as we are all aware, is that such committees or
structures, once set up, are often difficult to dissolve or
disband, even when their original raisons d’être or
utility have ceased to exist. This report is perhaps
mindful of that fact, in making clear that the new
structures put in place will not be a permanent
arrangement and in expressly incorporating sunset and
review clauses, and is to be particularly commended.
Also, as the envisioned new Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate involves both the
Security Council and the Secretariat, it is imperative
that both United Nations organs cooperate closely in its
establishment and functioning. Such a new structure
may be adequate in view of the special nature of global
counter-terrorism efforts, but, as the report rightly
underlines, it should not set a precedent for other
Security Council bodies. The EU wishes to emphasize
that the integrity of the Secretariat and role of the
Secretary-General as the chief administrative officer of
the Organization must be preserved at all times.
Thirdly, the European Union is also gratified to
see provision made in the report for direct liaison
between the proposed Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
other human rights organizations in matters related to
counter-terrorism. For this purpose, we would
recommend, as others have, the recruitment of a human
rights expert. We look forward to receiving regular
updates in relation to the liaison activities mentioned.
The European Union, like others, has consistently
stressed that counter-terrorism measures must at all
times be accompanied by a respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms and, more generally, by
respect for the rule of law and legal certainty,
especially for individuals. There can be no trade-off
between protecting human rights and effective counterterrorism measures.
Fourthly, the European Union is reassured by the
fact that the projected increase in staffing requirements

19

S/PV.4921

will be quite modest. The impulsive hiring of
additional staff, tempting as it may seem to some as a
quick-fix solution, is not a sine qua non for rendering
existing operations more effective and efficient. Rather,
we should ensure the optimal utilization of available
expertise and examine critically the current
arrangements,
reconfiguring
accordingly
and
amplifying staff numbers only where absolutely
necessary. The CTC has wisely adopted this latter
approach.
Fifthly, the Executive Director, as envisaged in
the report, will be responsible for numerous important
tasks. Facilitating the provision of assistance
programmes to States in order to further the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) continues to
be an essential challenge. A lot of work is still required
of the CTC in this field. The EU therefore welcomes,
among other things, the recognition contained in the
report of the need to strengthen contacts with States,
relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations and other bodies of the United Nations
system, including the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions
Committee, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the United Nations Development
Programme. In reporting on the progress of States in
their participation in the relevant internationalterrorism-related conventions and protocols, the need
for close cooperation by the Executive Director with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime should
also be noted here.
The report on revitalization of the CTC is the
culmination of many months of intensive deliberation
among Committee members. We are grateful to them
for the long hours spent in the quest for agreement on a
final text. Given those concerted efforts and their
successful outcome, it is our genuine hope that a draft
resolution reflecting the contents of the report may be
agreed upon as soon as possible.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of India.
Mr. Nambiar (India): We thank you, Mr.
President, for providing us with this opportunity to
convey our views on recent developments in the
international community’s collective fight against
terrorism. This debate assumes particular relevance in
the context of ongoing measures to introduce
significant and far-reaching changes in the structure
and functioning of the Security Council’s Counter-

20

Terrorism Committee (CTC). We congratulate
Ambassador Arias of Spain on his exemplary
chairmanship of the Committee.
India’s exposure to the ravages of terrorism for
over two decades, with the loss of thousands of lives,
has only strengthened our resolve to fight this global
menace. In the period following the attacks of 11
September 2001, the international community was
galvanized to act individually and collectively against
the threat of international terrorism.
The measures adopted have had considerable
impact in restricting, curtailing and limiting the space
within which terrorist groups can operate. The most
important impact has been the growing perception that
terrorism cannot be condoned or supported as a
legitimate activity. Any justification — on diplomatic,
political, religious or any other grounds — for support
to terrorism remains untenable.
The United Nations in general, and the Security
Council in particular, have taken firm strides in the
period following 11 September 2001 to create and
carry forward international momentum on counterterrorism activities through multilateral means. The
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), under the
capable leadership earlier of the United Kingdom and
now of Spain, has been the focal point of such
international efforts. As a result, a large number of
States have undertaken measures to create the
legislative and administrative frameworks required to
counter terrorism. Many are moving towards improving
their operational capabilities in tackling terrorists and
their networks, both in their respective countries and
through global cooperation.
In our own region, the seven States members of
the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
(SAARC), at its twelfth Summit, held at Islamabad in
January 2004, signed the Additional Protocol to the
SAARC Regional Convention on Suppression of
Terrorism. The Additional Protocol would update the
Convention in order to meet the obligations devolving
in terms of resolution 1373 (2001). The SAARC
Islamabad Declaration, noting that the people of South
Asia continue to face a serious threat from terrorism,
condemned terrorist violence in all its forms and
manifestations. It recognized that terrorism violates the
fundamental values of the United Nations and the
SAARC Charter and constitutes one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security.

S/PV.4921

In our statement in the Security Council on 18
January 2002 (see S/PV.4453) — soon after the
adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) — India
recommended to the Counter-Terrorism Committee that
its focus should extend to groups that are known to
perpetrate terrorism; that it should be proactive in
seeking views, in particular from States affected by
terrorist acts; that it should not leave unchallenged or
un-addressed claims of moral, political and diplomatic
support for terrorism, which are clearly in
contravention of resolution 1373 (2001); and that it
should institute more effective measures to deny safe
haven to terrorists and to seek their extradition.
Undoubtedly, a lot has been achieved over the
past two years. However, continuing acts of terror in
different parts of the world by Al Qaeda, the Taliban
and their sympathizers, or by groups with a propensity
to achieve their questionable objectives in a similar
way, illustrate the continued vulnerability of the
international community in this regard. The
international community must persevere in its efforts to
interdict and neutralize terrorist organizations and their
networks through dynamic measures designed for
maximum global reach. The CTC could increase its
effectiveness by going beyond building legislative
capacity
to
improving
the
operational
and
administrative capabilities of States and cooperation
among States in their counter-terrorism efforts.
We have seen the report of the CTC Chairman on
the proposal for the revitalization of the CounterTerrorism Committee, recently adopted by the
Committee (S/2004/124, annex). India is fully
committed, in principle, to any proposal that enables
the CTC to improve its effectiveness and strengthen the
fight against terrorism. The CTC’s effective monitoring
of Member States’ compliance with the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001) is an objective that India has
supported since the adoption of that resolution.
At the same time, new systems require a certain
amount of introspection and clear articulation before
they are instituted. Those that may have long-term
implications on the functioning of the Council and the
United Nations, and that might possibly have a bearing
on Member States themselves, cannot be considered
the sole preserve of the Council. Although some of the
questions relating to the proposal on establishing a
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
may well have been addressed and possibly answered
in the course of the debate today, the following

questions come to mind. What kind of a precedent are
we creating by the establishment of an enhanced
mechanism such as the Executive Directorate within
the Security Council? Is there sufficient rationale for a
separate structure within the Secretariat? How effective
would a body of 20 experts be in terms of cost and
performance? How does the Council propose to ensure
the accountability of the Executive Directorate and its
institutionalized accessibility to and appropriate
consultation with Member States on their concerns and
priorities? Finally, have the financial implications of
the establishment of the Executive Directorate over a
period of three years and the need for its consistency
with regular budgetary, administrative and financial
practices been fully considered?
Other issues that need to be considered are the
recruitment of experts on the basis of geographical
representation, non-controversial credentials, objective
selection, diversity of background, expertise and
experience; and the avoidance of duplication and
overlap in the functioning of different agencies or
bodies elsewhere within the United Nations system
engaged in capacity-building on counter-terrorism with
that of the Executive Directorate.
The overall message that India, like most other
Member States, would like to convey is one of
unstinting support for counter-terrorism efforts arising
from the Security Council. Notwithstanding the
questions that I posed, the efforts of the CTC to
institute effective measures within a transparent and
calibrated system will receive our firm support and
cooperation.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker is the representative of Switzerland, on whom I
now call.
Mr. Helg (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like first of all to thank Ambassador Arias for
his briefing on the work done and the efforts made in
recent months by him and all others involved in
producing the report on the revitalization of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) (S/2004/124,
annex).
The fight against terrorism concerns the entire
international community, and it is therefore essential
that all States — not only the members of the Security
Council — be given an opportunity to express their
views. I therefore welcome this open debate.

21

S/PV.4921

Switzerland hopes that that same concern for
transparency will guide the future work of the
Committee, in particular the discussion of the Action
Plan that the new Executive Director will submit on the
strengthening of the role of the Committee. All
Member States should be able to take part in the
discussion of that plan from the outset, and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
should be established with full respect for the
prerogatives of the Secretary-General and the
institutional rules that govern the functioning of the
Organization.
The report on the revitalization of the CounterTerrorism Committee is a first important step towards
strengthening the role of the Committee. I would
therefore like to highlight several aspects of this issue
that Switzerland considers particularly important.
First of all, there should be closer cooperation
between the Committee and other international bodies
concerned with terrorism. The Committee’s activities
should not duplicate or compete with what is being
done elsewhere. There is a need for synergy both with
regional organizations and with specialized bodies such
as the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
located in Vienna.
As for visits to Member States, Switzerland
welcomes the fact that clear guidelines will be
established. The Al Qaeda and Taliban sanctions
Committee, as well as experts from the Monitoring
Group, are also carrying out such visits. It is vital that
we exploit more effectively any future synergy between
that Committee, its experts and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee.
On several occasions, Switzerland has expressed
its determination to participate in the fight against
terrorism and has demonstrated that determination
through numerous specific measures. The necessary
fight against terrorism can and must be carried out
without sacrificing respect for human rights,
democracy and the rule of law. In its resolution 58/187,
adopted on 22 December 2003, the General Assembly
underlined the importance of respect for human rights
in formulating measures to combat terrorism and called
for greater consideration of existing instruments and
mechanisms in the area of human rights. In that
context, I would like to stress two points.
First, with respect to the planned improvement of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee’s ability to collect

22

information, I would like to emphasize that it is
necessary to collect and process that data in
compliance with international rules on the protection of
individuals and data.
Secondly, it is important to strengthen
collaboration
between
the
Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights. Switzerland welcomes the fact that
this is among the proposals in the report on the
revitalization of the Committee. We would be
interested in learning more about the concrete setting
up of that liaison mechanism.
The creation of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
was an exceptional measure that was taken to respond
quickly to an urgent situation. Today, we know that the
fight against terrorism and its financing is a protracted
challenge. Thus, it is necessary to think of the long
term rather than of emergency measures. The planned
re-examination of the Committee’s new structures will
provide an opportunity to reflect on the Committee’s
role in the long term.
My country is of the view that the crucial
question is whether the fight against terrorism within
the framework of the United Nations should continue
to be the primary responsibility of a subsidiary body of
the Security Council. A possible alternative would be
to establish a central office under the authority of the
Secretary-General. In any event, a new formula should
be found to enable all States to participate more fully
in the current efforts to combat terrorism.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Belarus, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Ivanou (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): On
behalf of the Republic of Belarus, I first thank you, Sir,
for convening this meeting and for providing this
opportunity to address the Security Council on the
problem of terrorism, which is of concern to the entire
international community and which has been the focus
of the Council’s constant attention since the events of
11 September 2001.
We commend the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) in monitoring and providing
assistance to States in their implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). At the same time, that work
requires some improvements in order to ensure full
implementation of that resolution, which can be

S/PV.4921

enhanced by the measures set out in the Committee’s
report of 19 February 2004 (S/2004/124).
Belarus hopes that the new structure proposed for
the CTC and the inclusion in its work of a strategy for
active links will speed up the process of implementing
resolution 1373 (2001) and will create the conditions
necessary for more effectively providing States with
technical assistance to strengthen their counterterrorism capacities. Belarus supports the existing
format and principles of the Committee’s work, which
encourage consensus in the international community
regarding the threat to international peace and security
posed by terrorism and on practical steps to counter
that threat.
The constructive interaction of the Republic of
Belarus with the Committee on legislation to
implement resolution 1373 (2001) has a positive
impact on our national legal system and supplements
cooperation to improve counter-terrorism legislation
with other international organs, in particular the
Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime.
In this area, Belarus expects of the Committee not
just an overall assessment of the degree of
development of various norms of national counterterrorism
legislation
but
also
concrete
recommendations on how to bring our legislation into
conformity with international standards, based on a
thorough study of the experiences of other countries
possessing legal systems of a similar nature.
On 21 January of this year, a national seminar
was held in Minsk on the implementation of the
universal counter-terrorism conventions in the
legislation of the Republic of Belarus. That seminar
was organized by State entities of Belarus, together
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. In
that seminar, which included the participation of
international experts, a detailed analysis was made of
the anti-terrorist provisions of our national legislation.
That analysis confirmed that those provisions were
rather progressive in nature and, on the whole, in
keeping with the provisions of the international
conventions to combat terrorism to which Belarus is a
party.
The need to supplement national legislation arises
basically with regard to the ratification of the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism. It is proposed that the

ratification of that Convention will take place in the
spring session of the Parliament of the Republic of
Belarus, concluding the process of formalizing our
Government’s participation in the 12 main international
conventions against terrorism.
At Security Council meetings on threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts, Belarus has repeatedly drawn attention to the real
national situation in the area of combating terrorism,
which is marked by a lack of information on terrorist
activities, including their financing. Given our situation
as a transit country, Belarus has made a top priority of
adopting measures to strengthen customs, migration
and border controls to prevent terrorist movement and
to combat criminal activities linked to terrorism. The
Government of the Republic of Belarus welcomes CTC
assistance in resolving those tasks, in the light of our
previous request for technical assistance. Such
assistance would help to enhance cooperation with the
Committee as it carries out its mandate.
In conclusion, I thank the leadership of the CTC,
in particular the Chairman, Mr. Inocencio Arias, for his
tireless efforts to advance the work of the CTC, which
is an exceptionally important body for combating
terrorism under the aegis of the United Nations and for
creating a broad international counter-terrorism
network.
Mr. Kazykhanov (Kazakhstan): First of all, I
would like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this open
debate on the agenda item under consideration, which
provides an additional opportunity to review the
progress made in the fight against terrorism and to
determine priorities for the subsequent work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee.
My delegation commends Ambassador Arias for
the effective and inspiring leadership he has displayed
in steering the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC). I would also like to thank the
Chairman for his informative briefings and his
excellent presentation of the report of the CTC,
contained in document S/2004/124.
Kazakhstan, like other States, recognizes the
leading role of the United Nations in erecting effective
and secure anti-terrorism barriers. We strongly believe
that the issue of combating terrorism should remain a
top priority on the agenda of the international
community.

23

S/PV.4921

Kazakhstan expresses its appreciation to the
Security Council and its Counter-Terrorism Committee
for their actions to ensure the full and comprehensive
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). The
Committee’s efforts to improve the counter-terrorism
legislative framework and the national arrangements of
Member States are quite commendable and should be
recognized.
It is encouraging to note that an overwhelming
majority of Member States have acceded, or are about
to complete their accession, to 12 international
conventions against terrorism. At the same time, we
believe that it is time to elevate to a qualitatively new
level our joint action to develop and enhance
international norms and universal arrangements in that
area.
Along with our efforts to establish effective
international counter-terrorism mechanisms, we should
continue to conduct an in-depth study of the root
causes of this evil. Here, we cannot afford a mistake.
We strongly support the efforts of the CTC to
pursue an open dialogue with Member States in the
spirit of transparency and its assistance to countries in
order to enhance their capacity to combat terrorism.

between the Committee and regional organizations will
go a long way towards building on its accomplishments
and revitalizing its work. A number of regional
organizations, including in Eurasia, already have in
place
effectively
operating
counter-terrorism
structures.
As indicated in the aforementioned report, the
main provisions related to the revitalization of the CTC
are to be reflected in a Security Council draft
resolution on the issue. We believe that this proposal
should enjoy the support of the members of the CTC.
Kazakhstan has been fully cooperating with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee since its establishment
and will continue to provide all necessary support to
this important body by making every effort to oppose
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Japan, to
whom I give the floor.
Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): I should like to state at
the outset that Japan supports the report before us. On
that basis, let me stress the following four points.

In our view, it is essential to step up the CTC’s
activities aimed at providing technical and expert
assistance to Member States in order to strengthen their
counter-terrorism capacity. Since modern-day terrorism
is so closely associated with illegal trafficking in drugs,
arms and persons, the strengthening of the border
guard, customs and law enforcement agencies of those
States located on drug-trafficking routes from
Afghanistan has thus become a top priority for the
Central Asian region.

First, Japan believes that, in restructuring the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), it is important to
secure the coordination of existing structures within the
United Nations, such as the Secretariat, and thereby to
strengthen the United Nations as a whole. We are
convinced that the role of the CTC will be further
strengthened if, as recommended in the report, the
Committee is able to enlist the services of experts who
are well versed in the various trends reflected in recent
terrorist acts, and if, with their assistance, the CTC is
able to analyse the large body of information gathered
from Member States and to propose common measures
to be taken by all States, as well as specific measures
to be taken by certain States, for the eradication of
terrorism. However, since technical support such as
assistance in developing legislative measures related to
counter-terrorism is already provided by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), we
would like to request the CTC fully to coordinate and
cooperate with other United Nations organs, as
mentioned in the recent report, so that there will be no
duplication of work among them.

My delegation encourages the CTC in its efforts
to intensify its cooperation with international, regional
and subregional organizations. Closer interaction

Secondly, I would like to stress the importance of
promoting and enhancing support for counter-terrorism
measures. While we appreciate the role which has been

Yet we would like to underscore that our overall
effectiveness in the combat against international
terrorism, coordinated by the United Nations and its
Security Council, will depend to a great extent on the
further revitalization of the CTC. In that context, our
delegation supports changes in the operation of the
Committee and its dialogue with Member States in
evaluating the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001), as introduced in the CTC
report. Indeed, this is a priority task.

24

S/PV.4921

played by the CTC in this regard, we believe that the
CTC, under its new structure, should continue to
facilitate appropriate technical assistance, for example
by sending experts to the countries concerned. Japan,
believing in the importance of promoting cooperation
to combat international terrorism, has been actively
extending assistance for capacity-building. My
Government has been holding a variety of seminars
with a view to assisting in capacity-building for
counter-terrorism, primarily for Asian countries, in six
main areas: immigration control, transportation
security, customs cooperation, export control, police
and law enforcement, and measures against terrorist
financing.
Thirdly, I would like to emphasize the need to
continue to assign high priority to cutting off the
sources of funding that make terrorist activities
possible and to preventing the outflow of arms to
terrorists. Such measures are indispensable for
preventing terrorism. For that purpose, importance
should also be attached to the CTC’s coordination of
activities with those of the Committee established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1267 (1999) —
the so-called Taliban and Al Qaeda sanctions
Committee.
Japan has taken measures to freeze the funds and
other financial assets of well over 400 individuals and
entities implicated in terrorist activities. We intend to
continue encouraging Member States to enact the
domestic legislation needed in order to take measures
against the financing of terrorism.
Fourthly, as I said at the outset, Japan supports
the recent report on revitalization of the CTC.
However, that does not mean that expenditures for that
purpose should be allowed to grow unrestrained. In that
regard, we would like to commend the point made in
paragraph 6 of the most recent report that all measures
to be taken, including reinforcement of the CTC
structure, “should not increase in a disproportionate
way the budget and resources already allocated to the
CTC.”
It is also important to ensure transparency with
regard to the sources of financing of the CTC’s
activities. We are often warned that when a new
organization is established, people tend to attach more
importance to its continuation and expansion than to its
original objectives. In this connection, I would like
also to welcome the inclusion in the proposal of a

sunset clause terminating the new structure on 31
December 2007.
The CTC is now well into its third year of work.
We believe that the time has come to verify once again
whether the counter-terrorism measures which we have
been taking are functioning effectively, both in their
organizational and their operational aspects. In this
regard as well, my Government believes that the recent
proposal is on the right track. Expectations are high
regarding what the CTC is capable of achieving. I
would like to request that the work conducted by the
CTC be reviewed continuously and seriously with a
view to verifying whether the Committee is effectively
fulfilling its goals. I would also like to add that the
work of the CTC is a matter of interest to all States
Members of the United Nations. I hope, therefore, that
future reports concerning the evaluation of the
activities of the CTC will be provided to all Member
States without delay.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Ukraine, to
whom I give the floor.
Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): Terrorism remains a
major threat to international peace and security. The
latest outbreaks of terror in Baghdad, Karbala and the
Pakistani city of Quetta killed scores of innocent
people as tens of thousands of Shi’ite pilgrims from the
Muslim world gathered for Ashura, the holiest day in
the Shi’ite religious calendar. These and other terrorist
acts have reminded us once again that the problem of
terrorism requires sustained, long-term global action.
We therefore share the view expressed by many
delegations today that the Security Council, through its
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), should continue
to play a leading role in promoting cooperation in the
fight against this scourge.
The Council has created the necessary framework
for a global response to international terrorism, and it
has to be maintained and reinforced. We are pleased,
therefore, that the Committee has continued to work
actively to implement Security Council resolution 1373
(2001). We are grateful to Ambassador Arias and to the
team of experts of the Secretariat for their outstanding
work. The CTC has already done an enormous job.
Furthermore, as was mentioned earlier, it has evolved
to assume a more proactive role in the dialog with
Member States, in facilitating technical assistance to
Member States and in promoting closer cooperation

25

S/PV.4921

and coordination with international, regional and
subregional organizations.
We note with appreciation the efforts of the
Chairman of the Committee and its members to
elaborate practical measures to give the CTC proper
means to fulfil its tasks. We share the view that the
CTC’s supporting staff of experts and secretariat
should be reorganized within the existing United
Nations structure in order to enhance the Council’s
ability to monitor and encourage implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). The establishment of the
Committee’s Executive Directorate will, in our view,
facilitate the work of the Committee and increase its
expert potential in all relevant fields.
We think that technical assistance should be
facilitated for those countries that require it.
Furthermore, the Committee should extend the
technical assistance to cover various activities related
to counter-terrorism. In that regard, I would like to
refer specifically to the problem of the Chernobyl
exclusion zone in Ukraine. The zone, surrounding the
Chernobyl nuclear power plant — the site of the
world’s largest nuclear catastrophe — comprises 76
abandoned settlements, including the towns of Prypyat
and Chernobyl, as well as 800 sites where nuclear
waste and contaminated materials have been dumped.
There still exists a great risk of unauthorized
penetration into the zone and removal of the
contaminated substances, which, inter alia, could be
used by potential terrorists for their own purposes.
To secure the exclusion zone and to ensure that
such radioactive materials are kept out of reach of
unauthorized persons, the Government of Ukraine has
been working on numerous projects. In this regard, an
appropriate request was transmitted to the CTC for its
advice and support. We would be grateful if that
request were granted and are waiting for specific
proposals in that regard.
In addition, I would like to draw the Council’s
attention to the possibility of using the Chernobyl
exclusion zone and abandoned settlements within its
territory for working out practical measures on the
prevention of acts of nuclear terrorism, as well as for
the training of appropriate personnel. Ukraine is ready
to consider all proposals from interested parties.
Secondly, Ukraine, as a member of the regional
organization comprising Georgia, Ukraine, the
Republic of Uzbekistan, the Republic of Azerbaijan

26

and the Republic of Moldova (GUUAM), attaches great
importance to cooperation between the CounterTerrorism Committee and regional and subregional
organizations. We welcome the CTC’s endeavours to
facilitate the dialogue and the exchange of information
between such organizations. I refer here specifically to
the Committee’s special meeting last March in New
York with representatives of regional organizations and
the follow-up meeting at the headquarters of the
Organization of American States, in which GUUAM
participated and played an active part. A regular
exchange of opinions and information between
representatives of regional bodies will definitely
benefit the global anti-terrorist struggle.
Thirdly, the issue of combating the legalization of
proceeds from crime, which constitutes one of the
major sources of terrorism financing, has become
especially vital. In this regard, the more stringent
requirements of the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF), the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund represent a strong contribution to the
consolidation of global efforts to prevent and rebuff
that extremely dangerous phenomenon. We hope that
the cooperation of the Committee with those
institutions will be further facilitated.
Let me also reiterate that the Government of
Ukraine fully supports the international measures in
this sphere, demonstrating its openness and readiness
for cooperation. Last Friday, FATF announced at its
plenary meeting that, due to the efforts made by the
Government of Ukraine, it has removed my country
from its list of non-cooperative countries and
territories. Ukraine will continue to pay paramount
attention to the enhancement of its national system of
combating money-laundering and terrorism financing.
In conclusion, I would like to express the hope
that the Council will take all appropriate measures
referred to in the report of the Committee’s Chairman
for the benefit of our common cause.
The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the members of the Council, I extend a warm welcome
to The Honourable Marian Hobbs, Minister for
Disarmament and Arms Control of New Zealand, and
invite her to take the floor.
Ms. Hobbs (New Zealand): It is my honour to
address the Council on behalf of the members of the
Pacific Islands Forum group of countries that maintain
permanent missions in New York: Australia, the

S/PV.4921

Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, the Republic of
the Marshall Islands, Nauru, Papua New Guinea,
Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and
my own country, New Zealand.
The countries of the Pacific Islands Forum group
reaffirm our unequivocal condemnation of terrorism in
all its forms and our continuing determination to fight
against terrorism by all means possible, consistent with
human rights and the rule of law. As history has too
often demonstrated to us, no State is immune from acts
of terrorism. The threat of terrorism, although always
present, has increasingly assumed an international
character, including the frightening prospect of
terrorists’ obtaining access to weapons of mass
destruction — an issue that will be considered
tomorrow at a seminar on weapons of mass destruction
and the United Nations, organized by the International
Peace Academy with the support of the Government of
New Zealand.
Terrorism is a global problem and, if it is to be
eliminated, requires action at the national, regional and
international levels. The Pacific Islands Forum
therefore supports the work of the Security Council
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) established under
resolution 1373 (2001). Resolution 1373 (2001)
brought a significant new element to the existing
multilateral counter-terrorism framework. If the
objectives of the resolution are to be attained, it will
require full and meaningful implementation of its
requirements. This, in turn, requires the CounterTerrorism Committee to take a proactive role, in
consultation with Member States, in evaluating the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), focused and
directed at increasing and improving the capacity of
States — particularly small island States — in the fight
against terrorism.
This meeting provides a useful opportunity to
reflect on the work so far done by the CounterTerrorism Committee and the road that lies ahead to
ensure the full implementation of the now landmark
resolution 1373 (2001). We welcome the Council’s
analysis of these issues and its determination to see the
Committee take a clear and pragmatic direction in its
future work, as reflected in its proposal for the
revitalization of the Committee contained in the report
under discussion today. The clarification of the roles of
the Council, the CTC and the new Executive
Directorate set out in the report should, in our view,
significantly assist in this regard.

As a group made up of primarily developing
States, many of them small island States, the Pacific
Islands Forum places particular emphasis on capacitybuilding. We accordingly welcome the report’s
renewed focus on strengthening direct dialogue with
States and relevant organizations. The task of the new
Assessment and Technical Assistance Office in
following up on the technical assistance needs of
Member States will be particularly important as the
CTC moves ahead with its work.
Continued efforts at the regional and subregional
levels will remain critical to translating the terms of
resolution 1373 (2001) into effective action. The
Pacific Islands Forum group has taken a number of
steps to increase its political and technical cooperation
in that field. With the assistance of the Forum
secretariat and regional donor partners, work is
ongoing to ensure that a robust and consistent
framework of anti-terrorism measures is in place across
the region. A Pacific roundtable on counter-terrorism
will be held in Wellington, New Zealand, in early May
to further that goal.
As we face the evolving challenge of terrorism,
and as we work to implement the letter and the spirit of
resolution 1373 (2001), the Security Council and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee can be assured of the
continuing full support of the members of the Pacific
Islands Forum group.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker is the representative of Cameroon, to whom I
give the floor.
Mr. Chungong Ayafor (Cameroon) (spoke in
French): Thirty months ago, following the tragic
attacks of 11 September 2001, the Security Council
unanimously adopted its historic resolution 1373
(2001) under Chapter VII of the Charter. That
resolution has become the road map for a worldwide
mobilization against terrorism. It is only natural that
from time to time we should stop to assess the progress
we have together made in this common struggle, which
we hope will never let up. Terrorism is unjustifiable. It
is unacceptable.
Mr. President, I want to say how much we
appreciate your initiative to convene this open debate
on an item that has mobilized us all. Also, I
congratulate Ambassador Arias on the detailed updated
information he has just provided about the activities of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), which he has

27

S/PV.4921

chaired in an outstanding manner since April 2003. In
his statement earlier this morning, he did not merely
take stock of the situation; he spoke also about the
necessary revitalization of the Committee’s working
methods to ensure greater effectiveness and more
productive endeavours.
In general, the Committee’s record is a positive
one. The Committee has already considered 461 reports
in less than three years: that is a record in the history of
the United Nations. To that we can add the following
achievements: the establishment of a global antiterrorism network involving States and international,
regional and subregional organizations; ensuring
awareness by the international community of the threat
posed by terrorism and of the need for a united fight
against it; the creation of a real counter-terrorism
database; and strong encouragement over the past three
years to ratify the 12 international counter-terrorism
instruments.
We must keep up this momentum by providing
the Committee with means commensurate with its
mission. For that reason, Cameroon supports
Ambassador Arias’s suggestions for addressing the
problems encountered by States and by the Committee
in implementing resolution 1373 (2001). Here, I
welcome the revitalization proposal the Committee
approved on 19 February.
Cameroon has always advocated strengthening
the current legal framework, which remains sectoral in
nature and which thus displays gaps. We will therefore
continue to join other members of the great United
Nations family in their efforts to bring to fruition the
plans for a comprehensive anti-terrorism convention
and for a convention to prevent and punish acts of
nuclear terrorism.
In addition to such legal concerns, there is also
the question of building the capacity of some States,
such as mine, to enable them to combat terrorism
effectively. True, the Committee is considering that
question as a matter of priority, but the logistical and
technological gap between States remains, and it could
be exploited at any time by terrorists and their
sponsors. Here, we hope that idea once put forward by
the French delegation — of providing the Committee
with a special counter-terrorism fund — is still of
interest to the Committee.
The new, ambitious programme of work appeals
to us, and, naturally, we fully support it. We also note

28

with approval the profound concern for greater
productivity and effectiveness that now seems to be the
Committee’s leitmotif. It is from that perspective that
we view the Committee’s determination to make its
activities more operational. We share the view that it is
not enough just to adopt national counter-terrorism
legislation or to become parties to the various
international conventions on the subject: we must first
and foremost ensure that these measures are effectively
implemented.
That is also how we understand the Committee’s
determination to review its working methods. The
delegation of Cameroon has always considered that the
three phases — A, B and C — for analysing the reports
submitted by States did not provide the best way of
assessing the international community’s efforts in
implementing resolution 1373 (2001).
Further, my country considers that the
establishment of a Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate could provide the Committee
with a real mechanism both to follow up and monitor
its work and to assess its activities with a view to
adapting them as necessary. Setting up an assessment
and technical assistance office within the Directorate,
inter alia, to provide liaison with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and other human rights organizations would meet the
legitimate concerns of many Member States.
My country would be happy to welcome those in
charge of that structure, once they have been
appointed, in order to strengthen our dialogue and our
fruitful relationship of cooperation with the CounterTerrorism Committee. We also welcome the news that,
in the sphere of technical assistance, the Committee
has decided to go beyond the role of a mere
intermediary between donors of assistance and
applicants, and to play a more active role in the future.
With its proven links with transnational organized
crime, terrorism today poses a real threat to
international peace and security. Our common fight
must therefore be a long-term endeavour; it must be
based on a clear-minded strategy that will rally support
and that encompasses the elimination or reduction of
intolerance, injustice and poverty, and the promotion of
democracy and respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms.

S/PV.4921

The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker is the representative of Cuba, to whom I give
the floor.
Mr. Requeijo Gual (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My Government thanks the Chairman of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) for the revitalization
proposals set out in the annex to document S/2004/124.
In that connection, we believe all Member States would
benefit if the CTC could be more effective in its work.
Cuba believes that unilateral actions or preemptive wars on the part of one State or a group of
States — however powerful they may be — using the
fight against terrorism as a pretext are totally
unacceptable and deserve categorical condemnation.
There will be progress only through international
cooperation, not through acts of war, aggression or
revenge, which will only lead to more violence. Nor
will any progress be made through the promulgation of
laws authorizing the extrajudicial execution or arbitrary
detention of a country’s nationals or of foreign citizens,
through covert actions violating laws and borders,
through the manipulation of public opinion, through
discrimination against or persecution of immigrants,
through disregard of international humanitarian law,
through the violation of human rights or the restriction
of civil liberties inherent in the rule of law, through
unilateral sanctions or through the listing or
certification of countries for dark political purposes.
We need to wage an international fight against all
forms and manifestations of terrorism, with the
participation of Third World countries as equals,
transcending political, religious or other any other kind
of differences, in order to build a just world of free
peoples and sovereign, independent States — a world
without international terrorism.
Cuba was one of the first three countries to ratify
the 12 international instruments on terrorism as a
contribution to the international confrontation against
such acts. In December 2001, Cuba adopted its Law 93
against acts of terrorism and additional effective nonlegislative measures. We have also cooperated, on our
own initiative and in good faith, with the Security
Council and its Counter-Terrorism Committee, to
which we have submitted three exhaustive reports in a
timely manner; we are now preparing a fourth. In
addition, we have actively supported the negotiation of
a comprehensive anti-terrorism convention.

Cuba has never permitted its territory to be used
for terrorist actions against any State, without
exception, and has stated that it will do everything in
its power to prevent that from happening in the future.
Cuba has never carried out, financed, tolerated or
permitted a terrorist act — not even in self-defence —
against the direct authors or masterminds of
abominable crimes against our people that the Cuban
American National Foundation and other groups
belonging to Miami’s terrorist mafia have of late
financed, organized and carried out from United States
territory with absolute impunity — including
bombings, attempts to assassinate Cuban leaders and
attacks against targets vital to our economy.
On 15 March in Panama, there will be a trial of
four terrorists of Cuban origin, who, following the
instructions of similar organizations based in the
United States — from where they operate with total
impunity — planned an attack against the Cuban
President during the Ibero-American Summit held in
November 2000 in that country. For more than three
decades, those terrorists carried out horrible crimes
against the Cuban people, who hope that they will be
sentenced in the trial so that justice will prevail over
impunity.
Cuba categorically rejects the insidious
statements of senior United States officials, who have
referred repeatedly to alleged plans in my country to
develop weapons of mass destruction. The most recent
of those statements was made in Japan in midFebruary. Through such false statements, the
Government of the United States seeks to create
conditions enabling it to expand its aggressive policy,
which could even lead to military aggression.
Similarly, we reject the arbitrary inclusion of Cuba on a
United States list of countries that supposedly support
terrorism.
Cuba will comply with the laws it has adopted as
a sovereign Power and expresses its readiness to
cooperate with all countries, with full respect for the
Charter and international law. In that spirit, Cuba has
proposed on three occasions to the Government of the
United States — without conditions and in accordance
with the provisions of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001) — three draft bilateral agreements, concerning
cooperation in the fight against terrorism, illicit drug
trafficking and trafficking in persons. Although the
United States has refused — under mere pretexts —

29

S/PV.4921

even to consider them, Cuba still hopes that that policy
will change.

revitalization of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC).

It is impossible to eliminate terrorism if we
condemn some terrorist acts while we keep silent about
others or tolerate or justify them. The terrorism against
Cuba must stop. In Miami, with complete impunity and
with the complicity of the United States authorities,
funds are provided and collected to carry out terrorist
acts; bank accounts that finance terrorism operate
openly and normally; terrorists are recruited; supplies
of weapons are provided; safe refuge is offered; and
those who finance, plan and commit acts of terrorism
are allowed to use the territory. While that has been
taking place, five young Cubans have been incarcerated
in the United States for more than five years, having
been subjected to excessive confinement and isolation
for long periods of time. In some cases, they have been
unable to contact their wives and families since their
imprisonment. A spurious court in Miami sentenced
them to imprisonment for life or for many years,
prohibiting them, upon their release, from visiting
places where certain terrorist groups are based —
groups that they had been observing in order to prevent
such acts from being committed in Cuba or on United
States territory. Cuba has provided sufficient
information to the Counter-Terrorism Committee on
this case and has repeatedly denounced the double
standard being applied in the alleged fight against
terrorism by the Government of the United States.

Much progress has been made in the fight against
international terrorism since the adoption of the
landmark Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) and
the subsequent establishment of the CTC. Undeniably,
the CTC continues to play a pivotal role in drawing the
attention of the international community to the threats
posed by international terrorism and in building
capacity at all levels to counter that scourge.
Notwithstanding the accomplishments of the CTC thus
far, the challenges ahead remain daunting, particularly
given the increasing opportunities for terrorist groups
to exploit the new technologies and networks of
globalization for their nefarious activities. In our view,
it is imperative to act now, to strengthen international
cooperation in this field on the basis of a unified,
multilateral and multifaceted strategy.

The Cuban delegation hopes that all efforts aimed
at revitalizing the Counter-Terrorism Committee will
lead to its more efficient functioning and will enable it
to respond more effectively to the concerns expressed
by Member States. Cuba, which has presented
substantial evidence of terrorist actions against our
country — in flagrant violation of resolution 1373
(2001) and of other legally binding instruments —
would like to know what practical actions the
Committee and the Security Council plan to carry out
in that respect.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker is the representative of the Republic of Korea,
to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Kim Sam-hoon (Republic of Korea): The
delegation of the Republic of Korea welcomes the
convening of this open debate as a valuable
opportunity for non-members to contribute to the
deliberations of the Security Council on the

30

Against that backdrop, I would like to share
briefly some of the Republic of Korea’s observations
on the report regarding the revitalization of the CTC
(S/2004/124).
First, we fully concur with the need to revitalize
the CTC with a view to strengthening the international
legal framework and establishing uniform benchmarks
for all States. In that context, the Republic of Korea
recently ratified two terrorism-related international
conventions, namely, the International Convention for
the Suppression of Terrorist Bombing and the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism. That makes the Republic of
Korea a party to all 12 terrorism-related conventions
and protocols.
Secondly, recognizing the potential for regional
efforts to supplement and reinforce international efforts
in the fight against terrorism, we believe that the CTC
should be revitalized in a way that will enhance
cooperation and coordination at the international,
regional and sub-regional levels. In the absence of
regional conventions on terrorism in the Asian-Pacific
region, the Republic of Korea has worked to strengthen
mutual cooperation under the existing bilateral
framework.
Thirdly, we value the proposed new structure for
the CTC, which includes a plenary and a bureau as well
as a CTC Executive Directorate to be led by an
Executive Director. We believe that through the

S/PV.4921

implementation of this proposal, the CTC will be better
positioned to achieve its mandate.
Fourthly, we believe that the facilitation of
technical assistance should remain one of the key
objectives of a revitalized CTC. Acknowledging the
need to strengthen cooperation at the working level, my
Government has provided several capacity-building
programmes to support those countries that need
assistance in combating terrorism. Moreover, we will
continue to work in partnership with regional
organizations, such as the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation and ASEAN Regional Forum, to broaden
capacity-building and promote closer regional
cooperation in this field.

In closing, my delegation wishes to extend its
unswerving support to the fight against international
terrorism and looks forward to working in close
cooperation with a revitalized Counter-Terrorism
Committee to that end.
The President (spoke in French): There are 10
speakers remaining on my list. Because of the late
hour, I propose, with the consent of the members of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.

31
