A /74/PV.15

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fourth session

15th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 15 October 2019, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Muhammad-Bande  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nigeria)

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Agenda item 19
Sustainable development
(a) Implementation of Agenda 21, the
Programme for the Further Implementation
of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the
World Summit on Sustainable Development
and of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development
Draft resolution (A/74/L.2)
The President: Members will recall that, at its 2nd
plenary meeting, held on 20 September, the General
Assembly decided to allocate sub-item (a) of agenda
item 19 also to the plenary meeting for the purpose of
endorsing the draft political declaration of the Highlevel Political Forum on sustainable development
convened under the auspices of the General Assembly.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/74/L.2.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/74/L.2, entitled “Political declaration of the
high-level political forum on sustainable development
convened under the auspices of the General Assembly”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/74/L.2
Draft resolution
(resolution 74/4).

A/74/L.2

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position, may I remind delegations
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): My
delegation wishes to thank the co-facilitators, the
Ambassadors of the Bahamas and Sweden, for their
leadership on this High-level Political Forum resolution
(resolution 74/4). Today the United States of America
is pleased to join the consensus on this important
outcome document.
All countries have a role to play in achieving
the 2030 vision. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development remains a common rallying point
for the international community to share both the
burdens and the opportunities inherent in addressing
global development challenges. The United States
will continue to play a leading role in sustainable
development, not only as the world’s largest provider of
official development assistance by volume but also as
the largest contributor of funding to the United Nations
system and the multilateral development banks. We
want to emphasize that today’s global development
challenges will require collective actions to create and
foster an environment that prioritizes domestic resource
mobilization, as well as the engagement of the private
sector and other key non-governmental stakeholders,
including civil society and faith-based organizations.
The United States itself is built on a system of
individual liberties that give people the freedom to
innovate and drive progress. For the United States, pro-

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-31660 (E)

*1931660*

A/74/PV.15

growth policies have delivered robust economic growth,
restored incentives and established a strong cycle of
prosperity. In our foreign engagements, we understand
that economic ties are most valuable when they are
inclusive, multidirectional and rules-based. We also
believe that investments in sustainable development
will have the greatest impact when they promote and
uphold internationally accepted best practices and
standards, when they establish local markets and when
they catalyse additional investments and action at the
local level.
To meet the 2030 Agenda’s ambition and achieve
sustainable progress, countries will need to actively
choose investments that adhere to the highest
environmental and social standards, and which are
financially viable. All our collective efforts across the
Sustainable Development Goals should be grounded in
the principles of good governance, transparency and
sustainability, including debt sustainability, and also
ensure that economic and social impacts are properly
assessed and progress is localized. To fully realize
the challenges and opportunities in the Agenda, the
involvement of all stakeholders, including the private
sector, is imperative. In some parts of the world and
even in multilateral institutions, here in the United
Nations system the participation of the private sector
and non-governmental actors is threatened. We will
not collectively meet the Goals of the 2030 Agenda
without the full and unobstructed involvement of these
important non-governmental stakeholders.
Lastly, we take this opportunity to make points
of clarification on the negotiated text of the Highlevel Political Forum political declaration. The general
statement on Second Committee agenda items we
delivered at the Economic and Social Council on
8 November 2018 addressed our broader concerns on
the 2030 Agenda, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–
2030 and the New Urban Agenda. With respect to the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change and climate change
language in this document, the United States reaffirms
its intention to withdraw from the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change at the earliest opportunity. Therefore,
the Paris Agreement and climate change language
is without prejudice to United States positions. We
affirm our support for promoting economic growth
and improving energy security, while also protecting
the environment.
2/18

15/10/2019

Mrs. Bogyay (Hungary): Hungary is entirely
committed to the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, which was also underlined by
His Excellency Mr. János Áder, President of Hungary, at
the SDG summit during United Nations high-level week.
In line with the Sustainable Development Goals, this
year Hungary hosts four major international events in
Budapest, namely, the International Telecommunication
Union Telecom World conference, the Budapest Water
Summit, the regional counter-terrorism conference and
the World Science Forum.
The political declaration of the High-level Political
Forum on sustainable development (resolution 74/4) is
a crucial document in achieving our Goals. Therefore,
Hungary supported the adoption of the declaration.
However, the Government remains concerned about any
references to the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
Regular Migration, as well as migration in general, and
would like to express reservations regarding paragraphs
21 and 27 of the political declaration. Hungary voted
against the Global Compact for Migration at the
General Assembly last December (see A/73/PV.60). The
Hungarian Government can neither share the view that
migration is the best solution for the labour market and
the demographic problems of countries of destination,
nor that it is the solution to the problems of countries
of origin. Sustainable solutions can be found only if
development aims are focused on creating livelihood
opportunities for people in their home countries.
The Hungarian Government is therefore focusing on
development projects in the countries of origin that can
contribute to establishing lasting solutions for those in
need and improving living conditions. We put emphasis
on building health care, sanitation, water management
and educational infrastructure in developing countries.
The President: We have heard the last speaker
in explanation of position after the adoption of
resolution 74/4.
I shall now give the floor to those speakers who
wish to make statements after adoption.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): It is a pleasure for me to
speak on behalf of the co-facilitators of this political
declaration, namely, the Permanent Representative
of the Bahamas, Ms. Sheila Carey, and myself, as the
declaration, which was first adopted at the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) summit, has now also been
endorsed by the General Assembly (resolution 74/4).
19-31660

15/10/2019

I wish to thank all delegations for their cooperation
in the consultations and negotiations that we held. With
their help and collaborative spirit, we accomplished
the goal that we had set out to achieve — a concise,
evidence-based
and
action-oriented
political
declaration, agreed by consensus. I want to leave
members with three take-aways from the work on the
political declaration.
First, members’ collaboration shows us that
multilateralism works. When the stakes are high,
we can put our differences aside and focus on our
common goal. The leaders at the SDG summit spoke
with one voice — they agreed to keep the universal and
indivisible 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
front and centre, and accelerate action so that we can
reach the SDGs on time.
Secondly, the evidence of progress on the SDGs are
presented to us in the Global Sustainable Development
Report and SDG progress reports. They show us that we
are moving too slowly. In some cases, we are moving
backwards. However, the reports also tell us that we
can still turn things around if we focus on the right
things and work together.
Finally, as the political declaration has now
been adopted, we enter the crucial decade of action
and delivery. We should remind ourselves of the
commitments we have made. The political declaration
contains a 10-point plan of accelerated action to guide
our implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. I hope that political guidance will be
useful not only to Governments but to all stakeholders
who are working together to reach the 17 SDGs.
Next year we will celebrate the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations, and we will have
just one decade left to fulfil the 2030 Agenda. In the
political declaration, we have asked the SecretaryGeneral
“to engage Governments, civil society, the private
sector and other stakeholders in generating solutions
and accelerating action to address systemic gaps in
implementation, as we embark on a decisive decade
for the 2030 Agenda”. (resolution 74/4, para. 26)
Let us use the coming year to show that we can bring
implementation to the forefront. We have also pledged
to carry out an ambitious and effective review of
the High-level Political Forum during this session
of the General Assembly. I hope that the positive

A/74/PV.15

and collaborative spirit we experienced during the
negotiations on the political declaration can carry over
to the review process. The 2030 Agenda is our road
map for saving the planet for future generations. The
political declaration has sent an urgent message to the
world that the time for action is now.
Mrs. Azucena (Philippines): The Philippines
aligns itself with the statements made at the Sustainable
Development Goals summit by the observer of the
State of Palestine, on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China, by the representative of Thailand, on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and
by the representative of El Salvador, on behalf of
the Like-Minded Group of Countries Supporters of
Middle-Income Countries.
At the adoption of the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) in September 2015 (see A/70/PV.4), the
Philippines, along with the 192 other States Members
of the United Nations, committed to achieving the
17 Sustainable Development Goals and their targets
by 2030. To this day, our commitment to the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, with the
expressed linkage between the three dimensions of
sustainable development — economic, social and
environmental — and the urgent need to eradicate
poverty in all its forms and dimensions, remains
resolute. The SDGs are in sync with the medium and
long-term development plans of the Philippines and
fully entrenched in them. Sustainability and inclusivity
are both the goals and the principles that guide our
development strategies.
We have also actively participated in the voluntary
national review process in order to share our experiences,
including successes, challenges and lessons learned,
with a view to accelerating the implementation of the
2030 Agenda. We view the voluntary review process
exercises as milestones in our work of achieving the
SDGs, enabling us to track our progress and reassess
our methods where necessary. As a pioneer country in
this area, the Philippines presented its first review in
July 2016. We focused on the lessons learned from the
Millennium Development Goals and identified ways to
build on those gains as we entered the first phase of
the SDGs.
At the High-level Political Forum conducted under
the auspices of the Economic and Social Council earlier
this year, we presented our second voluntary national
review, where we emphasized a whole-of-Government

19-316603/18

A/74/PV.15

and whole-of-society approach to realizing the
aspirations of the Filipino people for a life that has
strong family and community ties and is comfortable,
peaceful and secure. We outlined some of the country’s
achievements, such as near-universal primary-school
enrolment, the promotion of employment that is
inclusive, sustainable and equitable through our Green
Jobs Act, the strengthened engagement of the private
sector, strengthened capacity-building and partnerships
for disaster preparedness, and ratification of the
Bangsamoro Organic Law to address long-standing
conflict in the southern Philippines.
The Philippines fully supports the ongoing reforms
of the United Nations development system to make it
more effective, efficient and transparent in supporting
countries and their development priorities. We chaired
the 2019 Economic and Social Council Operational
Activities for Development segment, where we took
cognizance of the ongoing efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and acknowledged the progress achieved so
far, while noting that much remains to be done.
As we move on to the next phase of the SDG
implementation, I would like to echo the statement of
the Philippines delegation in 2015 at the adoption of the
SDGs, as this remains true today.
“The Philippines pledges to make the 2030 Agenda
a reality and to leave no one behind. It is our
sacred responsibility to our children and to future
generations, and our solemn duty as Members of
the United Nations.” (A/70/PV.12, p. 3).
Mr. De La Mora Salcedo (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): Mexico welcomes the political
declaration adopted today in the framework of the
Sustainable Development Goals summit (resolution
74/4). When we designed the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, we recognized that each
of its three dimensions — economic, social and
environmental — was equally important. Today,
on the eve of its final decade, no Member State has
fully met the Sustainable Development Goals. We
run the risk of failing to deliver on our commitments.
It is therefore necessary to move from words and
negotiations to action and partnerships. Mexico was
pleased to be able to register nine Acceleration Actions
at the summit, projects that put into practice Mexico’s
commitment to sustainability. Beyond aligning our
national development plan with the 2030 Agenda, we
4/18

15/10/2019

have identified areas that need targeted interventions to
address socioeconomic lag.
I would like to highlight just a few of the Acceleration
Actions led by the Office of the President of Mexico
and that can be found on the United Nations interactive
portal. First, Mexico firmly believes in revitalizing
agriculture while respecting the environment, and
we are therefore developing our Escuelas del Campo
programme. In 65 municipalities in south-eastern
Mexico we will work with civil society to train
producers in environmentally related best practices. At
the same time, these marginalized communities will be
integrated into local and regional value chains without
creating unsustainable land use.
Secondly, we want to enhance higher education’s
direct contribution to the implementation of the 2030
Agenda. By the end of next year, we will have installed
100 sustainable development laboratories in universities
across the country, which will work directly with
communities to identify, design and implement local
economic development projects using cooperativism
and the social economy.
Thirdly, leaving no one behind means precisely
that — no one. For many years, women, but particularly
those working in the home and in the countryside, have
not had adequate access to social security. Mexico will
consolidate its national care strategy with a specific
focus on historically forgotten populations. Through
welfare banking, we plan to increase the availability
of financial tools by 40 per cent in five years, with
particular emphasis on the south and south-east of
the country.
Every day that passes leaves us less time to meet
the goals of the 2030 Agenda. We therefore reject any
attempts to renegotiate the objectives that we have
collectively agreed on. That is also why we welcome the
strategic alliances that we consider essential to fulfilling
the Agenda. Mexico wants to deepen its collaboration
on sustainable development with other countries,
civil society, private initiatives, academia, indigenous
peoples, migrant communities and young people. Yes,
it is possible to achieve our targets, but only if we work
together. That teamwork will ensure that no one is
left behind. At the end of the review cycle of the 2030
Agenda during this session of the Assembly, I want to
reaffirm Mexico’s firm support for the implementation
of the Sustainable Development Goals. We will remain
19-31660

15/10/2019

a reliable and active partner in the review and followup processes.
Ms. Velichko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Innovative approaches and enhanced international
cooperation are essential to achieving sustainable
development. It was that multilateral approach that led
us to the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development four years ago (see A/70/PV.4).
Multilateral cooperation is not merely a possible option
for achieving this but is crucial. If we are to advance
sustainable development and mobilize our resources,
we need more coordinated and decisive action. While
it is very important to mobilize domestic resources and
become economically self-reliant, creating a favourable
international environment and ensuring broader access
to financial resources and technological assistance
remain critical. We believe that the private sector can
provide financial resources and technology and that
the United Nations should therefore deepen and scale
up the partnerships needed to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs).
Belarus continues to make steady progress towards
achieving sustainable development based on the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Our efforts are
focused on achieving a sustainable balance between
economic development and environmental protection
and promoting the principles of the green economy,
the introduction of the concept of smart cities and the
development of precision farming. Belarus is firmly
committed to transitioning to a low-carbon sustainable
economy and is willing to increase its contribution to
joint efforts to tackle that global challenge. We are
unequivocally committed to reducing our greenhouse
gas emissions by 2030 by no less than 35 per cent
compared to 1990, using only our own resources.
Belarus is also considering more ambitious goals that
it could achieve with the financial and technological
assistance of more advanced countries.
The efforts to achieve the SDGs have become
a uniting factor for all our partners — Government
bodies, Parliament, civil society, business and academia.
We held our first national forum on sustainable
development with the participation of a wide range of
national and international partners, as well as our first
regional forum. At the beginning of 2020, we plan to
hold the first Eurasian Economic Union forum on the
SDGs. We see partnerships with all stakeholders at both
the national and international levels as a key factor in
accelerating the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for

A/74/PV.15

Sustainable Development. With that in mind, Belarus is
prioritizing the exchange of experience and joint efforts
to achieve the SDGs, and we encourage the expansion
of cooperation between the national institutions and
mechanisms responsible for that area. We also believe
that establishing similar international partnerships will
facilitate the exchange of best practices on sustainable
development and accelerate progress towards achieving
the SDGs.
Mr. Rai (Nepal): I would like to commend you,
Mr. President, for your able leadership in steering the
work of the General Assembly.
Nepal welcomes the Assembly’s adoption of the
political declaration of the High-level Political Forum
on sustainable development (resolution 74/4). Needless
to say, the Forum is an important quadrennial occasion
for comprehensively reviewing the progress that we
have made in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Our leaders returned home
to convey loud and clear the message of the declaration
that rapid change is possible and the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) remain within reach if we
embrace transformation and accelerate implementation.
What matters now is the timely and effective
implementation of the 2030 Agenda. That requires
a transformation from a business-as-usual approach
to intensifying our efforts to take further action and
increase partnerships. There are many challenges
facing the world, from poverty and hunger to climate
change and disasters. Such global problems require a
global response, and a global response is possible only
through strong multilateralism. Two of the central
principles that make the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development so ambitious and transformative are
those of leaving no one behind and reaching out to the
furthest behind first.
Four years of implementation have shown that
there are gaps in data, structures and financing. Some
of those gaps are huge when it comes to countries
in special situations, including the least developed
countries, the landlocked least developed countries
and the small island developing States (SIDS). As the
midterm reviews of the Vienna Programme of Action
for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade
2014–2024, the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action
Pathway and the Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries for the Decade 2011-2020 are fast
approaching, the SDGs make it incumbent on us, as

19-316605/18

A/74/PV.15

the international community, to focus our priorities on
the countries that are the most in need. In our journey
towards achieving the SDGs, the upcoming decade must
be one of both action and delivery. The only option we
have for that is ensuring a strong multilateralism that
can attract a global response.
Nepal, as a landlocked, mountainous and least
developed country that has gone through political
transformation, has now prioritized economic
prosperity and sustainable development. That national
ambition is captured in the Government’s motto of
“Happy Nepali and prosperous Nepal”. While aligning
with most of the SDGs, the Government of Nepal has
adopted a fifteenth periodic plan, along with a 25year long-term vision for the country, that is aimed at
laying out a transformational development pathway and
bringing about structural change in our economy.
Owing to its approximately 800-kilometre
mountain system, Nepal lies in one of the world’s most
vulnerable areas to climate change. We attach great
importance to sustainable and integrated mountain
development. Keeping in mind the exigencies of the
climate crisis, the Government of Nepal has decided
to convene the Sagarmatha Dialogue, an annual global
forum to exchange views on various subjects, including
climate change.
Financing for sustainable development remains an
important challenge. In Nepal’s case alone, we will need
about $18 billion a year to achieve the SDGs by 2030. We
will do our best to marshal whatever domestic resources
we can. At the same time, we urge our development
partners to meet their commitments as soon as possible.
Nepal also organized an investment summit this year to
encourage private-sector investment. It is evident that
without greater cooperation and partnership with all
our international partners in obtaining the necessary
resources, technology and other support, achieving the
SDGs will remain elusive.
In conclusion, I want to highlight the fact that we
need more collaboration and partnerships, as is rightly
emphasized in the political declaration. Nepal is ready
do all that it can within its ability to make its people
prosperous and our planet sustainable.
Ms. Tesfamariam (Eritrea): Four years have
elapsed since the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) began, and we have 11 years
to make good on our pledges. Monitoring the progress
that we are making and examining the challenges that
6/18

15/10/2019

we face are critical if we are to take stock of how far we
have travelled in realizing our sustainable development
commitments. It is important to note the positive trends
that many countries have registered in the reduction of
extreme poverty and child mortality rates. The increase
in the implementation of gender-responsive budgeting
globally is equally noteworthy. However, progress
remains uneven, and the speed and the scale do not
match the commitments needed to meet the ambitious
objectives of the SDGs by 2030.
Eritrea has been making modest strides towards
the achievement of sustainable development in its
three economic, social and environmental dimensions
through our long-standing policy of achieving
people-centred and balanced growth. The achievement
of the SDGs is indeed a tall order for many countries,
but more so for developing countries and those that have
been affected by conflict. For a country such as Eritrea,
which has been affected by conflict for more than three
quarters of its existence as a nation, the recent peace
in the region has opened up better opportunities and a
promising future for recouping opportunities that had
been lost. That positive trajectory will enable Eritrea
and the rest of the region to focus on putting in place
the necessary building blocks for regional development
and integration. While the region moves towards
integration, the task of providing for our peoples’
basic needs — food, water, health care, education,
transportation, electricity, capacity-building and youth
employment and empowerment — cannot be deferred.
Eritrea has embarked on a dual programme of
accelerating economic growth and working with
its neighbours to achieve and sustain peace in the
region. We will continue to take the actions needed to
boost our mobilization of both human and financial
domestic resources, which we see as drivers of
sustained development. Yet the importance of scaling
up global partnership and attracting substantial
investments in diverse sectors of our economies cannot
be overemphasized.
The successful implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development demands that
we work together and show solidarity. Let us deliver
on our commitments to getting our policies right and
marshalling the resources we need to build a better
future for all while leaving no one behind. It will require
the full and effective participation of all stakeholders
in the implementation of the SDGs. For its part,
Eritrea will spare no effort to achieve an economically
19-31660

15/10/2019

prosperous middle-income country by 2030, reinforcing
the foundation for a harmonious nation that fulfils the
expectations and aspirations of its people.
Mr. Alshamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): Recent reports have shown that, despite the
progress made in a number of areas in implementing the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change, overall implementation
at the global level has been slow. It is not an overstatement
to say that we have gone off course. The world’s first
Sustainable Development Goals summit was therefore
a timely opportunity to collectively discuss how to
accelerate the implementation process.
The United Arab Emirates supports the pledge
of the international community to launch a decade of
action to achieve the 2030 Agenda. We have refocused
our programmes for foreign assistance, valued at
$20 billion from 2016 to 2018, to provide direct support
to implementing the SDGs. Our goal going forward is
to enhance SDG compliance mechanisms and step up
all sources of funding for achieving them.
Bridging gaps in the energy and technology sectors
is essential to achieving progress towards eradicating
poverty. The United Arab Emirates believes that it is
high time for United Nations programmes to focus
their efforts on those two sectors. In the same vein,
the United Arab Emirates, through its partnerships
on renewable energy, valued at $1 billion, has seen for
itself how public founding funding can pave the way for
private funding.
As such, there are plenty of ways to create job
opportunities. For example, we expect the efforts of
the International Renewable Energy Agency to create
approximately 11 million job opportunities in the
renewable energy sector by 2030. Accordingly, we are
all seeing the transformative potential of new sectors,
such as renewable energy and digital technologies, in
support of implementing the SDGs. The United Arab
Emirates is committed to working closely with all
partners to maximize such potential.
In conclusion, the world needs more SDG
ambassadors and believers who will make sure that
the SDGs are suitable for those who are in need. To
reach that goal, the United Arab Emirates has placed
the SDGs at the heart of Expo 2020, the next global
exhibition, to be held in Dubai. We will incorporate the
SDGs throughout Expo 2020 to make them part and
parcel of the activities. We will also focus on inspiring

A/74/PV.15

people to become ambassadors of positive change in
their societies. Twenty-five million people are expected
to participate from all over the world, and we hope that
Expo will be the largest event held so far to accelerate
the implementation of the SDGs. We also hope that it
will be an opportunity to create partnerships among
countries and participants with a view to implementing
the common goals of the 2030 Agenda.
Ms. Juárez Argueta (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): We cannot not pass up this opportunity to
congratulate ourselves on the adoption earlier of the
political declaration of the High-level Political Forum
on sustainable development in the General Assembly
(resolution 74/4), as well as the underlying commitment
demonstrated at the global level to implementing the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and each of
its Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
We in Guatemala have made important strides in
our development planning by adopting our national
development plan — K’atún: Our Guatemala 2032 — in
2014 and integrating the Goals and targets of the 2030
Agenda into the national development plan in 2016,
condensing them into 10 national priorities. Our second
voluntary national review, which we presented this
year, allowed us to look back on the first five years of
our national development plan. The review, which was
prepared through a much more participative process
and with a broader scope, included working with public
institutions, municipalities, development councils,
international cooperation partners, the business sector
and civil society. However, as the General Assembly
reaffirmed today, our vision is to move towards a decade
of action and results for sustainable development.
From our experience, we know that sustainable
development requires a readjustment of institutions,
public policies, programmes and budgets, which
necessitates a considerable effort on the part of
Governments in the implementation process.
Providing capacity-building for local Governments
and consolidating statistical systems and tools that
support consistent and strategic decision-making
will be key in that stage. It is therefore essential to
strengthen the means of implementation, particularly
financing for development in which private investment,
trade, sustainable debt and technology transfers can
complement initiatives with domestic resources and
official development assistance. We know that strategic
alliances are essential to complement Government
efforts at all levels.

19-316607/18

A/74/PV.15

In Guatemala, we believe that the following are
of the utmost importance: reducing poverty; ensuring
social protection; guaranteeing access to health
services; promoting food and nutritional security;
providing access to quality, relevant and equitable
education; offering decent and quality employment,
especially for young people; and reducing inequalities
to decrease gaps among indigenous populations, women
and people with disabilities, as well as in rural areas of
the country.
Similarly, as one of the most vulnerable countries to
the effects of climate change worldwide, we underscore
the need to integrate the principles of adaptation and
mitigation at all levels of public policies. We also
underscore the importance of continuing to strengthen
our institutions, security and access to justice, which
will enable us to count on solid and democratic
institutions that are able to respond to the development
needs of our citizens in order to foster peaceful and
inclusive societies.
I reiterate my country’s commitment to achieving
our national priorities, and we call for integrated efforts
in favour of multilateralism in order to better meet
our challenges.
Mr. Kakanur (India): Four years ago, the global
community took a pledge to leave no one behind
and to make the world a more sustainable place. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) provided the
action plan to make that a reality. We are now entering
the final decade of achieving the SDGs. Although we
have made considerable progress in the first four-year
cycle, challenges remain in the long road ahead.
The underlying principle of India’s development
agenda is “Through everyone’s support, for everyone’s
development and towards everyone’s trust”. That slogan
mirrors the essence of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. A country’s ability to achieve and sustain
long-term economic growth is determined by its ability
to increase productivity through the use of better
technology, together with human and physical capital.
In India, the financial technology industry has
contributed significantly to the rapid expansion of
access to financial services and financial inclusion.
A record 370 million marginalized people have been
brought into the financial system in the past five
years. The spread of mobile telephony and linking it
with digital biometric cards and bank accounts has
8/18

15/10/2019

enabled the Government to target subsidies and deliver
e-governance services.
We achieved the target of 100 per cent village
electrification in April 2018, and have now redoubled our
efforts to achieve 100 per cent household electrification
over the next few months. In September 2018, we
launched the world’s largest Government-funded health
coverage scheme, which targets 100 million households
and has the potential to provide free health services to
a population of 500 million. The cashless and paperless
health scheme provides coverage of up to $7,000
per family per year for secondary and tertiary care
hospitalization. We also plan to wipe out malnutrition
from India by 2022 and are in the process of building
40 million affordable homes in the same time frame.
Through all those development initiatives, India has
made significant progress in the eradication of absolute
poverty. According to the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), India lifted 271 million people
out of poverty between 2006 and 2016, recording the
fastest reduction in Multidimensional Poverty Index
values during that period.
India is fully committed to fulfilling its nationally
determined contributions well before the target date,
protecting its rich environment and pursuing a path
of sustainable, low-carbon development. Seventeen
countries in the world comprise 70 per cent of the world’s
biodiversity, earning them the title of “megadiverse
countries”. India is one such country; it accounts for
7 to 8 per cent of the world’s biodiversity but is still
able to feed 17 per cent of the global population. We
are of the view that it is possible to strike a healthy
balance between development and conservation. The
doubling of India’s tiger population — from 1,411 in
2006 to 2,967 in 2019 — validates that view. Of the
world’s overall tiger population, 70 per cent survives in
India today.
We have also pledged to restore 26 million
hectares of degraded land by pursuing a massive
afforestation programme. We have also launched the
Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure — a
global partnership where knowledge is generated and
exchanged on different aspects of climate- and disasterresilient infrastructure.
We have even been successful in monitoring the
implementation of the SDGs. The responsibility for
overseeing SDG implementation in India has been
assigned to our national think tank — the National
19-31660

15/10/2019

Institution for Transforming India — which is chaired
by our Prime Minister. In order to provide highquality, reliable and timely data, we launched the
SDG India Index, an online dashboard that monitors
the implementation of the SDGs at the state level and
provides appropriate incentives to the provinces in order
to spark competition to enable them to perform better.
In the spirit of sharing experiences, including
successes, challenges and lessons learned, and to
accelerate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, India presented its voluntary
national review during the seventy-first session of the
Assembly, and will present its second round at the 2020
High-level Political Forum.
Our goal is to ensure that the fruits of India’s
progress and development percolate down to each
of its 1.3 billion citizens. India’s progress in the
implementation of the SDGs is crucial for the world, as
the country is home to about 17 per cent of the global
population. Despite still being a developing country,
in 2017, in the spirit of South-South cooperation,
India established the India-UNDP Partnership Fund
to assist fellow developing countries to achieve their
SDGs. A sum of $176 million has been committed to
the Fund over the coming decade in order to focus
on development projects in least developed countries,
landlocked developing countries and small island
developing States.
Mahatma Gandhi once said, “there are two days in
the year that we cannot do anything — yesterday and
tomorrow”. He meant specifically that we need to act
today to address our development challenges.
Ms. Rosa Suazo (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to take this opportunity to
make a brief statement following the adoption of the
political declaration of the High-level Political Forum
on sustainable development convened under the
auspices of the General Assembly (resolution 74/4) in
order to highlight the commitment of Honduras to the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Four years after beginning the
implementation of the Agenda, despite limited progress,
it is evident that we need to redouble efforts to achieve
the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). As the declaration indicates, we need
accelerated action and the strategic mobilization of the
necessary resources if we are to leave no one behind.

A/74/PV.15

In today’s world, we must move from words to action.
To that end, my country has been developing concrete
strategies to achieve the 2030 Agenda. The first step
was to incorporate the SDGs into our national planning
system. We have informed the General Assembly about
the progress made in that respect. Subsequently, we
launched a national commission on the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Through that commission,
the Government of Honduras will lead the effective
implementation, follow-up and monitoring of the SDGs
in the country, with the participation of actors from
the central Government, as well as local governments,
non-governmental organizations, the private sector and
academia. The 2030 Agenda is a commitment of all to
all, and we must join forces in a concerted manner.
When we talk about the implementation of the
2030 Agenda, we must also talk about climate change.
Sustainable development cannot be achieved unless
measures are taken to mitigate the effects of climate
change. If our efforts do not take climate change into
account, it will roll back development gains of recent
decades, thereby jeopardizing the internal stability of
nations and world peace.
We in Honduras are promoting agricultural
production systems adapted to climate change;
agricultural research and innovation centres; and
protected structures such as greenhouses, intelligent
irrigation systems and water reservoirs. We are also
leading reforestation campaigns that seek to motivate
young people and children to conserve forests. Society
as a whole must participate in efforts to achieve
conditions of resilience, adaptation and mitigation.
Access to financing, the mobilization of resources
from the private sector and international cooperation
must be strengthened in order to build a system that
allows for new modalities of access to funds — one with
a gender approach that includes the most vulnerable
sectors so that all members of society receive the true
benefit of fair trade.
In conclusion, Honduras reiterates its firm
conviction that the adoption of this declaration will give
new impetus to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
in order to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.
Ms.
Brink
(Australia):
The
Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) embody Australian
values and our ambitions for our region, the IndoPacific — prosperity, stability and inclusiveness.
We were pleased to join others in reaffirming our

19-316609/18

A/74/PV.15

commitment to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development at the SDG summit and through this
political declaration (resolution 74/4). We congratulate
Ambassador Skoog and Ambassador Carey for their
effective stewardship of the negotiations.
Australia is proud to be working with our
international partners to advance the SDGs at home, in
our own region and globally. We know that harnessing
and developing the skills of women and girls to advance
equality and empowerment is critical to achieving
not only SDG 5, on gender equality, but all 17 of the
Sustainable Development Goals. Last year, Australia
launched its inaugural Women’s Economic Security
Statement initiative to boost economic opportunities for
Australian women and realize its vision for a vibrant,
safe and cohesive Australia. We are combating violence
against women through our National Plan to Reduce
Violence against Women and their Children 2010-2022.
We are also developing our second national action plan
on women and peace and security to guide long-term
work on the meaningful participation of women and
girls in peace and security processes.
The Pacific is Australia’s home. It faces significant
and unique challenges. That is why we are undertaking
our Pacific Step-up, putting the region front and centre
of our foreign policy. Australia is working in close
consultation with its Pacific partners to tackle the
region’s long-term development challenges, including
climate change. Together we are building climate and
disaster resilience in the region, improving ocean health
and tackling plastics pollution. We are also working
together to assist communities in the region to address
the underlying causes of gender inequality and reduce
gender-based and family violence.
Australia is opening access to its labour markets
for Pacific workers, which drives up remittances and
supports skills development across the region. The
Coral Sea Cable System links Australia with Papua
New Guinea and Solomon Islands to increase Internet
access and connectivity with our neighbours. This is
truly a transformative project. We are working across
the multilateral system to ensure that the additional
resources needed to meet the SDGs are flowing to
our neighbourhood.
The 2030 Agenda is ambitious and as relevant as
ever. We look forward to working with all partners
to meet the challenge that we have set ourselves of
transforming our world and leaving no one behind.
10/18

15/10/2019

Mr. Do Rego (Benin) (spoke in French): It is a real
pleasure for my country, Benin, to take this opportunity
to address this plenary meeting, which reflects
the General Assembly’s ownership of the political
declaration (resolution 74/4) adopted at the Sustainable
Development Goals summit.
Four years into the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in Benin,
one of the key lessons learned is that integrating
SDG initiatives into national planning frameworks is
essential for the effective implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, which must
focus on harmonizing the principles of prioritization,
coordination and partnership.
Our national ownership of the SDGs led to Benin’s
selection of 49 priority targets and 168 monitoring
indicators. That large number of targets involving
all sectors of activity has led to more active and
binding coordination, with better coordination of
data management. The entire development planning
framework has thus been aligned with those
priority targets.
The ownership process continued with an
assessment of the costs of achieving the priority
targets of the SDGs — a significant $74 billion. That
assessment enabled the country to take stock of the real
challenge of mobilizing the necessary resources and
ensuring a sound macrobudgetary framework.
An analysis of the ripple effects and synergies
between the priority targets of the SDGs led to the
identification of nine operational starting points — social
protection, agricultural production, education, health,
drinking water, energy, infrastructure, cities and
human settlements and the Earth. Major projects are
being implemented in each of those areas, with tangible
results in many places encouraging people to go even
further. By way of illustration, I note the implementation
of the social protection programme entitled “Insurance
for Strengthening Human Capital” to help the most
vulnerable within the sectors of agriculture, trade,
transport, crafts, art and culture.
I also note the implementation of the school
canteens project, with 51 per cent of primary schools
enrolled in the National Integrated School Feeding
Programme, which has made it possible not only
to improve school performance and the health and
nutritional status of students but also to develop local
19-31660

15/10/2019

agricultural production, which provides substantial
income to farmers.
In addition, we are implementing the reform of
the entire agricultural sector, with the establishment
of agricultural development centres managed by the
Territorial Agency for Agricultural Development,
responsible for implementing national development
programmes in different fields.
Also worth mentioning are the significant
investments in the drinking water sector through the
rehabilitation of boreholes and village water supply
projects in order to reach the SDG target of ensuring
drinking water for all by 2021, 10 years before
the deadline.
In the energy sector, the commissioning of new
127 megawatts of electricity generation capacity for a
forecast of 400 megawatts by 2021, with a 25 per cent
renewable energy mix, has helped to reduce our energy
dependence by half.
The implementation of an asphalting programme
in all major and secondary cities of Benin for urban
sanitation purposes also contributes to improving the
living conditions of our population.
Finally, sustainable solutions are being implemented
in order to reduce and reverse the land degradation trend
in the country. In that connection, more than 13,000
agricultural producers have been trained in sustainable
land management and the rehabilitation of degraded
soils to improve food security.
In conclusion, on behalf of the Government of
my country, I reiterate our gratitude to the technical
and financial partners for their continued support for
the progress achieved in Benin. My country twice
submitted voluntary national reviews in the framework
of the High-level Political Forum in order to comply with
the principles of the evaluation. Despite those annual
evaluations, to which Member States must submit, and
with regard to the 2018 report of the Secretary-General
on the SDGs (E/2018/64), the pace of global process
does not match that called for by the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. That assessment forces us to
take immediate and intensified measures at all levels so
as to effectively leave no one behind.
Mr. Al-Kuwari (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): The
State of Qatar welcomes the adoption of the political
declaration of the High-level Political Forum on
sustainable development convened under the auspices

A/74/PV.15

of the General Assembly (resolution 74/4). We once
again express our appreciation to the co-facilitators,
the Permanent Representatives of the Bahamas
and Sweden, for their tireless efforts to facilitate
consultations on the political declaration in such an
open and transparent manner.
By adopting this political declaration, we reaffirm
our shared and ambitious commitment to achieve our
common vision by 2030 and to leave no one behind. The
State of Qatar attaches great importance to a number
of critical issues addressed in the political declaration,
inter alia, recognizing the special challenges facing
the most vulnerable countries in seeking to achieve
development, including the least developed countries
and the small island developing States. Given that the
State of Qatar is convinced of the necessity to pay
maximum attention to responses to meet the needs
and priorities of the least developed countries, we will
host the fifth United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries in March 2021. We hope that the
Conference will be an ideal time to provide positive
momentum for the sustainable development of the least
developed countries and an important contribution to
the shared efforts to that end.
In the light of the dire need to address threats
resulting from the effects of climate change and
coordinate multilateral action in that regard, we
welcome that the political declaration reiterates the
need to prioritize and act urgently and globally to
mitigate and adapt to climate change as one of the
greatest challenges of our time. The State of Qatar
was accordingly keen to play a leading role at the
Climate Action Summit, held by the Secretary-General
last month, through the leadership of Sheikh Tamim
bin Hamad Al-Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar, the
French President and the Prime Minister of Jamaica, as
co-leading countries of the climate finance and carbon
pricing alliance.
His Royal Highness announced at the summit
a $100 million contribution to help least developed
countries and small island developing States address
climate change, as they are the countries most affected
by its consequences. In line with the commitment
of States underscored in the political declaration to
support efforts by the Secretary-General to restructure
the United Nations development system so as to
enhance support to countries in the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in
2018 the State of Qatar announced an unearmarked

19-3166011/18

A/74/PV.15

multi-year contribution of $500 million in core
resources for United Nations system entities, including
support for the Special Purpose Trust Fund under the
Resident Coordinator system for the period 2019 to
2020 and earmarking $20 million in multi-year funding
support for the network of United Nations Development
Programme accelerator laboratoies to speed up the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). Those measures make Qatar among the largest
partners supporting the United Nations in various areas.
The political declaration recognizes the importance
of achieving our vision of creating a world that will
provide access to quality, equitable and inclusive
education. This is in line with Qatar’s view of the
great importance of education as an enabling factor
contributing to sustainable development, as well as
its central role in achieving the SDGs. My country
is similarly paying close attention to education, with
our Education Above All Foundation realizing great
achievements by providing quality education to
10 million children and young people around the world,
in cooperation with international partners.
In conclusion, Qatar, which sees the political
declaration as a solid basis for stepping up our ambition
to achieve sustainable development and leave no one
behind, will spare no effort to continue its commitment
to actions based on the principle of partnership and
cooperation on shared goals.
Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ambassador Carey
and Ambassador Skoog for their tireless efforts as
co-facilitators of the political declaration that we have
just adopted (resolution 74/4). I firmly believe that the
declaration will guide us through the decade of action
and delivery for sustainable development.
It was four years ago that world leaders gathered
here and adopted the most ambitious goals in history.
They did so with a view to transforming the world for
people and this planet. Their commitment, however,
has not yet been fully translated into reality. Substantial
progress has yet to be made in implementing the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Before it is too
late, we must galvanize our political will to step up our
efforts to fully implement them.
Today, drawing upon the experience of my own
country, I would like to bring everyone’s attention to
the importance of inclusivity in promoting sustainable
development. The Republic of Korea has often been
12/18

15/10/2019

acclaimed as a success story of development, which
demonstrates that transformational development is
possible even in half a century. We also take pride in
the fact that we have achieved democracy and economic
development in tandem, made possible thanks to the
Korean people’s strong aspiration for a better life and
relentless efforts to achieve it. However, too much focus
on growth resulted in increasing inequality and exclusion
in economic, social and environmental contexts. That
inequality and exclusion undermined social cohesion
and raised barriers to sustainable development.
As part of efforts to correct course, this past year
my Government announced its vision and strategy for
innovative and inclusive growth. Its ultimate goal is to
build a society where equal opportunities as well as just
and fair outcomes are ensured. Concrete policy actions
that include targets and specific time frames for each
of them have been put in place this year. The national
budget has also been increased to implement the
policy vision. Furthermore, my Government renewed
its action plan for sustainable development, known as
the K-SDGs. Diverse groups, including women, young
people and people with disabilities, took part in setting
goals and targets for the future. The action plan will
serve as a comprehensive monitoring mechanism to
ensure the inclusivity and sustainability of the country’s
economic development.
Governments alone cannot tackle challenges to
sustainable development effectively. Partnerships with
civil society and the private sector are essential, and a
sense of global solidarity is a must. In order to support
the implementation of the SDGs around the world, the
Republic of Korea has steadily increased its official
development assistance (ODA). We will continue to
do so with a plan to more than double our ODA by
2030. In doing so, we will pay particular attention to
ensuring that our support reaches those at risk of being
left behind, thereby contributing to building peaceful,
just and inclusive societies in our partner countries.
We have clearly defined common goals but, to achieve
them by the target year, we need to take actions with a
sense of urgency that truly matches our ambition. The
Republic of Korea will play its due part in this effort
throughout the journey towards 2030.
Allow me to conclude my intervention on a
personal note. This is the last meeting of the General
Assembly that I attend, as I will leave New York in
a matter of days after three years of my tour of duty,
which conclude my 40-year-long diplomatic career.
19-31660

15/10/2019

It has been a great pleasure for me to work with the
members of the General Assembly and other colleagues
to promote sustainable peace and development around
the world. Serving as Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission in 2017 and as President of the Executive
Board of the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Population Fund and the United
Nations Office for Project Services this year was a
special honour and privilege for me in that regard. I am
confident that the United Nations will build upon its
past achievements and rise to new heights under your
able leadership, Mr. President. I wish you all the best
in your new endeavours as President of the General
Assembly at its seventy-fourth session.
The President: I wish the representative of the
Republic of Korea well in his future endeavours
and acknowledge the great work he has done for
the Organization.
Ms. Blais (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
joins other Member States in welcoming the adoption
of the political declaration of the High-level Political
Forum on sustainable development convened under the
auspices of the General Assembly (resolution 74/4). We
would like to thank Ambassador Carey of the Bahamas
and Ambassador Skoog of Sweden and their staff for
the excellent work done in co-facilitating the process.
(spoke in English)
The message that Canada heard loud and clear
during our recent high-level week was that we need
greater ambition if we are to meet the challenges of the
twenty-first century. Let us not forget that we recently
had such ambition, as it was only four years ago that we
created the 2030 Agenda of Sustainable Development:
the blueprint for our people, prosperity and planet. But
it will require more than simple ambition to achieve
this comprehensive agenda; we also need partnerships
that will see us work better together. Reducing poverty,
ensuring economic security for all, empowering women
and girls, tackling climate change, building peaceful
and inclusive societies — those are ambitious targets,
which absolutely no country can achieve by working in
isolation. We need to work together. Working together
also means involving women and girls, men and boys,
all levels of Government, Parliaments, civil society and
businesses to ensure that we are walking the talk.
Canada believes that our shared goal of leaving
no one behind represents the best of multilateralism.
It means ensuring that all people have the opportunity

A/74/PV.15

to lead better lives. Our global goals will be met only
if we hear and address the needs and priorities of the
poorest and most marginalized among us. We must step
up our efforts and meet those challenges together, while
paying close attention to the specific needs of the least
developed countries, small island developing States
and conflict-affected regions. It was President Maamau
of Kiribati who said during his address at this year’s
general debate,
“the real and true test of the success of the United
Nations is to be measured not in the number of
treaties concluded or resolutions adopted but rather
in how much it improves the lives of the most
vulnerable”. (A/74/PV.6, p. 38)
(spoke in French)
Canada knows that it will not be easy to ensure
a decent standard of living for all, including the most
vulnerable. Despite the fact that Canada has a high
level of economic and social development, 3 million
Canadians are still struggling to meet their basic needs.
Indigenous peoples, women, the elderly, persons with
disabilities and those newly arrived in Canada are
more often the victims of poverty, discrimination and
social exclusion.
(spoke in English)
Canada believes that one of our most critical tasks
is to mobilize the necessary resources from the public,
private and philanthropic sectors in order to achieve
all the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030. For
that reason, Canada was pleased to partner with Ghana
in co-facilitating the recent high-level dialogue on
financing for development. Through that work, we have
heard that the world has more than enough financial
resources to make our Sustainable Development Goals
a reality. The problems are rooted in coordination and
connection. Canada believes that the United Nations,
through its normative and convening roles, is uniquely
positioned to be at the forefront of those efforts.
The 2030 Agenda is not an à la carte menu from
which we can pick. It is a holistic approach to globalism
and sustainability — one that we all depend on in order
to survive. Only when we all commit to that together
will we restore trust and rebuild hope.
Mr. Alnahdi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having organized the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) summit on 24 September. The summit

19-3166013/18

A/74/PV.15

served to highlight the commitment and desire of the
United Nations and its States Members to achieve
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
provided a suitable forum to discuss the most important
achievements and challenges of the past four years.
Saudi Arabia recognizes the importance of the
global challenges and issues we face in pursuing the
SDGs. We need to adopt a comprehensive approach in
order to address those challenges and issues through
national, regional and international partnerships, with
the participation of all stakeholders. Saudi Arabia
also stresses the importance of leveraging all possible
factors with a view to achieving the 2030 Agenda, most
notably inclusiveness, the empowerment of women
and young people and investing in human capital in
order to ensure that all our achievements are sustained
beyond 2030.
Financing for development is one of the most
important factors in achieving the SDGs. That requires
the development of financial and non-financial
mechanisms and strategies to support implementation
through leveraging domestic resources and involving
the private sector, as well as the optimal channelling of
official development assistance. As part of that global
commitment and in line with our vision for 2030, which
is based on three lines of action — a vital community,
a prosperous economy and an ambitious nation — we
are working hard to ensure that the Government works
effectively with other sectors, such as the private
sector and the not-for-profit sector, in order to achieve
economic growth, social balance and environmental
protection in a sustainable manner.
Saudi Arabia is a key partner in finding radical
solutions to address development issues at the national,
regional and international levels. We look forward to
accelerating the implementation of the SDGs. Saudi
Arabia stresses the importance of regional cooperation
that enhances political, economic and social stability, in
turn creating the necessary conditions for achieving the
2030 Agenda and implementing it at the global level.
Through our chairmanship of the Group of Twenty
Summit next year, Saudi Arabia will also ensure that
priorities are aligned with the Sustainable Development
Goals and complement them.
Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): Portugal aligns
itself with the statement delivered by Mr. Frans
Timmermans, Executive Vice President-Designate
14/18

15/10/2019

of the European Commission, during the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) summit.
At the outset of this complementary statement, I
would like to sincerely thank our colleagues from the
Bahamas and Sweden for having co-facilitated the
negotiation of the political declaration we adopted
today (resolution 74/4), one that is both concise
and aspirational.
While on the subject of mentioning our colleagues,
allow me to send my best wishes to Ambassador Cho
Tae-yul of the Republic of Korea, who is coming to
the end of his successful three-year mandate here in
New York.
The fact that we all endorse this declaration means
that we have been able to renew the global commitment
to sustainable development. Progress has certainly been
too slow in some areas. We must unquestionably step up
our actions, but the SDG summit was an opportunity to
recognize precisely that and show that we are ready to
roll up our sleeves and ensure the faster implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The 2030 Agenda is to be implemented by all States,
including both developed and developing nations alike,
sharing a common responsibility to achieve the 17
SDGs and their respective targets.
Having presented its first national voluntary
report, in 2017, Portugal remains fully committed to
implementing the 2030 Agenda and to cooperating
with other countries through partnerships in order to
implement their own measures. A global manifestation
of that engagement was evidenced by our successfully
hosting the World Youth Conference in Lisbon last June.
That meeting promoted dialogue between Governments
and youth delegates from around the world, concluding
with the adoption of the Lisboa+21 Declaration on
Youth Policies and Programmes. Moreover, with the
implementation of SDG 14 especially in mind, Portugal
will co-host with Kenya the second United Nations
Ocean Conference in Lisbon next June.
In conclusion, the 2030 Agenda inspires us to
achieve a better, safer and more prosperous and
sustainable future. It is a vision to which we all aspire.
Let us continue to strive towards its full implementation.
Mr. Naeemi (Afghanistan): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this meeting
today on a very important topic under the auspices of
the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session,
19-31660

15/10/2019

namely, to discuss the important matter of accelerating
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. It is a great honour for me to share our
achievements and challenges in the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda.
Together with our private sector, civil society and
development partners, the Government of Afghanistan
has been working to fulfil its commitments to the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in the midst of
conflict, fragility and poverty. The SDGs have provided
us with a vision for a better future, and we are actively
working to translate them into concrete actions and
better outcomes for our people. Let me now highlight
some of our key achievements in implementing the
SDGs in our country.
To give the Agenda its required level of political
attention, an executive committee was created to
coordinate various agenda points on the SDGs at the
highest policy level. The Ministry of Economy has
been designated as the primary Government agency to
lead and coordinate the technical work on the SDGs in
Afghanistan — both through working groups and with
each agency of the Government of Afghanistan.
Having set that direction, the Ministry of Economy
analysed SDG stakeholders, carried out consultations
and nationalized the most relevant SDG targets
and indicators. The result was the adoption of the
Afghanistan Sustainable Development Goals (A-SDGs)
as set out in a national document. More recently,
we aligned the A-SDGs with national development
priorities. We are currently laying the groundwork for
mainstreaming the A-SDG targets and indicators into
national planning and budgeting processes.
While working across all the A-SDG custodian
Government agencies, we have identified our A-SDG
priority targets and focus areas to maximize impact
through integrated planning and budgeting and to guide
our development partners — donor agencies, multilateral
organizations, non-governmental organizations, our
private sector and civil society — to maistream their
programmes and projects into our A-SDG priorities
during the next decade.
As development and security are interlinked,
Afghanistan is still at the forefront of countering
international terrorism. More than four decades of
conflict have taken a heavy toll on our people, resources
and infrastructure, and served as the primary obstacle
to achieving sustainable development. We therefore

A/74/PV.15

stress the need for sustained international assistance to
achieve our SDG targets in a timely manner.
In conclusion, I would like to assure you,
Mr. President, that Afghanistan is committed to leaving
no one behind in the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. We will continue
our efforts to implement our SDG targets in a feasible
way. We hope that our international partners will help
us in achieving them together.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Alzabidy (League of Arab States) (spoke
in Arabic): Four years after the adoption of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, today we have
adopted the political declaration of the High-level
Political Forum on sustainable development convened
under the auspices of the General Assembly (resolution
74/4). This represents a positive step that the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
should use to devote concentrated efforts to achieve the
2030 Agenda with resolve and seriousness. Critically,
we will need to deal with those challenges throughout
the next decade with resolve and seriousness as we
implement this ambitious Agenda. We all face those
challenges jointly. The universality of the Agenda and
the similarity of the problems, regardless of their forms,
compel us to join efforts to resolve them and achieve
well-being for our peoples. In that respect, I will
briefly share the vision of the League of Arab States
in addressing the challenges we face in the next phase.
Eradicating poverty by 2030 remains the main
challenge ahead of us. It requires mobilizing all
national, regional and international efforts to address
it as a step towards achieving sustainable development
and meeting our commitment to leave no one behind.
Development is a human right for everyone, and it
should be enjoyed by all, including women, youth and
marginalized people, as well as the most vulnerable
groups, including children, people with disabilities
and elderly people. That requires the provision of
effective financial tools to bridge the financial gap.
The League of Arab States calls on the international
community to fulfil its commitments under Goal
17 of the SDGs, particularly when it comes to the
mobilization of financial resources to support the least
developed countries and middle-income countries.
That also includes the crucial and vital role of official

19-3166015/18

A/74/PV.15

development assistance as a key source of financing for
developing countries.
Our modern world, specifically the Arab region, is
faced with grave political and security challenges that
hamper the implementation of sustainable development.
At their core lies the challenge faced by peoples and
States under occupation and conflict. There is no doubt
that the Israeli occupation causes huge development
challenges in both occupied Palestine and other Arab
territories under occupation. Those peoples and States
require special assistance and support to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals, particularly those
related to the sustainability of natural resources.
Allow me to mention here the long-term
repercussions of mass forced displacement as a
result of wars, terrorism, conflicts and occupation on
sustainable development, especially in the Arab region.
We must take into consideration the increasing impact
of the influx of refugees on infrastructure in host
countries, notably in the health, education, housing,
energy and water sectors. In that context, it is important
to intensify efforts and cooperation between the United
Nations and the League of Arab States in enhancing
humanitarian efforts, supporting financing for
development and providing the necessary funding for
national development response plans, strengthening the
capacities of host countries to address the repercussions
of the crisis and ensuring that efforts to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals are not hampered.
In conclusion, the League of Arab States reiterates
its commitment and that of its member States to
enhancing cooperation with the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and the Secretariat
to continue the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals and targets — to the benefit of
both our organizations and to achieve the sustainable
development to which we all aspire.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the International Union for Conservation of Nature.
Mr. O’Connor (International Union for
Conservation of Nature): The International Union
for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) welcomes the
political declaration of the High-level Political Forum
on sustainable development convened under the
auspices of the General Assembly (resolution 74/4).
The IUCN is encouraged at seeing the strong reference
therein to conserving and sustainably using our
planet’s marine and terrestrial resources and to halting
16/18

15/10/2019

ecosystem degradation and biodiversity loss. We were
also encouraged to see the prominent featuring of
nature-based solutions for climate change during the
Secretary-General’s Climate Action Summit. We know
that conserving, restoring and sustainably managing
the world’s ecosystems — its forests, mangroves,
peatlands, grasslands, coral reefs, drylands — can
help countries and communities to adapt to climate
change and build their resilience, as well as providing
important mitigation benefits.
We now need to build on the momentum generated
by the summits held in September and prepare
diligently for 2020, which promises to be a watershed
year for biodiversity and nature conservation.
Important biodiversity-related targets in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development are supposed to
have been achieved by 2020. Even if they are, and the
likelihood of their all being reached looks slim, much
work remains going forward to restore our planet’s
ecosystems to robust health and halt the rapid loss
of biodiversity documented by the recent report of
the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services.
Next year gives us a tremendous opportunity to
scale up ambition in four ways: first, by ensuring that
enhanced nationally determined contributions to tackle
climate change incorporate ambitious and quantified
targets for deploying nature-based solutions; secondly,
by ensuring that the back-to-back United Nations
Ocean Conference and the IUCN World Conservation
Congress — the Lisbon-Marseille axis — provide
concrete and ambitious outcomes to advance ocean
health and to scale up action on nature conservation
more broadly; thirdly, by crafting a strong political
declaration to be adopted by world leaders at next year’s
leaders’ summit on biodiversity, one at least as ambitious
as the recent Metz Charter on Biodiversity; and,
fourthly, by adopting a post-2020 global biodiversity
framework with verifiable science-based targets and an
ambitious financing strategy at the Conference of the
Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, to be
held later next year in Kunming.
We look forward to working with all Member States
to ensure that 2020 is truly a watershed year for both
biodiversity and climate change, as these two global
challenges are inextricably linked to one another, as
well as to the present and future well-being of human
beings and societies.
19-31660

15/10/2019

The President: We have heard the last speaker on
this item.
I would like to express my sincere thanks to
Ambassador Sheila Carey of the Bahamas and
Ambassador Olof Skoog of Sweden, co-facilitators of
the informal consultations, who demonstrated great
ability and patience in their conduct of the discussion
and complex negotiations on resolution 74/4. I also
thank Member States for their valuable contributions to
reaching an agreement on the resolution.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 19.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/74/L.1)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liberia to introduce draft resolution
A/74/L.1.
Mr. Kemayah (Liberia): Permit me to take this
opportunity to reiterate our congratulations to you, Sir,
on your election as President of the General Assembly.
We would like to commend you for the able manner
in which you continue to steer the affairs of the
Assembly and further reassure you of our delegation’s
commitment to fully supporting your leadership.
It is my great privilege to introduce to the
General Assembly, on behalf of the main sponsors
and co-sponsors, draft resolution A/74/L.1, entitled
“Proclamation of 28 September as the International
Day for Universal Access to Information”.
Access to information is very essential for the
democratic functioning of a society and shaping our
political, social and economic perspectives. It is also
vital for the sustainable development of countries.
Recognized by the new United Nations Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework and in the
Sustainable Development Goals under Goal 16.10.2,
access to information serves as an enabler of all other
Sustainable Development Goals, whether ending
poverty in all its forms everywhere; ensuring healthy
lives and well-being; ensuring equitable education,
gender equality and women’s empowerment; youth

A/74/PV.15

empowerment; promoting peaceful and inclusive
societies; or reducing inequalities within and among
countries. None of these Sustainable Development
Goals can be achieved without access to information.
The progress towards achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals cannot be measured without access
to information.
Liberia, as a country that has experienced
conflict and major public health crises, such as the
Ebola pandemic, appreciates the value of access to
information in combating problems of this scale. We
know first-hand what a lack of information can mean
for a society — the difference between life and death.
The draft resolution we are introducing today
draws on resolution 38 C/70, which was adopted
unanimously by the member States of UNESCO at
its General Conference in Paris in 2015 and which
proclaimed 28 September as the International Day for
Universal Access to Information. Since the adoption
of the UNESCO resolution, several countries and civil
society organizations celebrate the day annually, raising
awareness on the importance of access to information.
The adoption today of draft resolution A/74/L.1 for
the proclamation of 28 September as the International
Day for Universal Access to Information by the General
Assembly will create the biggest global platform for
Governments, civil society organizations, citizens and
development partners to reflect on the importance of
access to information, identify challenges and design
new and innovative ways to promote the advancement
of access to information as a tangible tool for
development and the realization of the Sustainable
Development Goals.
The draft resolution we humbly introduce today
is the result of the dedicated work of many Member
States, small and large, from different regions of the
world. Such broad and diverse ownership demonstrates
the truly global nature of this draft resolution on access
to information. The adoption by consensus of draft
resolution A/74/L.1 by the General Assembly today,
Tuesday, 15 October, will send a clear and important
message globally that we are committed to enhancing
access to information and achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals.
We reaffirm the unflinching practical commitment
of His Excellency Mr. George Manneh Weah, President
of the Republic of Liberia, and the Government of
Liberia to promoting access to information, advancing

19-3166017/18

A/74/PV.15

press freedom and freedom of expression and achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals. We commend the
delegations of Sierra Leone and Costa Rica and the
many co-sponsors for their unwavering support to our
leadership on this noteworthy endeavour and, more
important, for joining us in this initiative. We appeal
to those Member States that have not yet done so to
kindly do so and support the draft resolution. We
also thank the many countries from different regions,
international partners and civil society organizations,
including, but not limited to, UNESCO, the African
Platform on Access to Information, the Press Union
of Liberia and all other media institutions around the
world that have championed initiatives that promote
access to information worldwide over the years.
The action that we take today will serve to
reaffirm our collective resolve as the world body — the
United Nations — to work together to enhance access
to information and promote democracy and the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Together we must prioritize enhancing access to
information as a pivotal and tangible tool to ensure the
achievement of, and assess progress on, the Sustainable
Development Goals.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/74/L.1, entitled

18/18

15/10/2019

“Proclamation of 28 September as the International
Day for Universal Access to Information”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in the
document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/74/L.1: Armenia, Benin,
the Central African Republic, Colombia, Comoros,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Eswatini, Greece, Grenada,
Guinea, Ireland, Mali, Morocco, Nigeria, Norway,
Paraguay, the Philippines, Senegal, Serbia, Tunisia,
Uganda and Uruguay.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/74/L.1?
Draft resolution
(resolution 74/5).

A/74/L.1

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 14.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

19-31660
