S/PV.8413

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8413th meeting

Wednesday, 5 December 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ouattara . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Côte d’Ivoire)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Esono Angue
Mr. Amde
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Ms. Kaag
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Post-conflict reconstruction and peace, security and stability
Letter dated 28 November 2018 from the Permanent Representative of Côte
d’Ivoire to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2018/1063)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-41380 (E)
*1841380*

S/PV.8413

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency
Mr. George Herbert Walker Bush, forty-first
President of the United States of America
The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Security Council, I wish to convey my heartfelt
condolences to the Government and the people of
the United States of America following the death of
Mr. George Herbert Walker Bush, forty-first President
of the United States. President Bush left us after a long
and illustrious career in the service of his country,
including as Permanent Representative of the United
States to the United Nations, where he presided over
the Security Council in May 1972.
On behalf of the Council, I invite all attendees to
stand and observe a minute of silence in memory of
President Bush.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Post-conflict reconstruction and peace, security
and stability
Letter dated 28 November 2018 from the
Permanent Representative of Côte d’Ivoire
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2018/1063)
The President (spoke in French): I wish to
warmly welcome the Secretary-General, Ministers and
other representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Burkina Faso, Japan, Rwanda and
Senegal to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Paul Robert Tiendrebeogo, Minister for African
Integration and Burkinabes Living Abroad of Burkina
Faso.
2/32

05/12/2018

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/1063, which contains a letter dated
28 November 2018 from the Permanent Representative
of Côte d’Ivoire to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, and give him the
floor.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I extend
a warm welcome to His Excellency President Alassane
Ouattara and at the same time thank Côte d’Ivoire for
using its presidency of the Security Council to propose
today’s theme, which emphasizes the links between
sustainable economic development, peace and security.
The experience of Côte d’Ivoire itself, which is
moving forward on the path of peacebuilding and
development, shows us that peace and development are
indivisible. In addition, having hosted a United Nations
peacekeeping operation on its soil, Côte d’Ivoire can
make a valuable contribution and share its experience
with ongoing peace operations in other countries
around the world. These facts undoubtedly attest to the
results we can achieve if we work together. This is the
very spirit of my Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
In the long term and in the light of the acute and
protracted crises that shake the world today, it is clear
that the main method of responding to crises has too
high a human and financial cost. That is why I am
so keen to refocus our activities on prevention, to
rebalance our action in the fields of peace and security,
and to coordinate our activities across the three pillars
of peace, sustainable development and human rights.
Peace cannot be sustainable without development, and
sustainable peace is essential for the preservation of
development gains. Based on this observation, I would
like to share four key messages with the Security
Council today.
First, we must take a holistic approach. This
approach essentially implies that we combat such
potential factors of instability as inequalities, climate
18-41380

05/12/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

change, competition for resources, corruption and
cross-border crime. It also requires a real awareness that
investing in basic services, sustainable development and
social cohesion is investing in peace. Finally, it requires
a better adaptation of the United Nations presence to the
changing needs of countries that, in the aftermath of a
violent conflict, seek to establish lasting peace. To this
end, we must give priority to meeting the needs of the
host country and mobilizing the entire United Nations
system — all peace operations, all humanitarian and
development actors — around these needs. This is
one of the fundamental elements of the reforms I have
undertaken. Unfortunately, all too often, countries
that have experienced crises can sometimes return to
violence if a development programme inclusive is not
well conducted.
Secondly, we need to adopt more inclusive
approaches. It is essential that peace and development
activities be owned, led and carried out by national and
local actors. For this to occur, we must mobilize citizens
first and foremost, as well as the private sector, and
ensure that the scope for civil society action remains
intact. We must also involve in our efforts the social
strata that are too often marginalized and excluded, such
as women and girls, the elderly, young people, people
with disabilities and members of minority groups.
The participation of women, in particular, is a sure
way to improve the effectiveness and sustainability of
peacebuilding. Their contribution is indeed crucial to
the economic recovery, political legitimacy and social
cohesion.
(spoke in English)
Thirdly, we need more partnerships. I am
committed to further strengthening ties with regional
and subregional organizations and with international
financial institutions to safeguard development gains,
strengthen resilience and build local capacities to
prevent and respond to conflicts. This is particularly
important in transition settings, once the mission
departs and international attention and resources
typically start to decline.
Our partnership with the African Union is key and
continues to deepen. We have signed joint frameworks
on peace and security and on implementation of
Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Further, we have conducted joint
missions focused on women, demonstrating the central
importance of gender equality. Earlier this year, I signed

S/PV. 8413

a Strategic Partnership Framework with the World
Bank, and we are operationalizing the findings of our
joint study, Pathways for Peace: Inclusive Approaches
to Preventing Violent Conflict.
The Peacebuilding Commission has a useful
convening and bridging role to play as a platform
where diverse actors and stakeholders foster coherence
among political objectives and support sustainable
development in countries affected by conflict. Indeed,
the Commission’s dialogues with local peace activists
and civil society have been essential in connecting
country-level peacebuilding efforts with global policy
discussions.
Fourthly, we need adequate and predictable
resources for peacebuilding and development actors
during the conflict cycle. We must support Member
States in strengthening domestic resource mobilization
and in attracting external investments.
The Peacebuilding Fund needs and deserves greater
support. As a catalytic, fast and flexible vehicle, the
Fund fosters local participation and, crucially, provides
support in remote areas, including cross-border
zones, that are often overlooked. The Fund has also
allocated more than 30 per cent of its annual resources
to supporting women’s rights and gender equality for
sustaining peace. I reiterate my call to all Member
States and United Nations organizations to follow
this example. I also appeal once again for African-led
peace operations acting under the Security Council’s
authority to receive predictable, sustainable and
flexible financing, including through United Nationsassessed contributions where appropriate.
I am strongly committed to supporting the Security
Council as we strive together to strengthen our work
across the peace continuum.
Restructuring and repositioning the peace and
security and development pillars of the United Nations
will help foster a new generation of approaches
and architecture to more effectively respond to the
world’s most pressing problems. The 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and sustaining peace are
complementary and mutually reinforcing. I encourage
all actors to do more to embrace those frameworks as
our best guarantees against instability and insecurity.
I once again thank His Excellency President Ouattara
and Côte d’Ivoire for focusing our attention on this
crucial work.

18-413803/32

S/PV.8413

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Faki Mahamat.
Mr. Faki Mahamat (spoke in French): The African
Union echoes the President of the Security Council
in conveying its condolences to the United States of
America following the passing of former President
George H.W. Bush, who, in the course of his long
career, served as his country’s representative here in
the Security Council.
By choosing the topic of peacebuilding and
sustaining peace, post-conflict reconstruction and
peace, security and stability, and by sharing with us
today its post-conflict experience, Côte d’Ivoire has
made a real contribution. Countries where recurrent
conflicts persist, particularly in Africa, would do well
to be inspired by that experience, which is enlightening
at more than one level. I wish therefore to pay tribute to
President Alassane Ouattara, whose presence heightens
the importance of this meeting. I wish also to reiterate
my appreciation to Secretary-General António Guterres
for his commitment. Since taking office, he has been
working continuously to strengthen partnerships,
including with the African Union.
The quest for peace is a lengthy process requiring
a continuing commitment on the part of national
stakeholders and ongoing support from the international
community. In the absence of international support,
national efforts cannot overcome the countless obstacles
that stand in the way of peace. In the absence of strong
national political will, international assistance cannot
lead to sustainable results.

05/12/2018

the economic front, the strong growth recorded in
recent years, in parallel with an impressive level of
infrastructure development, has brought Côte d’Ivoire
closer to the desired emergence and laid considerable
groundwork for its long-term stability.
In any conflict, silencing the guns is only the
first step in a long process. Establishing lasting peace
requires sustained efforts and a long-term commitment
that extend well past the end of a peacekeeping
mission’s mandate. There can be no clearer illustration
of the need to pay close attention to this question than
the finding that 40 per cent of post-conflict countries
relapse into violence 10 years after emerging from it.
That is why in 2006 the African Union adopted a
framework document on post-conflict reconstruction
and development to serve as a guide in efforts to address
the root causes of conflict and prevent the resurgence
of violence. It was followed by the launch in 2010 of
the African Solidarity Initiative, which is based on the
principle of mutual assistance on the continent. On
the ground, the African Union is providing a tangible
contribution to many Member States in post-conflict
situations through quick-impact projects, technical
support in key areas and advocacy aimed at mobilizing
the required support. This practical involvement on the
part of the African Union reflects the resolute will of
African leaders to assume their share of responsibility
in promoting peace and security on the continent. Selfreliance is an essential element of Africa’s revitalization,
and it is on the basis of that principle that our leaders
have committed to financing 25 per cent of the costs of
the continental agenda for peace and security.

Côte d’Ivoire is a clear demonstration of the fact
that peace is within reach when the will to achieve it
exists. As Africa redoubles its efforts to silence the guns
by 2020, the path taken by Côte d’Ivoire is a source of
encouragement, as are the recent developments in the
Horn of Africa. I am pleased to note that the political
will and determination that made it possible to end the
crisis in Côte d’Ivoire have continued to be shown by
the Ivorian authorities during the post-conflict phase.

In line with the relevant African Union instruments
and based on past and current experiences on the
continent, we cannot overemphasize the importance
of political inclusion, democratic governance and
a national leadership that is dedicated to the success
of peacebuilding. It is equally important to promote
balanced development, to fight resolutely against
inequality and to meet the specific needs of young
people and women, who are the primary victims of
such conflicts.

At the political level, extending a hand to former
enemies made it possible to take decisive steps on
the path to reconciliation. The courageous measures
announced by President Ouattara last August, on the
fifty-eighth anniversary of his country’s independence,
are of landmark importance in that respect. On

The dialectic relation between peace and development
is of course evident. Similarly, it is important to
harmonize activities related to the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process with securitysector reform and the fight against impunity in a way
that takes account of the specifics of each situation.

4/32

18-41380

05/12/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The restoration of peace in Côte d’Ivoire is a
victory for the partnership among the United Nations,
the African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS). The United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire took over from the mission
that ECOWAS had deployed on the ground since
December 2002. Politically, the three organizations
worked closely together throughout the peace process.
The resolutions of the Council on Côte d’Ivoire were
very often the outcome of decisions taken at the regional
level, as signed off on by the African Union Peace and
Security Council.
We are pleased to note that over the years, and
learning from our common experience in Côte d’Ivoire
and elsewhere on the continent, the partnership
between the African Union and the United Nations
has been significantly strengthened, both between
the Commission and the Secretariat and between the
African Union Peace and Security Council and the
United Nations Security Council. I also take note of
the promising cooperation that has developed between
the Peace and Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission. I reaffirm here the commitment of the
African Union to continue and deepen that collaboration,
with a particular focus not only on African countries
that are on the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission,
but also on those in which peacekeeping missions are
preparing to wrap up their operations. In the context
of strengthening our partnership, I believe it useful
to recall the principles that should guide our common
action in support of peace, stability and development
on the continent.
First, there needs to be national ownership. In that
area, as in many others, nothing sustainable can be
achieved if national actors do not provide leadership of
the peacebuilding process.
Secondly, solutions must be promoted that are
adapted to the realities of each country; this applies
in particular to the issue of post-conflict justice. In
accordance with its Constitutive Act, the African Union
is deeply committed to the fight against impunity. But
the fight for justice must be conducted in a manner that
promotes reconciliation and lasting peace on the basis
of the triptych of justice, truth and reconciliation. Any
other approach could perpetuate divisions and recreate
conditions conducive to violence. It is therefore
pertinent and timely to call for a fresh review of the
principles underlying the concept of transitional justice.

S/PV. 8413

Thirdly, long-term international support is
required. Unfortunately, international mobilization
often dwindles as soon as a crisis stops making
headlines, even though that marks the start of the most
critical part of the process of the sustainable promotion
of peace.
I wish to conclude by stressing the timeliness
of this debate on peacebuilding, and I hope that it
will lead to increased mobilization on the part of the
international community in this area, as it is necessary,
in order to succeed, to judiciously combine the need
for solidarity with the African continent with a longterm perspective.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Faki
Mahamat for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
President of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire.
I am particularly honoured to preside over this highlevel Council debate in the framework of the activities
chosen by Côte d’Ivoire to distinguish its Security
Council presidency during the month of December.
This is an important moment for my country, coming
27 years after its last term on the Security Council.
Our presidency also comes more than one year after the
removal of Côte d’Ivoire from the Security Council’s
agenda and the closure, in 2017, of the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) after 13 years of
presence on our territory. It must be said that it was a
genuine success story.
Côte d’Ivoire assumes the rotating presidency of
the Security Council at a time marked by upheaval
at the international level, with a reshaping of certain
balances. Our presence in this prestigious forum offers
us the opportunity to reiterate our faith in a balanced
multilateral system that allows everyone to make their
voice heard, howsoever weak it may be, and to see their
aspirations taken into consideration. In this pivotal
period, our world is called to show greater solidarity and
understanding so as to overcome the peace and security
challenges we all face. In that context, our presidency
will be characterized by openness, the sharing of
experiences and collaboration in order to create the
conditions for consensus on the most difficult issues at
all times. We also want to expand the range of Security
Council responses to the various issues before it.
Moreover, during its presidency my country will
pay close attention to African issues — and here I

18-413805/32

S/PV.8413

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

05/12/2018

thank Chairperson Moussa Faki Mahamat for his
presence — which sadly and overwhelmingly dominate
our agenda and require the special attention and
full commitment of each of the African countries. I
therefore invite Council members to respond favourably
to Africa’s expectations and calls for greater solidarity
in financing its peace support operations, and I thank
the Secretary-General for all his initiatives in this area.

people to their countries and their families, as well as
to the great family of the United Nations.

In view of the many challenges to international
peace and security in our ever-changing world, the
United Nations and the Security Council are more
indispensable than ever before in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts. I would therefore like to express
my encouragement to the Secretary-General for the
ambitious reform of our shared Organization that he
has initiated, the outcome of which will be an even
more effective Organization.

The theme of our debate — “Post-conflict
reconstruction and peace, security and stability” — is
of great importance to my country, given its recent
history. That theme offers us the opportunity to share
our experience in post-crisis reconstruction. It also
gives us an opportunity to discuss the priorities we have
set in order to render irreversible the peace, security and
development that Côte d’Ivoire has enjoyed since the
end of the post-election crisis. We hope that the lessons
learned from our experience will contribute modestly
to enriching the Council’s peacebuilding practice,
which has evolved in recent years. Our experience may
also be useful to countries facing similar situations.

As I said, Côte d’Ivoire enjoyed the unprecedented
commitment of the international community,
particularly the United Nations and the Security
Council, for more than a decade. Indeed, in managing
the crisis that my country endured, the Security
Council adopted more than 50 resolutions. Some of
those resolutions, in particular those relating to the
certification of elections and the protection of civilians,
constitute new and courageous developments that will
remain engraved in the annals of the Council.
I can speak to the Council today thanks to the
determination and efforts of the Ivorian people who
elected me and to the remarkable commitment of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the African Union — whose high
officials, Mr. Faki Mahamat and Mr. Jean-Claude
Brou, I welcome here today — as well as of the United
Nations, through UNOCI. I pay warm tribute to
ECOWAS for the role it played in those initial moments
of crisis recovery.
I express my gratitude to then-Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Côte d’Ivoire at the time of
the crisis, Mr. Choi Young-Jin, for their courage, their
determination and their commitment to defending the
ideals of peace of the United Nations.
On behalf of the Ivorian nation, I pay tribute to the
memory of the 150 peacekeepers who sacrificed their
lives to save others and to bring peace and stability to
my country. I express the appreciation of the Ivorian
6/32

I also pay tribute to a worthy son of Africa — the
seventh Secretary-General of the United Nations — for
his outstanding contribution to peace in the world. That
is Mr. Kofi Annan, the great humanist, who passed
away on 18 August and whose voice and wisdom will
be missed by the great causes of the world.

In 2011, Côte d’Ivoire emerged from a decade of
crisis a post-election crisis. My country was weakened
in economic, social, human and security terms.
Insecurity was widespread. All economic indicators
were in the red, and economic infrastructure and basic
public services were in a state of worrying disrepair.
That situation could have jeopardized the country’s
return to lasting peace and stability if urgent measures
and a comprehensive strategy for reconstruction and
development had not been implemented as soon as the
clashes had come to an end. Recovery became possible
thanks to the restoration of State authority, which
we were able to secure in spite of our four and a half
months of confinement in the Hotel du Gulf in Abidjan,
the economic capital of Côte d’Ivoire.
As has been demonstrated in several situations
considered by the Council, post-crisis reconstruction,
peace and stability depend heavily on the existence
of State structures and institutions capable of fully
performing their functions.
Since 2011, Côte d’Ivoire has based its strategy
for post-crisis reconstruction, peace and stability on
the restoration of its economy, on demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration and on security-sector
reform and reconciliation. We began working on all
those issues while we were confined to the Hôtel du Golf
for four and a half months. The fact that our economy
18-41380

05/12/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

has bounced back so quickly has given the Government
the necessary leverage not only to respond to the
people’s immediate social and security needs but also
to work on the country’s long-term development. That
was what we had in mind when we were designing and
implementing our presidential emergency programme
during those sleepless nights in the Hôtel du Golf,
with the aim of restoring basic social infrastructure,
particularly in fragile rural areas, so as to accelerate
the re-establishment of Government authority in every
region of the country.
We backed up the emergency programme with
national development plans for the periods from 2012 to
2015 and 2016 to 2020, at a total cost of approximately
$72 billion, or almost CFAF40,000 billion, spread over
those years, with major private-sector involvement. The
goal was to have the private sector provide at least 60 per
cent of the financing, because we firmly believe in its
ability to revive the economy and create jobs. Those
investments have enabled a massive transformation
of the economy and brought a growth rate averaging
almost 9 per cent a year between 2012 and 2017. In some
years, in fact, the growth rate has actually reached 9 per
cent, and today it is around 7.5 per cent.
With regard to peace and stability, and with the
support of the United Nations and our financial and
technical partners, we initiated and implemented a
reform of the security sector and a vast and ambitious
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme. The programme cost $200 million, 72 per
cent of which was funded by the State of Côte d’Ivoire,
and has resulted in the reintegration of more than
65,000 ex-combatants. Beyond that process, which
we managed to carry out in three years, the country’s
economic improvement has provided young people and
ex-combatants with many employment opportunities. A
country of 24 million inhabitants has created more than
2 million jobs since 2012. I am sure that the members of
the Council themselves can see the importance of that
job creation.
Besides that, we are continuing to restructure and
modernize the army, the security services and the
judiciary to make them more effective and professional.
At this point, I would like to pay tribute to our security
and defence forces for their commitment to serving
the nation, their professionalism and their respect for
human rights, in particular during the terrorist attack
on Grand-Bassam in March 2016.

S/PV. 8413

On the political front, the Government has taken
almost complete charge of all the elections that have
been held since 2012, including the 2015 presidential
election and the 2016 referendum, which gave Côte
d’Ivoire a modern Constitution that does a much
better job of guaranteeing the rights and freedoms
of our citizens, especially women. All the elections
have helped to consolidate democracy and the
normalization of national political life in Côte d’Ivoire.
Incidentally, we have just concluded a second round of
local elections. The Government has also worked to
strengthen good governance through the establishment
of a high authority for good governance whose mission
is preventing and combating corruption. We have also
funded compensation for victims of the successive
crises we endured, through a process that began in 2015
with the establishment of a special fund with an initial
allocation of CFAF10 billion.
Finally, we have launched several initiatives
to promote and strengthen national reconciliation
and social cohesion, including the establishment of
structures such as a dialogue, truth and reconciliation
commission, a national commission for reconciliation
and the compensation of victims, and a Chamber of
Kings and Traditional Chiefs, based on their role in
settling conflicts and mediating at the local level. In
August, acting on my desire to strengthen reconciliation
and definitively settle the dispute relating to the 2010
post-electoral crisis, I introduced an amnesty law,
aimed at the 800 or so individuals who had been
prosecuted or convicted of offences related to the postelectoral crisis or to offences against State security.
These initiatives have had significant results. Today
all internally displaced persons have returned to their
places of origin and virtually all Ivorian refugees have
returned to Côte d’Ivoire. We live together in peace and
tolerance.
The case of Côte d’Ivoire should encourage the
Council and the international community to take action
when considering other post-crisis situations, however
complex they may be. First and foremost — and here I
completely agree with the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission — post-conflict reconstruction,
peace and lasting stability require a Government that
derives its legitimacy from democratic and transparent
elections. After that, what we found essential was
the establishment and redeployment of a reliable and
trustworthy Administration. Thirdly, what is needed
is a credible reconciliation process and security-

18-413807/32

S/PV.8413

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

sector reform designed to create a professional army
and security services. And the last requirement is an
emergency investment plan both for providing basic
social services and, of course, creating jobs, especially
for young people. That process requires sustained
political and technical support and significant financial
resources, which post-conflict countries do not
have. That is why it is important to ensure that the
international community, and the United Nations in
particular, remains decisively and resolutely engaged
in such countries while evaluating the conditions it
needs for an orderly withdrawal, as was the case in
Côte d’Ivoire.
However, we must recognize that peace, stability
and development in a country emerging from crisis are
also dependent on the regional security environment,
as with my country in West Africa. When we see the
situation in West Africa in general and in the Sahel,
where there is intense terrorist activity in some regions,
we must address those threats together as resolutely as
possible. In that regard, I call on the Council to provide
adequate and sustainable funding for peacekeeping
operations in Africa, especially that of the Group of
Five for the Sahel, an area that continues to be of major
concern for Côte d’Ivoire and all the countries in the
West African subregion.
In conclusion, I want to once again express my
sincere hope that I will see my country’s experience
enrich the recommendations and decisions on States
engaged in the complex processes involved in emerging
from crisis and rebuilding post-conflict. Côte d’Ivoire
is determined to spare no effort in providing help to
that end, and that is why we will provide the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and any other theatre of operations in Africa
that may need our help with contingents that we have
trained and equipped.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I invite His Excellency Mr. Simeon Oyono Esono
Angue, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of Equatorial Guinea, to take the floor.
Mr. Esono Angue (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, I would like to convey the apologies
of His Excellency Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo,
President of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, to the
8/32

05/12/2018

Security Council, as despite his desire to be here he
was unable to participate in today’s important meeting,
owing to previous State-related obligations. He has
instructed me to convey to the Security Council his
greetings of peace as well as his hopes for the meeting’s
success.
We also want to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your country’s assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of December
and on convening today’s meeting to discuss a very
important issue with regard to peace and security in
the world — that of post-conflict reconstruction and
peace, security and stability. We have every confidence
in your ability to carry out this important work. We
also commend and express our gratitude to SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and his entire team for their
excellent and comprehensive briefing, which once
again reflects the commitment of the United Nations to
achieving peace, security and stability throughout the
world. And we welcome His Excellency Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat to the meeting.
In recent times the African continent has been
one of the world’s main victims of armed conflicts.
It continues to be so, and it knows better than anyone
its devastating consequences, in the form of political
instability, poverty, human rights violations, damage
to infrastructure and weakened institutions. Many
African countries emerging from conflicts and wars
have to face multiple challenges in the areas of the
economy, infrastructure, reconstruction, poverty
elimination, employment, education, public health and
social security. In such situations, the international
community should focus its efforts on providing
genuine assistance to the countries affected with the
goal of enabling them to achieve an economic recovery
that prioritizes industrialization, the modernization of
agriculture and the development of human rights, and
in which the establishment of education programmes
takes precedence. Education is an essential component
in every country’s search for economic emergence. It is
also important to recognize that peacebuilding is a longterm, complex and difficult endeavour that in today’s
environment is encountering many new obstacles and
challenges, and that demands serious consideration
aimed at eliciting an appropriate response on the part
of the international community.
We have said before that no conflict can be settled
easily and that peace can never be achievable or
sustainable without the kind of measures that promote
18-41380

05/12/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

inclusive and balanced development for the benefit of
all. The effort expended to resolve a given conflict
must continue at the same level if development is to
be achieved once the conflict has ended. That must
be the absolute priority and inalterable policy goal in
seeking definitive solutions to the world’s problems.
There can be no peace without justice, and in order
to consolidate peace processes and resolve conflicts,
it is important that victims feel that justice has been
done, since policies that permit impunity can engender
vengefulness and hatred. That is why it is important to
properly manage the relationship between maintaining
peace and seeking justice. Humankind has always
longed for the goals of peace and justice, two concepts
that complement and mutually reinforce one another.
Achieving justice is not simply a legal problem. It is
closely linked to other political, economic and cultural
factors. The ultimate goal of justice is stability and
reconciliation, which are indispensable concepts in
the quest for peace and stability, especially in postconflict environments. That process must include the
rehabilitation of our most vulnerable citizens, who are
women and children.
It is crucial to help countries emerging from conflict
to design comprehensive strategies for reconstruction
and sustainable development, tailored to the specific
circumstances of their individual situations. There is no
one-size-fits-all model for peacebuilding. In providing
assistance, the international community must respect
the particular idiosyncrasies of every country, and their
specific points of view must be taken into account, as
they have the greatest interest in their own stability and
reconstruction. The international community must take
that into consideration.
Sustainable socioeconomic development should
be the principal route to building peace and should
also be its ultimate goal. Other important aspects,
such as human rights or the rule of law, must not be
unnecessarily prioritized to the detriment of economic
and social development. The United Nations system
should play a coordinating role so as to promote the
effective implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and give priority to ending
poverty and hunger.
We call on the international community to focus
more intently on the socioeconomic development of
States in post-conflict situations. The security situation
in several West African countries has stabilized in
recent years and is returning to normal. Equatorial

S/PV. 8413

Guinea welcomes those success stories and is confident
that under the impetus of the Governments and peoples
of the region, they will achieve even greater success
on the road to rebuilding and developing the region.
The positive experiences of Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia and
Sierra Leone deserve recognition, as they represent
tangible practical examples of lessons learned and
good practices. Countries in other African regions are
embarking on similar processes. We are hopeful for
their success and call on the stakeholders involved in
the various conflicts to put the overall interests of their
nations first and do their best to achieve stability and
peace for their countries. The consolidation and success
of those processes involve multisectoral actions,
including the reform of armed forces, the promotion
of justice, realistic economic programmes, successful
political leadership and frank and inclusive dialogue,
among other things.
The desire for peace, stability and development
is a common goal and shared aspiration of the States
Members of the United Nations, especially on the
African continent, where wars and conflicts persist.
The need to put an end to those conflicts as quickly
as possible in order to create a secure environment
for socioeconomic development has become the main
priority of the international community, thereby
requiring the significant support and assistance of
the United Nations. The primary responsibility of the
Council in the maintenance of international peace
and security is both irrefutable and irreplaceable.
In that regard, cooperation with the African Union
and regional economic communities is essential to
achieving satisfactory results.
Equatorial Guinea is actively participating in
the intense round of negotiations under way towards
adopting — if possible this month and under Côte
d’Ivoire’s presidency of the Council — a draft resolution
aimed at providing predictable and sustainable funding
through United Nations contributions to African Union
peacekeeping and peace support operations. I wish to
reiterate in this forum the request for the support of all
here present to help make the aspirations of the African
continent a reality.
The equation is simple and clear: we Africans
understand our own environment, which is where
many of the conflicts taking place are bleeding us
and destabilizing international peace and security,
obstructing not only our full development but also
preventing us from harnessing our undeniable potential.

18-413809/32

S/PV.8413

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

05/12/2018

Our partners, on the other hand, have the means that
could generate the necessary impetus to efforts seeking
to bring peace and stability to our continent. That
model of pioneering cooperation promises success and
has every chance of being successful, and we should
not waste this opportunity. Any endeavour to that end
is fully justified.

of former President of the United States of America
George Herbert Walker Bush.

We also encourage Member States to ensure
the full participation of women and young people in
peacebuilding processes. It is widely recognized that
the participation of women is crucial to the success
of economic recovery, political legitimacy and social
cohesion. National and international actors must
recognize the potential of young people as agents of
positive change. In order to achieve that, educational
systems must be rebuilt and young people must
participate and have a voice in the rebuilding of their
societies.

(spoke in English)

To conclude, we would like to remind Member
States that, while partnerships and other forms of
support, such as funding, are of the utmost importance
in post-conflict reconstruction, one of the preconditions
for successful foreign assistance is that those that
provide it should resist the temptation to impose their
preferred solutions upon the receiving country. It is
essential that the countries receiving support determine
their own goals and priorities and establish policies
that are most likely to realize them. A successful
strategy can therefore be developed and implemented
only through realistic and active cooperation between
donors and recipient countries. It is imperative that
donors and partners do not impose upon host countries
the nature, timing and sequence of economic policies,
each of which could result in unacceptable social costs
and the risk of conflict. The Republic of Equatorial
Guinea reiterates its continued support for the work of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the United Nations
in general.
The President (spoke in French): I would ask that
the representative of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
convey my gratitude to President Obiang Nguema
Mbasogo for having appointed him as the representative
of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea.
I now call on Her Excellency Ms. Sigrid Kaag,
Minister for Foreign Trade and Development
Cooperation of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
Ms. Kaag (Netherlands): The Kingdom of the
Netherlands reiterates its condolences on the death
10/32

(spoke in French):
At the outset, allow me to thank the President of the
Republic of Côte d’Ivoire, Mr. Alassane Ouattara, for
having convened this important debate.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
for their contributions to today’s debate.
As we have heard, Côte d’Ivoire is an excellent
example of a country that is no longer on the Security
Council’s agenda, but instead represents a valued
member of the Council. In bringing its experience to
the table, Côte d’Ivoire provides valuable support to
other countries and the Council, as highlighted in the
examples given by the country’s President. Like Côte
d’Ivoire, the Kingdom of the Netherlands believes that
it is essential for the Security Council to focus more
sharply on equitable post-conflict social and economic
development, reconstruction and reconciliation, as part
of the broader international peace and security agenda.
The Council was created to improve the lives of
people — to provide men, women and children with
an opportunity to live their lives in peace and security
and to enjoy sustainable development. And peace and
security are so much more than the absence of armed
conflict. When we ignore that fact, we see war-torn
societies reaching fragile peace deals, only to fall back
into armed conflict when international attention drifts
away. And, as members of the Security Council and the
international community, we find ourselves discussing
missions, mandates and budgets to fix things that
should not have been broken in the first place.
It is in all of our interests to realize that sustainable
peace and conflict prevention require an integrated
approach, one that is sustainable and includes social
and economic development from the outset — that is
essential. But let me underline that the Kingdom of the
Netherlands believes that the most successful form of
prevention is to make sure that there is no need for the
Council to address a particular country situation. That
requires the collective effort of States, the entire United
Nations system and international institutions, be they
financial or social, to tackle the root causes and prevent
instability from going down the line.
18-41380

05/12/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Conflict prevention is the cornerstone of the
integrated foreign policy of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, and it has been a priority during our
tenure on the Council. We have invested in timely risk
analysis on climate change, as well as the failure and
impact of the failure to respect human rights, which
is needed to help not only prevent conflicts from
starting or emerging but also to ensure a sustainable
transition from conflict to peacebuilding and durable
peace. The Joint United Nations-World Bank study
entitled Pathways for Peace: Inclusive Approaches to
Preventing Violent Conflict, highlights the importance
of addressing inequalities and exclusion in ensuring
sustainable peace. I would like to add environmental
sustainability to that list. Three points are crucial in
that respect.
First of all, environmental sustainability is
no longer optional within the menu of economic
development. Over the past year, the Security Council
has seen, in many countries, that climate change, food
insecurity and water stress increase tensions, which
ultimately may lead to conflict. Therefore, efforts to
build up the economy after conflict must take those
challenges into account to ensure resilience, energy
transformation and innovative approaches to achieve
those goals. That is particularly relevant when it comes
to food security, which needs no further elaboration.
This year, all countries around the table have shown the
courage and political will to recognize that fact through
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2417 (2018), on
conflict and hunger. In that regard, I commend the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
for taking up its mandated task earlier this year with
respect to Yemen and South Sudan, the latter a country
that turned seven years old this year and is home to
7 million people at risk of severe food shortages.
But there is also more that we can do as an international
community if we want to more systematically respond
to food insecurity and the risk of famine. We need to
safeguard agriculture-based livelihoods and secure the
means to produce food — even or especially — during
conflict. That requires innovative partnerships that
also include the private sector and, of course, financial
institutions.
A second point we would like to address is inequality.
Economic development must provide opportunities for
all. Women and girls can and will be powerful agents of
socioeconomic change, but we must provide them with
equal opportunities, especially access to education,

S/PV. 8413

inclusive financing and land rights. As for children, the
great challenge is to equip all children in developing
countries — but particularly those in conflict or under
threat of conflict — with the skill sets they need, no
matter the group they belong to or the region they come
from.
An instrument that is often forgotten but very
helpful in reducing inequality in post-conflict societies
is the provision of psychosocial support to all those
who have suffered trauma as a result of conflict. The
Netherlands is proud to announce that it will host
a conference on that particular theme in the latter
half of 2019, drawing attention to the importance of
psychosocial support and the political will to back it,
as well as the financial means and capacity to provide
assistance to those who need it the most and are the
most vulnerable.
Finally, following the principle of leaving no one
behind, in order to ensure that everyone can participate
and no one is truly excluded, societies need to develop
strong and inclusive institutions, strengthen the rule of
law and demonstrate respect for human rights for all.
Access to justice is also the focus of the ministerial
meeting which will be held in The Hague on 6 and
7 February 2019. It is part of the third Justice Task
Force Conference, which the Netherlands co-chairs
with Sierra Leone, Argentina and the Elders.
The rule of law and strong, inclusive institutions
are good for business and for attracting and retaining
investments. It is what makes it possible for a country
to make the transition from an economy of war to
an economy of peace. Respect for human rights is
instrumental in all of that. We have seen time and time
again that disregard for human rights leads to conflict.
That is why we believe the Security Council should
request timely briefings about human rights situations
of concern. And it is why we supported human rights
briefings on Syria, North Korea and Iran.
I would like to conclude by stating that the
Kingdom of the Netherlands stands with Côte d’Ivoire,
and indeed with Secretary-General Guterres, in its
quest to reform the United Nations system. It is our
quest to promote and ensure the implementation of an
integrated approach by all of us and the system, along
with the three outlined pillars. We have the tools to
embark upon that task — the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs), particularly SDG 16 on peace, justice
and strong institutions. They are the ultimate prevention

18-4138011/32

S/PV.8413

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

agenda. Together, it is incumbent upon us to promote
a proactive United Nations system that acts to prevent
conflict in a timely manner through improved risk
analysis and early warning, one that acts to resolve
conflict, including through better peacekeeping. We
need a United Nations system that acts to sustain peace
by ensuring that root causes are properly addressed in all
strategies and mandates and by treating the wounds of
conflict through transitional justice and accountability
for the perpetrators of human rights abuses or through
support for those who have suffered the most.
Those will always be the priorities of the Kingdom
of the Netherlands. I would like to take this opportunity
to express my sincere and personal commitment to
pursue those goals long after our Security Council
membership. We will not stop. We will remain strong
and steadfast, as always, as a partner in peace, security
and justice.
The President (spoke in French): I would ask that
the Dutch representative convey our gratitude to Prime
Minister Rutte of the Netherlands for our debates and
for having appointed her to represent the Netherlands.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to begin by conveying our condolences on
the passing away of former President George Herbert
Walker Bush. We express our sympathy to his entire
family. President Bush was an old friend of the Chinese
people. Over the years, he witnessed and promoted the
historical development of Sino-American relations and
made positive contributions to the friendly relations
between our two peoples.
I welcome you, Mr. President, to New York to
preside over today’s debate. I thank Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, and Secretary-General António Guterres
for their briefings.
China commends Côte d’Ivoire for setting the
theme of today’s debate — Post-conflict reconstruction
and peace, security and stability”. Maintaining
peace, building peace and achieving lasting peace are
important responsibilities of the Security Council. Postconflict countries are now confronted with the pressing
task of economic development. Only when people’s
basic needs are met and their livelihoods guaranteed
can peace be consolidated and a relapse into conflict
avoided.
12/32

05/12/2018

The concept note prepared by the presidency of Côte
d’Ivoire (S/2018/1063, annex) is highly illuminating. As
for the role that the Council should play in this process,
I would like to make the following three observations.
First, it is important to respect the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the basic norms governing international relations. We
must respect the national sovereignty and ownership of
the countries concerned, while helping them to craft a
development path tailored to its national specificities.
Priority should be given to capacity-building, helping
countries achieve early transitions and self-driven
development.
Secondly, equal emphasis should be given to
development and security, and both the symptoms
and root causes of conflicts should be addressed.
Poverty and underdevelopment are the major sources
of conflict. The international community should
comprehensively advance the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, strengthen
global partnerships for development and honour aid
commitments in order to promote sustainable peace
through sustainable development. Due attention should
be given to building institutions, enhancing social
cohesion and progressively allocating more resources
to development areas.
Thirdly, we must enhance the role of the United
Nations in post-conflict reconstruction. United Nations
field offices should uphold their respective mandates.
Those in development areas should focus on fulfilling
their development mandates and attach importance to
strengthening cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations. The international community should
actively support African countries in implementing the
African Peace and Security Architecture Road Map
(2016-2020) and the African Union’s Agenda 2063, and
encourage regional organizations to play an active role
in the reconstruction of post-conflict countries in the
region.
The poor are usually among the most affected and
most vulnerable in the context of conflicts. Accelerating
poverty alleviation and achieving development are
urgently needed for consolidating the post-conflict
peace dividend. As the most populous developing
country, China is deeply aware of the link between
development and people’s well-being. It is our abiding
commitment to share development opportunities and
results with other countries around the world. We
18-41380

05/12/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV. 8413

have actively assisted developing countries, including
those in post-conflict situations, through South-South
cooperation.

achieving lasting peace and common prosperity in postconflict countries and to play a strong role in building a
community with a shared future for humankind.

The Beijing Summit of the Forum on China Africa
Cooperation was successfully held in September. We
were very pleased to see President Ouattara, Chairman
Faki Mahamat and Secretary-General Guterres there.
At the Summit it was decided that China and Africa
would focus on eight major initiatives in the next
three years — industrial promotion, infrastructure
connectivity, trade facilitation, green development,
capacity-building, health care, people-to-people
exchanges and peace and security — in the form of
Government assistance, as well as investment and
financing by financial institutions and companies.
A total of $60 billion in financing will be provided
to African countries. President Xi Jinping’s Belt and
Road Initiative, an international public good offered by
China, has become the world’s single largest platform
for international cooperation.

Mr. Cohen (United States of America): Today the
American people mourn the loss of President George
H. W. Bush, the forty-first President of the United
States of America. We thank the Security Council and
the many delegations and colleagues who have offered
their condolences since his passing. Allow me now to
make a short statement in his memory.

We welcome the participation in the Initiative of
all parties and countries. We are pleased to see the
remarkable achievements that Côte d’Ivoire has made
with regard to its post-conflict reconstruction. In
recent years, its economy has maintained an annual
growth rate of over 8 per cent. China has been actively
engaged in the reconstruction process in Côte d’Ivoire
and has provided support and assistance to the best of
its abilities. Chinese peacekeepers participated in the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire. The projects
in that country that have been completed with Chinese
aid, such as the farmland and water-conservancy
projects and the construction of rural schools, continue
to have a positive impact. The Soubre hydropower plant,
financed by China, became operational in December
2017. It is the largest hydropower station in West Africa
and has generated thousands of job opportunities
for the local community. China will continue to
take concrete actions to support Côte d’Ivoire and
other African countries in their reconstruction and
development endeavours.
Before I conclude, I would like to recall that the
first President of Côte d’Ivoire, Félix HouphouëtBoigny, once said that the dream of humankind should
go beyond simply having a home to live in or a piece
of bread to fill one’s stomach. He said that Africa
should strive to realize the dream of building a greater
human family. Alongside other countries, including
African countries, China stands ready to contribute to

President Bush exemplified a fearless sense of duty
to his nation through his lifelong commitment to public
service. On his eighteenth birthday, he enlisted in the
United States Navy to serve his nation. From his time
as a member of Congress, United States Ambassador to
China, Director of the Central Intelligence Agency and
as President of the United States, he guided our nation
to peace and prosperity. He also shaped a freer, safer
world, including with the United Nations, as SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan’s Special Envoy for the South Asia
Earthquake Disaster and in this very Council as the
United States Ambassador to the United Nations. Here,
he worked selflessly to defend justice and promote
peace.
On a personal note, I had the honour and privilege
to work for President Bush. He was the first sitting
President of my country whom I met personally. I
met him for the first time in New York 27 years ago,
in 1991, during the high-level week of the General
Assembly. He made an indelible impression as a man of
great decency and great dignity. He also left a legacy of
towering foreign-policy achievements. We honour the
legacy of President Bush. His unwavering commitment
to public service and his accomplishments in both war
and peace will continue to inspire generations to come.
I would like to thank the President of Côte d’Ivoire,
Mr. Alassane Ouattara, for having gathered us today to
identify concrete ways in which the Security Council
can support peacebuilding and sustaining peace around
the world. This meeting provides an opportunity to
identify best practices in peacebuilding. It also allows
us to reflect on peacekeeping missions that still have
a long road to travel before peace is restored. It is our
hope that we will leave today with a renewed collective
commitment to working with the United Nations
peacebuilding community to support each country
seeking to transition to a post-conflict environment.

18-4138013/32

S/PV.8413

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The Council spends much of its time addressing
conflicts marked by open fighting, active violence
and significant loss of life. But once the hard work of
achieving a ceasefire has taken hold, such conflicts
often fade from the front pages and from the Council’s
agenda. It is precisely at that moment when the quieter
and arguably harder work begins to heal a society torn
apart by conflict. While that work has historically
been the responsibility of national Governments or
non-governmental organizations, the United Nations
has recently scaled up its capacity to play a leading
role in peacebuilding. The Secretary-General’s move
to integrate the Peacebuilding Support Office into the
Department of Political Affairs was a signal that the
United Nations is seeking to break down institutional
silos and marshal the full expertise of the United
Nations system to complete that task.
The recent report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace (S/2018/43) lays
out a number of important recommendations, including
the development of integrated strategic frameworks,
United Nations Development Assistance Frameworks
and greater United Nations cooperation on the ground.
While some progress has been made, we encourage
the United Nations to push forward on the full range
of proposals. Some of those proposals may require
new resources. We encourage countries to provide
additional voluntary contributions to the Peacebuilding
Fund, but we do not support efforts to tie a percentage
of the peacekeeping budget to the Fund. On the whole,
greater coordination and communication across the
United Nations peacebuilding system should not require
additional financial outlays.
We face a collective challenge in our approach to
peacebuilding. Our statements today will all support
the peacebuilding efforts of the United Nations.
However, we may all have different, undefined visions
of what that work should encompass in each context. To
remedy that, we encourage the United Nations, in each
specific instance, to identify a vision for an achievable
end-state and align resources and stakeholders to get
there. Optimally, the United Nations would identify
that desired end-state at the start of a peacekeeping
mission and pair it with an achievable exit strategy.
In that scenario, once the mission had fulfilled its
mandate, United Nations efforts would transition to
peacebuilding support. Côte d’Ivoire and Colombia are
two models of United Nations peacebuilding that have
benefited from a clear vision of a more peaceful future.
14/32

05/12/2018

In June 2017, the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) closed its doors after having
successfully provided support to the peace agreement
of 2003 and having helped to address the 2010 political
unrest. We made the right call as the Council to
terminate a mission whose objective to stabilize a postconflict country had largely been accomplished. Côte
d’Ivoire also recognized that the closure of UNOCI
meant not that its task had been completed, but that the
hard work of peacebuilding was just beginning. The
Peacebuilding Commission has been actively engaged
across the country, from standardizing identification
documents and formalizing citizenship rights, to
organizing election-focused civil-society dialogues.
The strong coordination among the Security Council,
the United Nations peacebuilding community, the
Government and local citizens has enabled Côte
d’Ivoire to overcome conflict and restore peace.
President Ouattara, we recognize the difficult task that
you faced, as well as your critical leadership in building
a more peaceful society.
With regard to Colombia, the Council approved
a narrow and specific mandate for a United Nations
special political mission tasked with the monitoring
and verification of the ceasefire between the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia–Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) and the Government of Colombia.
As a result, the FARC-EP relinquished thousands of
weapons and explosives, became a political party and
participated in recent elections. The successor mission,
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
now monitors security guarantees and the reintegration
of FARC-EP members into Colombian society.
Colombians in the Mission are now working towards
the full implementation of a comprehensive peace plan.
They are embracing a collaborative, inclusive approach
that is already delivering dividends for peace.
In our support for post-conflict reconstruction
efforts, the United States has identified several
common best practices. First, the international
community should treat a peace deal or a ceasefire as
only the first step in a long process. Secondly, postconflict reconciliation takes time and cannot be rushed.
Thirdly, local actors in societies as a whole must buy
into the transition. President Ouattara, you worked with
those goals in mind as you supported your country’s
transition. The Peacebuilding Commission understands
those dynamics and is well positioned to support that
critical work elsewhere.
18-41380

05/12/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV. 8413

Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in French): Mr. President, I would like to thank
and congratulate your country for having convened this
important meeting. Your presence today among us is a
testament to the importance that Côte d’Ivoire attaches
to peacebuilding.

We believe that the process of the institutionalization
of such cooperation should continue in order to
ensure fluid communication that allows for direct
consultations, better coordination of early-warning
mechanisms, conflict analysis and common strategies
developed on the basis of comparative advantages.

(spoke in Spanish)

Peacebuilding is closely tied to the important
links between good practices, lessons learned and the
strengthening of interactive dialogue and coordination
between the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission. We are in full
agreement with the strategic plan devised by the
Peacebuilding Support Office, which is aimed at
ensuring that complementarity among peace and
security initiatives, national ownership and gender
and youth inclusivity, at all levels, form vital building
blocks in the elaboration of a strategic partnership in
the quest for effectiveness and flexibility, with a view
to bringing about lasting peace.

We also welcome the presence of Secretary-General
António Guterres. We thank him and Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat for their briefings.
In 1992, the term “peacebuilding” appeared for the
first time in Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali’s
report “An Agenda for Peace” (S/24111), which defined
it in its paragraph 21 as “action to identify and support
structures which will tend to strengthen and solidify
peace in order to avoid a relapse into conflict”, with
the goal of overcoming the devastating effects of war
and armed conflict and building peace processes. That
launched one of most important and pivotal undertakings
of our Organization, one aimed at strengthening postconflict States. Peacebuilding is indeed a key tool, in
the framework of ownership and accountability on the
part of Member States, for addressing, in an appropriate
manner, challenges pertaining to the restoration of State
order, the rehabilitation of administrative structures,
the restoration of domestic security and the rule of law,
and, of course, development.
On the other hand, to fully build peace, it is
necessary to address the root and structural causes
of conflict. It is also pivotal to foster a common
understanding of the factors that trigger conflict,
sharing information garnered from early-warning
mechanisms regarding potential conflict, devising
conflict-prevention mechanisms, coordinating joint
actions and ensuring mutual support throughout the
various stages of conflict response and management.
As we have stated on several occasions, cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations is key. The
relevance of such cooperation is reflected in the work
of the African Union, through the Peace and Security
Council and subregional organizations, as their efforts
have made possible significant progress in conflict
prevention, which is facilitated when such bodies share
with the United Nations their views on the situation and
in so doing promote a better understanding of a crisis
and a unified approach to its settlement.

In our view, our Organization and the international
community as a whole has learned an important
lesson: that of Côte d’Ivoire. In that country it has been
demonstrated that peacekeeping operations can achieve
their goals in a context where the host Government is a
reliable partner that is deeply committed to upholding
its responsibility towards the citizens whom it serves
and to whom it has a duty — making it clear, of course,
that peacekeeping operations cannot substitute for
national political will or national efforts to overcome
the problems that triggered the conflict.
We would underscore the fact that in recent years
Côte d’Ivoire has made tangible progress on all fronts
owing in large part to the efforts of its citizens, with
the support of the United Nations and other partners.
The political climate has stabilized following three
peaceful electoral processes, allowing for economic
growth and for all citizens to share in the dividends
of peace, and strengthening the processes of securitysector reform and of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants into civil
society. We also underscore the importance of ongoing
efforts to promote reconciliation and social cohesion,
so as to enhance citizens’ perception of the security
forces deployed in their communities, which is a crucial
element at the post-conflict stage.
We agree that there can be no development without
peace or peace without development. We therefore
believe that it is vital that the international community

18-4138015/32

S/PV.8413

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

as a whole pool and redouble its efforts to bolster
synergies between peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities when necessary, in the framework of the
relevant remits, in order to achieve our fundamental goal
of the maintenance of lasting peace in the framework of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
To conclude, we would stress that lasting peace
should be sustained through the use of political tools
in order to reach negotiated solutions. We strongly
urge that efforts to achieve peace be made by means of
multilateral mechanisms, in strict accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
wish to begin by conveying our condolences to the
people and the Government of the United States on the
sad passing of former President George H.W. Bush. We
wish to honour his memory and legacy.
We welcome the convening of this debate and the
important briefing delivered by Secretary-General
António Guterres. We wish also to welcome your
presence, Mr. Ouattara, and to thank you for your
important message. We are also grateful for the presence
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and of other high-level officials.
Peru agrees with other speakers that have
underscored the importance of sustained, inclusive
economic growth and post-conflict reconstruction to
building and sustaining peace. We would in particular
underscore the good practices of Côte d’Ivoire.
Achieving lasting peace requires broad national
consensus around the issue of the reconstruction of
affected areas as well as economic revitalization.
Opportunities should be created and tangible benefits
ensured for the population, in a spirit of equity and
transparency, promoting the return of displaced persons
and ensuring that priority attention is accorded victims.
It is therefore necessary to consolidate inclusive and
accountable institutions that are capable of reducing
inequality and ensuring access to justice and the rule
of law, in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development.
The international community must support efforts
to achieve these goals, on the understanding that there
can be no development without peace or peace without
sustainable development. In that connection, we would
underscore the important role of the United Nations,
particularly its Peacebuilding Commission.
16/32

05/12/2018

In that context, we would stress three points.
First, we would underline the need to foster
social cohesion and political consensus. Rebuilding a
conflict-affected country must have as a foundation the
reweaving of its social fabric. There can be no lasting
peace if we do not at the same time make progress
in the area of national reconciliation, guaranteeing
access to justice and promoting human rights. It is
therefore vital to foster the emergence of new political
stakeholders that are committed to rebuilding a shared
future. The participation of women and young people in
this process is key.
Our second point is that we must make transparent
investments in inclusive and resilient infrastructure.
Post-conflict reconstruction requires major investments
in infrastructure, which creates jobs and relaunches the
economy. However, in order to attract the necessary
investments and safeguard the legitimacy of the national
institutions charged with promoting them, preserving
the rule of law is crucial. Citizens must be able to see
that infrastructure is being rebuilt with transparency,
without corruption or discrimination, for the benefit of
all sectors of society. Moreover, given the increasing
frequency of natural disasters related to climate
change, it is vital to ensure that any new infrastructure
is resilient, in keeping with the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030.
My third point is the responsibility of the
international community. The proliferation of conflicts
in today’s world is linked to growing inequality within
and among countries, as well as to vulnerability to global
phenomena such as climate change, violent extremism
and transnational organized crime. Modern conflicts
are also characterized by their cross-border impact.
Refugee crises have serious political consequences for
many countries. Fluctuations in natural-resource prices
affect all economies. In an irreversibly interdependent
world, it is vital to bolster multilateralism and
international cooperation and develop partnerships
with regional and subregional organizations, financial
institutions, the private sector and civil society in order
to effectively respond to the challenges that we all face.
In that light, and to conclude, we wish to emphasize
that supporting the reconstruction of conflict-affected
countries and in general promoting sustainable
development is not only an end in itself but also an
effective and efficient means of preventing conflicts
and maintaining international peace and security.
18-41380

05/12/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Mr. President,
to the Security Council.
First and foremost, I would like to echo the words
of condolence that my colleagues have expressed to the
American people and to the family and friends of the
forty-first President of the United States of America,
the late Mr. George Herbert Walker Bush. He served
his country faithfully, first on the field of battle during
the war years and then in high governmental positions.
Mr. Bush did much to strengthen Russian-American
cooperation on matters of international security and
earned sincere respect in my country.
We thank you, Sir, for organizing today’s Security
Council meeting on post-conflict peacebuilding, and
we are grateful to the Secretary-General for his views
and for his serious attention to peacebuilding issues.
For many years United Nations peacebuilding
assistance has been an important tool for helping States
to deal with the consequences of conflicts. As a rule,
countries that have survived the hot phase of a crisis
do not have the human and institutional resources to
resolve the whole complex of problems facing them
on the security, law-and-order and socioeconomic
development fronts, as well as other pressing issues,
which is why they may need international assistance.
At that sensitive stage, the main tasks for a country
are establishing national reconciliation and restoring
safe living conditions for its population as a whole, as
crucial conditions for preventing relapses into armed
conflict and transitioning to sustainable development.
Many issues related to the early stages of
peacebuilding are included in the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. In fulfilling their
main task of helping to advance peace processes,
peacekeepers make an important contribution to
establishing the initial conditions for the start of a fullfledged recovery. However, it should be understood
that peacebuilding’s key efforts take place at the
national level. Those efforts do not consist in a short
list of objectives but in a long process that begins
before the drawdown of a United Nations mission and
continues afterwards right up until all the goals have
been successfully implemented. In that way it differs
from international peacebuilding assistance, which
is necessary only until the host State achieves selfsufficiency — that is, the ability to exist without critical
support from the international community.

S/PV. 8413

As we have seen in practice, the help that is
provided during a conflict is not always effective, since
it is often impossible to consolidate its positive results
and the processes have to be started again from scratch
in the event of a relapse into conflict. International
peacebuilding assistance therefore gets results only
when it is accompanied by a sustainable truce and a
political process.
While the primary responsibility for developing and
implementing peacebuilding strategies unquestionably
belongs to Governments, all national stakeholders
should recognize their shared responsibility for peace.
It is difficult to conceive of effective post-conflict
recovery, let alone development, without constructive
contributions from all segments of society.
As for international support, it should be based on
the Security Council’s fundamental resolutions 1645
(2005) and 2282 (2016), which outline the basic principles
of peacebuilding — the consent of host States, respect
for its sovereignty and political independence, and
the recognition of national ownership and leadership.
Needless to say, international peacebuilding assistance
should aim to enhance host States’ national capacity and
independence, not act as a substitute for their functions.
With regard to the work of the United Nations in
the area of peacebuilding, it is important to strengthen
its internal coordination and maintain its division of
labour in accordance with the existing mandates of
the various Secretariat departments. In developing
peacebuilding assistance programmes, it is important
to bear in mind that each country’s situation is unique
and each has its own reasons for where it has ended
up. A one-size-fits-all approach simply will not work.
Every option for international peacebuilding assistance
must have the unconditional support of the host State or
risk exacerbating existing problems.
The key role in coordinating peacebuilding
assistance belongs to the Peacebuilding Commission.
That intergovernmental advisory body’s potential has
still not been fully realized. It would be particularly
helpful to the Security Council to have information
about the national peacebuilding priorities of States
whose situations are on both bodies’ agendas. The
transmission of that information and the Commission’s
unanimous advice could be an excellent complement
to the Secretary-General’s reports without duplicating
them. That would be especially helpful during the
transition from the peacekeeping to the peacebuilding

18-4138017/32

S/PV.8413

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

stage, or when the Council reviews missions with a
view to increasing their cost effectiveness. Needless
to say, where financing United Nations peacebuilding
assistance is concerned, an increase in predictability
would not go amiss. We believe that the best way
to encourage Member States to make voluntary
contributions is by ensuring proper transparency and
accountability in the use of the funds provided.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that we
firmly believe that only an impartial and transparent
approach to peacebuilding and sustaining peace can
ensure the effectiveness of efforts in this area. It is
important to provide that assistance in support of the
efforts of host States themselves without imposing
ready-made solutions or unnecessary mentoring. The
main purpose of peacebuilding is to help States get
back on their feet as soon as possible and manage their
sustainable development issues independently.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to convey our
deepest condolences following the death of Mr. George
Herbert Walker Bush, forty-first President of the United
States of America, a great patriot and a humble servant
of his nation and also a faithful friend of Poland. Our
sympathies go especially to his friends and family.
(spoke in French)
I would now like to thank the Secretary-General,
as well as the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, for their very informative briefings.
I would also like to congratulate Côte d’Ivoire on its
assumption of the Council presidency for the month of
December and to wish you every success, Mr. President,
as well as to commend the Chinese delegation for its
work during the month of November.
(spoke in English)
For more than 70 years, since the founding of the
United Nations, building sustainable peace has been
the holy grail of the international community. We have
worked very hard to find it and to fulfil the dreams
of so many, but so far to no avail. There have always
been new challenges and obstacles, such as conflicts
and violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. In order to tackle them, we should
deploy a broad spectrum of activities within the
competencies of all the Organization’s three pillars
of peace and security, development and human rights,
which are all interlinked and mutually reinforcing. We
cannot ensure long-term peace and security without
18/32

05/12/2018

addressing development and human rights. When they
are connected, they are stronger and more effective,
and that is why I would like to focus on those issues.
First, with regard to the peace and security pillar,
peacebuilding and sustainable peace are a fundamental
condition for development. To that end, the United
Nations should comprehensively address conflicts
by using every available instrument, from prevention
through peace settlement and peacekeeping to
comprehensive post-conflict restoration.
We should all underline the importance of sustaining
peace
through
multidimensional
peacekeeping
operations, so as to strengthen national ownership
and capacity and seek greater coherence among
United Nations system actors, including through joint
platforms such as the global focal point for the police,
justice and corrections areas in the rule of law in postconflict and other crisis situations.
Let me now turn to the second pillar: development.
The complex nature of challenges in post-conflict areas
requires the combining of forces to target economic,
political and social inequalities, using needsbased structural interventions and reforms, social
inclusiveness, reintegration and policy advice. It is
essential that the needs of the vulnerable, who suffer as
a result of conflict, not be ignored.
Furthermore, it is imperative to build resilient
societies that are economically and socially empowered.
Our own role in this regard should include sharing
responsibility and proving our solidarity with those in
need. However, humanitarian aid alone will certainly
not be enough. National and local actors need to assume
responsibility and leadership to the greatest extent
possible.
The role of Governments is essential to
strengthening investment in human development,
including providing better-quality education and access
to health care, both of which will contribute to a higher
level of development, while equal access creates the
opportunity for all to prosper. Policies should facilitate
the implementation of universal, adequately funded
health-care systems, and provide free and universal
primary and secondary education.
It is crucial that discrimination against ethnic and
religious minorities in the labour market and in access
to public services be prevented. Policies should support
18-41380

05/12/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

incoming populations by providing necessary basic
socioeconomic services.
That brings me to my third point: human rights.
There is no successful peace process without full
respect for human rights. Respect for human rights
means social cohesion. Every member of a society has
the right to be equal and secure. Non-respect for human
rights in many parts of the world creates instability.
Young people also have a place in the human rights
pillar. When young people in a region experience
great frustration and desperation, the stage is set for
destabilization. Fostering the participation of young
people is crucial for effective implementation of the
peacebuilding and sustaining peace agendas. Equally
important is the empowerment of women. Women’s
meaningful participation in all aspects of peace and
security is critical.
In conclusion, sustainable peace can only be
achieved when all segments of society are empowered
and included on an equal basis. Countries in postconflict transition periods need to develop adequate
capacity to take responsibility for their own
development, security and stability. In this regard,
Poland congratulates the people and the Government
of Côte d’Ivoire on the progress they have achieved in
the country’s post-conflict transformation, which is
a cornerstone for long-lasting peace and stability and
economic prosperity.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank President
Ouattara for travelling to be with the Security
Council today.
I would join other speakers in expressing
my personal condolences as well as those of my
Government and of the Queen on the death of President
George H.W. Bush, whom I had the honour to meet a
number of times. He was indeed a great statesman.
As the President and Mr. Faki Mahamat did, it is also
worth noting once more the passing earlier this year of
Kofi Annan, another great statesman who worked very
closely with President Bush. Both of them had at the
heart of what they were trying to achieve everything
that this debate is about today. I therefore thank the
Côte d’Ivoire delegation for putting it on our agenda.
I thank the other Ministers for coming to join us at the
Security Council.
I think that it is very good that we have been able
to have the benefit of Côte d’Ivoire’s own experience.
Too seldom in the Security Council do we hear of its

S/PV. 8413

successes. We wish the Government of Côte d’Ivoire
well in everything it has achieved, and long make it
continue. We salute all the reforms that Côte d’Ivoire
has brought in.
Another piece of good news that the Council was
able to participate in recently concerned the lifting of
sanctions on Eritrea. This kind of success in Africa is
very much welcome.
A number of speakers have drawn attention to
the fact that two-thirds of the armed conflicts that
ended in the early 2000s relapsed within five years. It
is therefore vital that we remain focused, not just on
resolving conflicts, but on sustaining peace in the long
term.
I would like to focus my remarks on three key
lessons today. First, and as other speakers have noted, a
political settlement needs to include the full spectrum
of society, including women, including the Polish focus
on human rights, including what the Dutch Minister
said about women and girls and education. All of this
is vital if peace is to be sustainable. We need to be
bold in this approach. We recognize that it can often
be extremely difficult in the aftermath of a conflict to
be magnanimous and reach out to all sectors of society.
Nevertheless, it is a very critical element. In the British
experience in Northern Ireland, we believe that we
were able to accommodate the interests of diametrically
opposed armed groups in the political process that has
brought two decades of peace.
It is important also that we engage with elites and
that we encourage them to take the lead, rise above
political, ethnic and religious divides, and take tough
choices for the benefit of all of their citizens. It is all
on our minds that the peace talks in Yemen are about to
start. We look to all participants to approach these talks
constructively and in a spirit of compromise.
Secondly, post-conflict power structures and
institutions need to be fully representative and
legitimate. Fair power structures that broaden inclusion,
accountability and transparency over time are more
likely to reinforce a sustainable peace. That said, there
must be a political agreement. We are all aware that in
Iraq, Libya and Afghanistan unresolved power struggles
undermined ambitious State- and institution-building.
Syria becomes even more important in this context. We
will not be able to consider providing reconstruction
assistance absent a political settlement.

18-4138019/32

S/PV.8413

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

It is also worth pointing to the virtues of patience.
The World Bank estimates that making meaningful
improvements to institutions takes a minimum of 10
years. The Peruvian representative spelled out the
vital importance of getting things like infrastructure
right. The conclusion from this idea is that longterm, predictable and coordinated support from the
international community as a whole is obviously going
to be critical if peace is to last.
Bosnia represents a successful example in that
particular context. The success of its transition to a
peaceful State over 20 years after the Dayton Accords
is noteworthy. This is due in part to the collaboration
and support of the Security Council, the European
Union, NATO and many others, including civil society
and non-governmental organizations. In fact, Paddy
Ashdown, who was the High Representative in Bosnia,
had three particular lessons for managing the end of a
conflict. The first was “Do the rule of law first.” His
second rule was “Have a plan and stick to it.” And his
third rule was “Be prepared for it to take a long time.”
We often approach things in haste, and obviously do
not condone backsliding, but the key is to keep moving
forward with patience.
Thirdly, we need to ensure that basic needs are
provided in the short term, and support economic
development in the long term. The provision of basic
needs is vital to the alleviation of immediate postconflict humanitarian needs, but also to ensure
political processes have the capacity to develop and
thrive. Development itself needs to be inclusive and
create widespread benefits to ensure groups are not
inadvertently left behind.
The International Labour Organization’s Decent
Work Agenda and its Programme on Jobs for Peace
and Resilience rightly emphasize the importance
of employment-centred recovery and accessible
opportunities for society to grow and for cohesion.
That all helps to reinforce the Sustainable Development
Goals. If we want to ensure that the 2 billion people,
who live in countries affected by conflict are not
trapped in a cycle of violence, then we must address
instability head-on. It was very good to learn of the
African Union’s Agenda 2063, which will clearly have
a key role to play in that regard.
It is impossible to touch on all the ramifications
of this important subject, but I thank you again,
Mr. President, for sharing Côte d’Ivoire’s experience
20/32

05/12/2018

with the Council and for starting a very thorough
discussion of the issue.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Mr. President, I would like to welcome and
thank you for your presence with us today in the
Security Council. We are grateful to the delegation of
Côte d’Ivoire for convening this important meeting. We
also thank Secretary-General Mr. António Guterres and
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, for their valuable briefings.
The post-conflict period requires an integrated
strategy in the political, security and economic
spheres — which are considered fundamental pillars
for building and sustaining peace and vital factors
for promoting security and stability. Many important
elements are required to achieve that, first and foremost
political determination, security, stability, sustained
funding for early recovery, and lasting medium- and
long-term financial investment.
The presence of Côte d’Ivoire in the Council today
as a non-permanent member bears witness to the
importance of the post-conflict period. Côte d’Ivoire
was able to successfully emerge from a serious longstanding crisis once the appropriate political and security
environment was established. That was achieved
after Côte d’Ivoire undertook serious and effective
economic reforms in a number of vital sectors — such
as agriculture, industry, mining and investment — that
helped avoid a relapse into conflict. The Peacebuilding
Commission also played a crucial role in building
peace and reconstruction efforts, alongside the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, whose mandate
ended in June 2017, as well as the peacekeeping troops
of the Economic Community of West African States.
Of the most important steps that should be taken
by a State in any post-conflict situation is to embrace
national ownership of the peacebuilding operation,
as well as sincere political will to achieve national
reconciliation while addressing the root causes of the
crisis. The vital role played by the Dialogue, Truth
and Reconciliation Commission of Côte d’Ivoire,
which was established in September 2011 and tasked
with investigating human rights violations during
the conflict, contributed immensely to creating an
environment of social harmony and political stability
by bringing to justice those responsible for violations
of human rights and perpetrators of crimes against
18-41380

05/12/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

humanity and war crimes. That was a crucial component
of the successful transition process in Côte d’Ivoire.
Experience has shown that, following the increase
in military conflicts and the difficulties and obstacles
faced by the Organization in certain cases, the efforts
of the United Nations need support from regional
organizations, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. It is also clear that regional
organizations are in many cases better-suited to deal
with conflicts owing to the fact that their operations are
less costly, both materially and in human resource terms.
They are also more capable of analysing information
pertaining to maintaining peace and security in their
respective regions. Close cooperation and effective
partnership between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations are therefore the first
line of defence for the United Nations in helping to
resolve regional problems, prevent their expansion and
avoid threats to international peace and security.
States emerging from conflicts often face economic
deterioration, destroyed infrastructure and an inability
to provide basic services to their peoples. In order
for those States to recover and be able to withstand
hardships, the role of international financial institutions
is crucial, first and foremost that of the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund. Those institutions,
in cooperation and partnership with the United
Nations and its specialized agencies, including the
Peacebuilding Fund, can contribute to reconstruction,
development and job-creation. Those States would then
be able to discharge their functions in the best possible
way, with a view to achieving sustained economic
growth, which represents the best guarantee to avoid a
relapse into conflict.
In conclusion, we reiterate our full support for
the Secretary-General’s reforms and his efforts to
restructure the peace and security pillars within the
Secretariat. Achieving Goal 16 of the Sustainable
Development goals is important in order to establish
peaceful societies and build effective institutions.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Let me
begin by again expressing to our American friends, as
President Macron did, our deepest sympathies on the
passing away of President George Herbert Walker Bush.
It is a great honour for all of us to host President
Alassane Ouattara today. On behalf of France, I would
like to warmly thank you, Mr. President, and through
you Côte d’Ivoire’s presidency of the Security Council,

S/PV. 8413

for having taken the welcome initiative of holding
this crucial meeting on the issue of post-conflict
reconstruction. The fact that this initiative originated
from Côte d’Ivoire lends it particular importance
and significance.
Côte d’Ivoire is in many ways a model of postconflict recovery and reconstruction, as well as a source
of inspiration for our work here at the United Nations.
This meeting also comes at a pivotal moment for the
United Nations, with the major reforms under way to
the peace and security pillar, which are helping to put
the sustainability of peace at the heart of our efforts.
In that regard, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for their important briefings, engagement
and exemplary partnership.
I will address the three inseparable dimensions
of post-conflict reconstruction, namely, economic
reconstruction, the reconstruction of institutions and
the reconstruction of what I call living together.
My first point concerns the reconstruction of the
economic fabric. Repairing what the war destroyed is
the first urgent need following a conflict, that is, roads,
infrastructure and the means of production. It is about
allowing economic life to resume. Montesquieu said
that the natural effect of trade was to bring about peace.
History has repeatedly shown us that the resumption
of economic exchanges is often the best guarantee of
lasting peace. The remarkable resurgence of economic
activity that Côte d’Ivoire experienced after a decade of
civil war is emblematic in that regard. The courageous
decisions that you took, Mr. President, greatly
contributed to that.
No peace is secure if people do not feel concrete
effects in their daily lives. We must also see to it that
no one is left behind during the crucial phase of postconflict reconstruction, including ensuring that growth
is sufficiently inclusive so as not to sow the seeds of
tomorrow’s conflicts. Post-conflict reconstruction
relies on the mobilization of all actors, including
international financial institutions and multilateral and
bilateral donors, but also the private sector. That is how
France is directing its efforts as part of its prevention,
resilience and sustainable peace strategy, adopted this
year, which aims to involve the private sector. It is
indeed one of the keys to economic recovery, which is
essential to lasting peace. Everyone sees that there can
be no lasting peace without sustainable development.

18-4138021/32

S/PV.8413

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

That is why post-conflict reconstruction must fully
integrate the objectives of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
My second message is about rebuilding institutions.
We know that good governance, which of course is itself
one of the main goals, also allows societies and States
to be more crisis-resilient. Post-conflict reconstruction
therefore also means the rebuilding of institutions. It is
fundamentally about rebuilding the social contract, in a
spirit of Government accountability and the restoration
of the rule of law. All the examples demonstrate that
judicial institutions have a major role to play in this phase
of reconstruction: victims must be able to again turn to
the courts with the requisite trust. That is one of the
keys to success. The processes of security sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration are
often also essential to rebuild an inclusive, law-abiding
army and to return to the State the monopoly on the
legitimate use of force. As President Ouattara recalled,
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire provided
valuable support to the Ivorian authorities in that area.
My third message is about what I referred to earlier
as rebuilding living together. After a conflict, especially
after a civil war, it is society itself that must be repaired
and rebuilt by working to reconcile yesterday’s enemies.
That is why peace must be prepared for as early as
possible, ideally from the beginning of the conflict.
In that spirit, we fully support the Secretary-General’s
reform of the peace and security pillar, which is aimed
at better calibrating the mandate of peacekeeping
operations and preparing the political solution from
the start of a crisis. I also commend the valuable work
of the Peacebuilding Commission, as a complement to
the work of the Security Council. To succeed, we must
also act at the community level in order to facilitate
reconciliation on the ground. What happens on the
ground is always the gauge of peace. The Peacebuilding
Fund is an extremely effective tool for carrying out
targeted actions in that regard. Although they are not
always visible, they nevertheless remain essential to
community reconciliation.
I
also
welcome
the
Secretary-General’s
determination to focus more on young people and
women, the latter often being the first victims of
conflict. In that respect, I welcome your commitment,
Mr. President, to the equality of women and men
and the fight against gender-based violence.
Discrimination, which perpetuates violence, must
be combated without mercy in and of itself, but also
22/32

05/12/2018

because it slows the reconstruction process. Women
play an irreplaceable role in re-establishing links and
working for reconciliation; but they can exercise that
role only if they are guaranteed a safe environment in
which their voice is heard. Similarly, involving young
people in the peace process means giving a voice to
future generations and creating the conditions for a
more lasting peace.
France is fully committed, at the bilateral and
multilateral levels, to working for conflict prevention
and peacebuilding, particularly in the crucial phase
of post-conflict reconstruction. For example, France
has set up a fund for peace and resilience to support
recovery from crisis and restore social cohesion in four
regions: the Sahel, the Lake Chad basin, the Iraq-Syria
zone and the Central African Republic. The fund, which
is partially financed by a tax on financial transactions,
is endowed with €100 million per year, an amount that
will increase to €200 million annually by 2020.
Before concluding my remarks, I would like to echo
your call, Mr. President, as well as that of Chairperson
Moussa Faki Mahamat, concerning African peace
operations. As President Macron reaffirmed in his
address to the General Assembly in September (see
A/73/PV.6), France fully supports the initiative of the
African Union aimed at the adoption of an ambitious
draft resolution on African peace operations before
the end of the year. That essential initiative has been
carried forward by the African Union and the Security
Council for several years now. Significant progress has
been made since the most recent resolutions adopted
on the subject, whether in terms of contributions to the
African Union Peace Fund — up to $74 million — or the
achievement of human rights compliance frameworks.
Our common understanding of the added value
of African peace operations and their necessary
complementarity with United Nations peacekeeping
operations has been strengthened. Today they play
a major role on the African continent. It is therefore
time to recognize the important efforts undertaken by
the African Union and its member States, including
the commitment to finance 25 per cent of African
peace operations, and allow those operations to enjoy
predictable and sustainable financing from United
Nations mandatory contributions.
The President (spoke in French): I ask the
representative of France to convey my gratitude to
President Macron for his message to me yesterday.
18-41380

05/12/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I wish to join
others in expressing our condolences to the people
of the United States for the loss of former President
George Herbert Walker Bush.
(spoke in French)
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this debate on post-conflict reconstruction.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
their insightful remarks.
Let me start by commending the Government
and the people of Côte d’Ivoire for their resilience
and efforts to restore peace and stability and boost
economic growth. Positive stories like your country’s,
Mr. President, are rare and far apart, but they serve as
an important source of hope and guidance to many.
Your experiences have also been valuable for our work
in the Security Council, including in our joint work
regarding the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel.
Post-conflict reconstruction and transition can
be successful only in the context of broader political,
economic and social reforms. As this debate has
illustrated, there is a multitude of challenges that need
to be addressed, including the effects of sexual and
gender-based violence. The resulting trauma, stigma,
poverty and poor health can echo across generations.
In response, socioeconomic integration support is
necessary to restore community cohesion. Ensuring
justice and reparations for victims remains crucial
across the board, as well as being a key component in
restoring the fabric of society.
The foundation for such restoration and
reconstruction is laid by peacekeeping operations.
Formulating
appropriate
mandates
with
a
comprehensive political solution at the core is key. An
exit plan anchored in national development planning
processes to ensure national ownership needs to be
formulated at an early stage of the mission. Integrated
work across the United Nations system is also needed to
ensure that transitions are just that — a transition rather
than a termination of one kind of support and possibly
the beginning of another for reconstruction.
Predictable and coherent peacebuilding during and
after transitions, including how we finance the system,

S/PV. 8413

is another vital part of a comprehensive approach.
The Peacebuilding Fund is an important tool in that
regard. The commitment, as formulated in the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative, to support United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes is also critical.
As Chair of the Liberia configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), Sweden had the
honour to work with Liberia through its transition. As
the peacekeeping mission withdrew, the PBC worked to
support and enhance national ownership, as well as to
sustain international attention, including by mobilizing
financial and political support. Many important lessons
were learned from the transition in Liberia, and the
PBC can now also function as an important platform to
share those lessons.
Peace and security must not be seen in isolation,
but rather as closely connected to socioeconomic
factors that drive both resilience and fragility. The joint
United Nations-World Bank report Pathways for Peace:
Inclusive Approaches to Preventing Violent Conflict
identifies exclusion, inequality and power imbalances
as principal causes of conflict and violence. In many
countries, growing inequalities fuel social unrest and
impede sustainable economic growth. Consequently,
policies that strive towards equality, in its broadest
sense, create more peaceful societies.
As the economy starts to grow again in the
aftermath of conflict, it is important to pay attention
to rising economic inequalities. Sweden has introduced
the multi-stakeholder initiative Global Deal for
Decent Work and Inclusive Growth, developed in
cooperation with the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development and the International
Labour Organization. It builds on the notion that a
well-functioning social dialogue and sound industrial
relations are key elements for coming to terms with
a wide array of societal challenges by forging trust
and paving the way for inclusive growth. As part of
recovering, it will at some stage also be important to
gain capacity to participate in the international trading
system in a free, equitable and sustainable way. To
eradicate poverty and promote sustainable and inclusive
growth and development, we need more trade, not less.
As the Secretary-General pointed out earlier,
we need a holistic approach. The 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, as well as the African
Union’s Agenda 2063 and the sustaining peace
resolutions, offers that framework for long-term

18-4138023/32

S/PV.8413

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

05/12/2018

approaches to building societal resilience and tackling
the root causes of conflict. It is all there. We know what
needs to be done, and we have to do it. In line with
the sustaining peace resolutions, we must move away
from the sequential approach to conflict, which often
results in silos of conflict prevention, humanitarian
action, human rights, peacekeeping, peacebuilding,
the rule of law and development. And, of course, the
women and peace and security agenda is not an add-on,
but must be universally integrated if sustaining peace
is to be achieved. We thank the Secretary-General for
constantly reminding us how critical it is to link the
three fundamental pillars of the United Nations, namely,
peace and security, development and human rights.

the Soviet Union and will be remembered dearly in
our country.

To end where I started — with the Peacebuilding
Commission — the PBC is well placed to contribute
to this holistic approach; it should be better utilized.
The PBC is a key adviser to the Security Council when
it comes to sustaining peace. The Commission can
convene actors for broader peacebuilding perspectives
spanning across the peace and security-human rightsdevelopment nexus. It can also assist with regional
approaches, work to strengthen national ownership and
develop partnerships for innovative solutions.

My delegation would like to offer the following
observations based on Côte d’Ivoire’s lessons.

In its current role as coordinator between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission,
Sweden has worked to deepen the dialogue between
the two bodies. The PBC has made important progress
on targeted context-specific advice and engagement in
transitions and mandate discussions. We believe that
there is broad support for consolidating those gains and
solidifying the cooperation between the Council and
the PBC. In order to capture best practices and further
deepen the dialogue between the Security Council and
the PBC, Sweden has presented a draft presidential
statement on the Commission’s support to the Council’s
efforts on sustaining peace. We look forward to Council
members’ constructive engagement on that initiative.
Sweden will continue its cooperation for successful
transitions and reconstruction and, by doing so, also
remains committed to the sustaining peace agenda.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, on behalf
of the Government of Kazakhstan, my delegation joins
others in conveying our deepest condolences to the
United States and its people on the passing away of
a great statesman, former President George Herbert
Walker Bush. He was the one who recognized the
independence of Kazakhstan after the dissolution of
24/32

We warmly welcome you to the Chamber,
Mr. President, and congratulate you on chairing your
delegation’s important signature event. We also thank
the Ivorian presidency for highlighting the importance
of peacebuilding and sustaining peace and giving us an
opportunity to learn from its experiences, which range
from emerging from a long conflict to holding a seat on
the Security Council. We join others in commending
this great accomplishment. We also express our
gratitude to His Excellency Mr. António Guterres and
His Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat for their
commitment to bringing sustainable peace to Africa.

Conflicts today are accelerating at an unprecedented
pace and intensity and are aggravated by the many new
emerging threats — terrorism, extremism, weapons of
mass destruction, organized crime, all forms of illegal
trafficking, migration, refugee influxes, human rights
violations, unmitigated climate change, deep-seated
poverty and multidimensional injustices. Therefore,
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Secretary-General’s new agenda for peace, Action for
Peacekeeping, and reforms provide us with the most
viable way forward. They should further reinforce
regional plans, such as Agenda 2063 and the Silencing
the Guns in Africa initiative, which must be supported
by the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Support Office.
Hence peacebuilding and sustaining should be a
priority, through a strategic and coherent approach for
conflict-prone and -affected countries, from the first
early warnings and not as a post-conflict intervention.
International attention must be paid to prevention.
As United Nations efforts in Côte d’Ivoire proved,
we must also overcome prevailing fragmentation and
silo-like strategies within the United Nations system
itself. The focus on laying the foundation for enduring
peace in some challenging areas is critical, such as
democracy-building, national security, the rule of law,
local governance, public administration, economic and
financial structures, social services and reconciliation.
Mediation, negotiations and confidence-building
measures between the sides involved to resolve
protracted, as well as newly emerging, conflicts are the
building blocks of the peacebuilding architecture. They
18-41380

05/12/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

are best achieved through coordinating the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representatives and
Envoys, in conjunction with regional and subregional
organizations, as well as the World Bank and African
and European development banks. Bilateral donors and
international aid agencies make a vital contribution,
supported by South-South, North-South and triangular
cooperation, to capacity- and institution-building and
the reintegration of regional and national economies.
Similarly, the changing nature of conflicts demands
a new, robust and multidimensional strategy that
combines peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustainable
development. Such a strategy should include climate
mitigation and the conservation of precious natural
resources. Those ultimate goals also call for a review
of how we shape our mandates and implement them
by broadening the concept of peace and stability
from State-centred security to people-oriented
security — from purely military to non-military
security, which includes food, water and energy
security — the key drivers of peace. In that process
of sustaining peace and reconstruction, the women,
youth, peace and security agendas must be overarching
and is most crucial. In that regard, Kazakhstan firmly
supports predictable and sustainable funding of United
Nations-African Union-led peacekeeping operations
and proposed a draft resolution on that matter.

S/PV. 8413

the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and eliminate that scourge by 2045.
The First and Second World Wars began as a result
of the lack of negotiations and dialogue, which still
persists 73 years after the United Nations was founded.
My President therefore recently proposed that the
main world actors and peace guarantors — such as the
United States, Russia, China, the European Union and
others — address their differences and find political
solutions together to threats to international security
and sustainable peace. Kazakhstan believe that such a
platform can have a great impact on peacebuilding and
sustainable peace.
The United Nations plays an irreplaceable role as
the most universal, representative and authoritative
Organization in the world. Kazakhstan will steadfastly
continue to support the United Nations as the premier
security envoy and forerunner of development.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): Let me also join others in
expressing our deep condolences to the Government
and the people of the United States on the passing away
of former President George Herbert Walker Bush. He
will be remembered as a great diplomat, who sat in
this Chamber, and a courageous statesman who, par
excellence, exceeded any measurement of dignified
leadership of our time.

Based on our two-year experience in the
Council — which included visiting the Horn of
Africa, the Great Lakes region, the Lake Chad basin,
Afghanistan, Colombia and Myanmar — or even taking
the example of Côte d’Ivoire, Kazakhstan proposes
strengthening multilateral system-wide coordination
to improve the interlinkages between development and
security with investments in education, job creation,
health care, a revamped regional approach and the
United Nations Delivering as One. This strategy is
not new, but a robust combination of those elements
can create a universal model to address conflicts and
sustain peace in other parts of the world.

We thank Côte d’Ivoire for organizing this debate
on peacebuilding and sustaining peace. We are very
pleased, Mr. President, to see presiding over this
important meeting. It is a demonstration of your very
real commitment to this issue, as the leader of a country
that has successfully managed to build and sustain
peace. We are also very pleased to see Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union (AU)
Commission, with us here today, and thank him for his
statement on the African perspective on this topic, to
which we fully subscribe. We also thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres for his remarks and the
reforms that he is advocating.

We can also envisage creating a new United
Nations paradigm for peacebuilding, sustaining peace
and development with reflections from my President’s
Manifesto: The World. The 21st Century, which proposes
just economic structures among countries to eliminate
conflicts by the United Nations centennial in 2045. In
addition, through its code of conduct towards achieving
a world free of terrorism, Kazakhstan has succeeded in
building a platform of 80 countries to jointly implement

It has been rightly emphasized time and again
that peace, security, development and human rights
are inextricably linked. We therefore require closer
collaboration among United Nations organs and other
stakeholders to build peace and inclusive societies. It
is absolutely essential to have coherence in policy and
operations across the whole United Nations system.
We must do away with all institutional fragmentation.
Only then will we be able to ensure that peacebuilding

18-4138025/32

S/PV.8413

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

and sustaining peace are placed at centre of the United
Nations work and activities. That is exactly what the
Secretary-General’s reform aims to address. When
it becomes operational, hopefully next month, it will
undoubtedly strengthen our ability to deliver effective
and efficient operational support in the field. It will
be particularly valuable in those complex security
situations where both peacekeeping and special political
missions are deployed.
Equally, an important element will be to fully utilize
the potential role of the Peacebuilding Commission
to convene, link and advise with principal organs of
United Nations. We need to scale up the Commission’s
contribution to make sure that it promotes an integrated,
strategic and coherent approach. It is also encouraging
to note the comprehensive advice that the Commission
provides to the Security Council on regional and
country-specific issues. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s reform in that regard, which underlines
the hinge role of the Peacebuilding Support Office
in linking peace and security with development and
humanitarian efforts.
My country believes that, in order to achieve our
aim to sustain peace, we must enhance partnerships
with other stakeholders. That should include regional
and subregional organizations, international financial
institutions, national Governments and various civil
society and private organizations. We should make that
active across the whole spectrum of the conflict cycle,
including prevention, peacekeeping, special political
missions, conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
Complementing the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the African Union’s peacebuilding efforts
on the continent are in line with the implementation of
the AU Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development
Framework, as well as the African Solidarity Initiative.
We also hope that the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security will play its relevant role in further
strengthening that cooperation for peacebuilding and
sustaining peace in Africa. Similarly, we welcome the
signing of the African Union-United Nations Framework
for the Implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development between the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission. We certainly hope that, together
with the Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security, that will offer a comprehensive guide
26/32

05/12/2018

for United Nations and African Union cooperation in
conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
There is a crucial need to strengthen the synergy
between the work of the Peacebuilding Commission
and the African Union to address some of the difficult
peace and security challenges that we continue to
face, whether with regard to mission transition, early
peacebuilding, reconstruction efforts or other areas. In
that regard, we welcome the Peacebuilding Commission
and the AU Peace and Security Council annual joint
consultative meeting in New York in July. In addition,
we would suggest that it is time for such meetings to be
institutionalized and regularly scheduled.
Let me emphasize that peacebuilding and sustaining
peace must ultimately be the responsibility of national
efforts. It must be owned nationally and inclusively.
Sustaining peace requires the involvement of the
Government, the private sector and civil society. The
success of Côte d’Ivoire’s transition in peacebuilding
shows how it can be done. That has been an exemplary
case. The role of the United Nations and international
partners must always be to help build regional, national
and local capacities to sustain peace. Building the
necessary confidence among Member States will
provide the means to facilitate the implementation
and operationalization of this new approach to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
I would like to take this opportunity to call on
members of the Council to fully support the initiative
on African-led peace support operations, which we
believe is an integral part of our efforts to strengthen
collective security through peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. We have no doubt that that will be
welcomed and successful.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Burkina Faso.
Mr. Tiendrebeogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in
French): Let me join other delegations in celebrating
the memory of President George Herbert Walker Bush
and expressing our deepest condolences to his family
and the entire American people.
At the outset, and on behalf of the President of
Burkina Faso, Mr. Roch Marc Christian Kaboré, I would
like to congratulate Côte d’Ivoire on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of December
and wish it every success in that role. I commend the
Ivorian presidency for convening this high-level debate
18-41380

05/12/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

on the important topic of post-conflict reconstruction
and peace, security and stability. Through me,
President Kaboré also wishes to express his gratitude
to you, Mr. President, for having invited him to this
debate. He regrets not being able to attend due to his
work timetable, but wishes Côte d’Ivoire every success
in steering the work of the Council.
I wish to commend China for its presidency of the
Council in November and for convening, on 15 and
20 November, respectively, a meeting on the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (see S/PV.8402)
and a briefing on peace and security in Africa (see
S/PV.8407). I also like to thank the Secretary-General
and Chairperson Faki Mahamat of the African Union
Commission, for their informative briefings.
The success of post-crisis reconstruction plans
represents an important catalyst for sustaining peace,
stability and security in affected countries. The
example that Côte d’Ivoire has set in that regard is
rich in lessons learned. It has been able to secure a
definitive exit from the crisis and implement a policy of
post-crisis management. That is the result of the vision
and leadership of President Alassane Ouattara and the
Ivorian Government, which, at an early stage, identified
and implemented appropriate measures to carry out the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
and ensure national reconciliation and reconstruction.
All of those measures enabled the Security Council,
by its resolution 2284 (2016) of 28 April 2016, to end
the mandate of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire on 30 June 2017, which stands out in the
history of United Nations missions, most of which end
up with an indefinite mandate and duration. That is
a good example for countries emerging from conflict
situations — particularly in Africa — and for the
Security Council itself.
As the Council is aware, conflicts and crises are
often multifaceted. Although not involved in an open
armed conflict, Burkina Faso experienced a political
crisis in 2014 and 2015 that deeply undermined its
institutions and greatly strained its social peace and
cohesion. During that period, the country benefited
from the mobilization and support of the Economic
Community of West African States, the African
Union and the United Nations, through the funds — in
particular the Peacebuilding Fund — that supported
security sector reform projects, national reconciliation
and the resilience of our population. After a period of
transition, the newly elected Government had to take

S/PV. 8413

that situation into account in the implementation of its
2016 presidential programme towards a national plan
for economic and social development. The plan was
established in strict accordance with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and Agenda 2063 of the
African Union.
With the structural transformation of our economy
through the reform of our institutions and the
modernization of our administration, the development
of human capital and the revitalization of the most
buoyant sectors of our economy and labour market, the
plan seeks to make Burkina Faso a country of strong
growth, sustainability, resilience and inclusivity, while
creating decent jobs, in order to consistently respond
to the many needs of our people. Our ultimate goal is
to create the conditions for inclusive and sustainable
development and thereby eradicate the root causes
of crises.
However, as Council members are aware and
as you recalled, Mr. President, since 2015 Burkina
Faso has been confronting a recurrence of terrorist
acts that have undermined peace and security in the
country, the wider Sahel and the entire West African
subregion. Aware that a military response alone is not
sufficient to defeat terrorism, in 2017 the Government
adopted an emergency plan for the Sahel that seeks
to ensure that people in the northern regions and the
Sahel — particularly women and young people, the
most vulnerable and susceptible to radicalism and
extremism — have access to basic the social services,
employment, education and infrastructure necessary
to their well-being. The emergency plan therefore
represents a holistic response to the dual socioeconomic
and security challenges faced in that part of the country.
The establishment of sustainable peace must also
and above all be articulated around the prevention
of factors for internal State fragility. Conflicts are
costly to States and the international community.
There is therefore a need to prevent such conflicts
from breaking out, persisting or deteriorating. That
requires a combination of national, subregional,
regional and international efforts, including those of
the United Nations and strategic partners, with the full
participation of women, which is indispensable.
This is the appropriate forum in which to commend
the important report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace, and all of the
proposals therein (S/2018/43). The report particularly

18-4138027/32

S/PV.8413

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

highlights the important role played by regional and
subregional organizations in the peaceful settlement
of disputes and welcomes African peacebuilding
initiatives, such as the African Union’s policy on
post-conflict reconstruction and development and the
African Solidarity Initiative.
To come back to sustaining peace at the national
level, and fully aware that it is the primary responsibility
of States themselves, the Government of Burkina Faso
maintains an ongoing inclusive dialogue with its social
partners towards a peaceful social climate. The creation
of the High Council for Social Dialogue and the High
Council for Reconciliation and National Unity, as well
as the determination of our Government to see the truth
flourish, justice prevail and reconciliation take place in
a calm atmosphere, form part of that policy.
I recall that, like other Sahel countries, Burkina
Faso faces the challenge of preserving peace as a result
of terrorist attacks, of which the use of improvised
explosive devices has become the most recent mode
of operation. It is therefore natural that our countries
play an active role in initiatives to establish security
in the Sahel, particularly through the establishment of
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel). The success of the Force is imperative and a
source of hope for the affected populations. We therefore
wish to reiterate the necessity that it be placed under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. This
is also an opportunity for my delegation to reiterate its
appeal to the United Nations and all partners to ensure
the necessary funding not only for the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force, but also the Priority Investment Programme,
which was established by the Organization and will
hold its first donor and partner coordination conference
tomorrow, 6 December, in Nouakchott.
The challenges of peacebuilding and peacekeeping
reveal the intrinsic links between peace and security,
stability and development. It is therefore necessary
that we adopt a holistic approach to the issue if we are
to implement appropriate and sustainable responses.
As was the case in Côte d’Ivoire, real political will,
resolve, vision and leadership, and especially national
ownership of the crisis resolution process, as well as the
clearly defined support of partners in the international
community as a whole, are undoubtedly key to success
and will prevent post-conflict countries from falling
back into crisis.
28/32

05/12/2018

The President (spoke in French): I would ask the
representative of Burkina Faso to convey my gratitude
to President Roch Marc Christian Kaboré for having
appointed him as the representative of Burkina Faso.
I now give the floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda) (spoke in French):
The delegation of Rwanda joins other delegations in
conveying its heartfelt condolences and those of our
Government to the Government and the people of the
United States of America on the passing of President
George H. W. Bush. His memory and exemplary
qualities have been extolled here by several delegations
and we align ourselves with their remarks.
(spoke in English)
It is my distinct honour to convey the congratulations
of His Excellency Mr. Paul Kagame, President of
Rwanda and Chairperson of the African Union, to Côte
d’Ivoire and to you, President Ouattara, for presiding
over the Security Council for the month of December.
We also thank you for presiding over today’s debate.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, for their briefings.
Rwanda fully associates itself with the statement
delivered by Mr. Faki Mahamat.
As many have said today, the theme of today’s
debate is of central importance to our continent.
Your country, Mr. President, serves as an example
of a nation successfully rising out of conflict. Africa
and Rwanda are very proud of what Côte d’Ivoire has
achieved within a very short period. The theme for
this debate — “Post-conflict reconstruction and peace,
security, and stability” — reflects a reality of what is
taking place not only in your country, but also in several
African countries. It is therefore worth taking stock of
lessons learned from your own experience.
While the balance sheet of Africa’s peace and
security dividend is not where we, as Africans, would
like it to be, there are major positive developments that
point to a bright future for the continent. Let me touch
on a few continental issues before turning to a few
observations based on Rwanda’s experience.
The economic and political consequences of violent
conflicts are enormous. They outweigh by far any
conceivable investment in post-conflict reconstruction.
Those consequences include the loss of life, property
18-41380

05/12/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

and infrastructure; the collapse of State institutions;
insecurity; and often, a completely fractured social
fabric. That is what we are dealing with when we look
into what is needed to ensure that countries emerging
from conflict do not relapse into conflict. We have
observed that nations that have been successful in postconflict reconstruction efforts share four pillars.
The first is leadership — leadership that is ready
to make difficult decisions to help people live and work
together again, side by side, as mentioned by another
delegation. Leadership is central in making sure that
post-conflict reconstruction will hold. It must be able
to convince people that even if they can exact revenge,
it is the worst idea ever for post-conflict reconstruction.
The second pillar is ownership. Post-conflict
reconstruction processes can be sustained only if they
are owned and led by people, local communities and
Governments that concretely and tangibly express the
will to truly rebuild and bring people together.
The third pillar is institutions. We cannot
overemphasize the centrality of strengthening State
institutions to make them inclusive and accountable.
The fourth pillar is partnerships, as has been
emphasized by many speakers. It is in the fragile phase
of the few years after the end of armed conflict that the
support of the international community is needed more
than ever. However, that support should be informed by
national efforts and support national priorities.
I would now like to share a few observations
regarding Rwanda’s post-genocide reconstruction
experience that, we believe, could also be useful to other
nations. In the early reconstruction phase, we focused
our efforts on three pillars. The first — security, peace
and stability — is the foundation for any possible
reconstruction effort. The second pillar is building our
institutions, which were completely destroyed. The
third pillar is ensuring that people will feel and soon
enjoy the development dividend.
The ultimate aim of any post-conflict reform is to
create conditions conducive to self-sustaining economic
growth and human development while addressing the
major risk factors for conflict relapse. One of the key
concerns must be ensuring inclusive processes. Very
early on, we ensured that women and youth were fully
included in the reconstruction process.
The linchpin for post-conflict reconstruction is
ensuring the restoration of security for all citizens and

S/PV. 8413

the stability of the nation. In the early years, we were
able to demobilize and reintegrate more than 10,000 excombatants into our communities. Those ex-combatants
had been involved in truly damaging conflict, such as
killings. Re-engaging them and reintegrating them into
our communities was not an easy undertaking because
it also required the Government to ensure the security
of local communities. However, those are the kinds
of decisions that I was alluding to when speaking of
leadership that is courageous enough to make some very
difficult decisions and choices. You have demonstrated,
Mr. President, that you are ready to make those difficult
choices and decisions.
The second priority for Rwanda in post-conflict
reconstruction was to rebuild our institutions in such
a way that they would deliver services to all citizens.
In order to achieve that, the rule of law had to take
root, the fight against impunity and corruption had to
succeed, and we needed to ensure that all people were
served equally.
The reconstruction process must be inclusive if it
is to take hold. We know that bringing women to peace
processes adds value to the agreements reached. It is
equally important to bring women on board and ensure
that they are involved from very early on in postconflict reconstruction efforts.
Finally, people have to enjoy the development
dividends of security and stability, which must bring
changes to people’s living standards if they are to
really support the Government’s efforts. In that sense,
supporting countries that are emerging from conflict
situations by investing in their development efforts is
really an investment in maintaining peace and security,
not only in those countries but in the regions to which
they belong. Through the investments made in Rwanda,
we have been able to lift millions of people out of poverty.
Within a very short period, we have been able to double
the country’s life expectancy. Those investments must
therefore be concrete and very tangible.
All the elements that I have briefly mentioned are
complementary, not sequential. They must all be put
in place and they cannot be put in place by countries
alone. While they of course require the ownership
and leadership of countries, they also require support,
including the support of this institution. Rwanda’s
experience shows that when we invest in people,
inclusive and accountable institutions and sustainable

18-4138029/32

S/PV.8413

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

05/12/2018

development, peace, security and stability can become
an irreversible reality.

open debate (see S/PV.7750) on peacebuilding in Africa,
Japan has three principles on peacebuilding in Africa.

The President (spoke in French): I would ask the
Rwandan representative to convey our gratitude to
President Paul Kagame of Rwanda, Chairperson of the
African Union, for having responded to our invitation
by appointing her to represent Rwanda.

First, there is an emphasis on people in the field.
That belief goes hand in hand with the concept of human
security, which, in partnership with all the relevant
actors, aims at protecting and empowering vulnerable
individuals with a view towards prevention.

I now give the floor to the representative of Japan.

Secondly, living standards must be improved
through inclusive economic development. It is
crucial to ensure that all people can benefit from the
peace dividend.

Mr. Bessho (Japan): I join others in expressing our
deep condolences to the people of the United States for
the passing of President George H. W. Bush, the fortyfirst President of the United States of America.
I would like to express my appreciation to Côte
d’Ivoire and President Alassane Ouattara for convening
and presiding over this very important debate. It is
an honour to be given a chance to speak here today.
We believe that this discussion will help keep up the
momentum for peacebuilding and sustaining peace,
which is one of the most important issues for Japan.
Let me also express my gratitude to SecretaryGeneral Guterres and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, for
their insightful briefings. I also thank the speakers
before me for sharing the experiences of their own
countries, which, I believe, has enriched today’s
debate immensely.
Japan believes that peace is not a transitory thing
such as a ceasefire or peace agreement, but rather
involves the continuous maintenance of security and
stability long after an agreement is signed. A year ago
this month, during its presidency of the Council, Japan
convened an open debate (see S/PV.8144) that focused
on the peace continuum. Speakers at that debate
highlighted the importance of taking a comprehensive
and integrated approach by embracing perspectives
of the peace continuum, as well as the humanitarian,
development and peace nexus.

The third principle is tolerance of diversity. While
emphasizing universal values, Japan also respects the
importance of ethnic diversity and local ownership.
These principles are in line with the basic philosophy
of the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD): ownership and partnership. In
the run-up to TICAD VII, which will be held in Japan
next August, we hosted an eminent persons group to
which we invited five former presidents of African
countries to participate, and we discussed the challenges
and measures towards the realization of peace and
stability in Africa. We believe that Côte d’Ivoire is a
good example of the peacebuilding and sustaining peace
model. It is with great pleasure that Japan is currently
implementing a project to promote reconciliation and
trust between that State and its people by developing
infrastructure and deploying experts.

In order to achieve peace, security and stability
in post-conflict countries, it is essential to build the
State’s capacity and institutions and to strengthen
trust between the State and its people. Peacebuilding
and sustaining peace has become an area of high focus
across the United Nations system and in particular
within the Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.

While we have taken many steps to advance
peacebuilding and sustaining peace, there is still
much to be done. How can we best utilize the
Security Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and
bilateral and multilateral ties in order to implement
peacebuilding and sustaining peace? How can we
leverage our efforts in an effective manner to make a
difference on the ground? While there is no silver bullet
that can solve all the issues at once, today’s debate
offers an opportunity to have a deeper discussion on
how to move that work ahead. That is why I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. For its
part, Japan will continue its support, which includes
contributions of both financial and human resources,
in order to enhance peacebuilding and sustaining peace
in the world.

As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan stated
in 2016 when he presided over the Security Council’s

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Senegal.

30/32

18-41380

05/12/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Mr. Niang (Senegal) (spoke in French): I join the
other speakers before me in reiterating, on behalf of
the people of Senegal, our deepest condolences to the
delegation of the United States upon the passing of the
prominent statesman and great figure of our time, the
late President George Herbert Walker Bush.
Mr. President, let me convey to you the enthusiastic
regards of your friend and brother, His Excellency
Mr. Macky Sall, President of Senegal, who, for the
reasons he personally explained to you during your
recent stay in Dakar, was unable to take part in this
important debate. He also asked me to once again offer
you his warm congratulations on the Ivorian presidency
of the Security Council and on your choice of such a
relevant theme for today’s debate, “Post-conflict
reconstruction and peace, security and stability”.
I would also like to pay special tribute to the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. António
Guterres, for his strong commitment and judicious
reforms and initiatives to promote peace and security
in the world. I pay the same tribute to His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, for his leadership in the effective
engagement of that organization in African situations,
whether they are theatres of conflict or theatres of postconflict. I also welcome the presence of the President of
the Commission of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), Mr. Jean-Claude Brou, and
commend the important work that ECOWAS is carrying
out in promoting peace and stability in our subregion.
I cannot think of a country that would be better
suited to lead today’s debate than Côte d’Ivoire. Indeed,
that beautiful country — which was temporarily
thrown off course by a crisis that almost wiped out
its solid political and institutional foundations — was
able to resist and overcome. Today, it has restored its
rightful place in the community of nations in the most
wonderful way possible. Senegal is linked to Côte
d’Ivoire by close ties forged by history and determined
by our inescapable common destiny. We are proud to
have taken part in the normalization process of the
situation in Côte d’Ivoire, first, within ECOWAS, at the
outbreak of the crisis, and then, within the framework
of United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, until the
end of its mandate.
Lessons learned from post-conflict reconstruction,
particularly in Africa, reveal that the countries concerned
are generally politically fragile, their institutions

S/PV. 8413

are often weak, their economies are vulnerable, their
young people are facing unemployment and their
infrastructures often need to be rebuilt. The challenges
these countries face throughout the peacebuilding
process are colossal. Their needs in terms of assistance
are equally enormous, especially with respect to
electoral assistance, reform of the justice and security
sectors, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR), the strengthening of the health and education
systems, and the recovery of economic activity and
job creation.
For the most part, these are countries where
everything needs to be rebuilt following the ravages of
war, which, beyond the lives lost and the buildings and
infrastructures destroyed, shake the very foundations
on which these States are built. As a result, postconflict reconstruction remains a broad issue of
great complexity. Adequately undertaking postreconstruction therefore requires an approach that is
comprehensive, as the Secretary-General said earlier,
as well as coordinated, and must take due account of
the many security, political, institutional, economic and
financial challenges, among others. All these factors
are, of course, inextricably linked.
Beyond national reconciliation, stabilizing the
security situation in a post-conflict country is certainly
a prerequisite for the rest of the reconstruction process.
The example of our dear neighbour, Mali, with which
we share a common destiny, clearly reveals the
negative impact that security problems can have on
post-conflict recovery efforts. Stabilizing the security
situation must therefore remain a priority in actions
undertaken in this context. That is why, in addition to
DDR activities, we must also combat the circulation of
arms and restructure the defence and security forces
into republican forces capable of ensuring order and
security in those countries.
While post-conflict reconstruction requires
significant resources over long periods of time,
funding for peacebuilding activities remains limited,
irregular and unpredictable. If peace is to be sustained,
the restoration of security must go hand in hand
with economic and social development. The lack
of sustainable and predictable funding is a major
impediment to the implementation of national postconflict reconstruction programmes. The process of
developing such programmes is fortunately increasingly
taking into account the principle of national ownership
and the involvement of all national stakeholders.

18-4138031/32

S/PV.8413

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

It is therefore necessary to emphasize the importance
of maintaining and strengthening the support provided
to countries transitioning towards peace so that
they can continue to benefit from the attention of
the international community, especially in terms of
sustainable and predictable funding. This means that
the commitments made at donor conferences, which are
often slow to materialize, must be fulfilled.
The example of the successful transition in Côte
d’Ivoire reminds us that the success of that critical
phase of peacebuilding is a fundamental element in
preventing relapses into conflict and a guarantee for the
return to lasting stability. The transition to sustainable
peace is a most demanding undertaking that requires
early planning, which must take due account of the
conditions and objectives to be achieved in order
to allow any peacekeeping operation to succeed. In
this respect, it is necessary to ensure from the outset
that peacekeeping missions can create the conditions
necessary to a smooth transition, including drawdown
and withdrawal, without compromising efforts aimed
at achieving the long-term goals of peace and stability.
To that end, peacebuilding activities should be
developed from the earliest stages of a mission, orienting
efforts towards strengthening national capacity,
governance and the rule of law, while tackling the
deep structural and socioeconomic problems that these
countries often face and promoting the maintenance
of effective political dialogue and coordination among
the various stakeholders. Above all, it is important to
work towards the creation of conditions conducive to
the transfer of functions to the countries concerned
at the time of the peace operation’s withdrawal.
Admittedly, this is a very difficult endeavour, but also
a very achievable one, as evidenced by the successful
experience of your country, Mr. President, as well as
Sierra Leone and Liberia, among others.
Various speakers today have highlighted efforts
undertaken at the international, regional and subregional
levels to help conflict-affected countries find their way
back to sustainable stability. However, these efforts are
often undertaken by various actors whose interventions
are not always well coordinated or in harmony, which
limits their impact on the ground. Therein lies the
advantage of the concept of sustaining peace, the
cross-cutting dimension of which calls for the building
of synergies — especially among the various relevant
actors — to develop coherent and holistic strategies and
approaches for promoting lasting peace.

32/32

05/12/2018

In this vein, the strategic partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union and its
regional organizations must be strengthened in order
to maximize their full potential for sustaining peace.
This implies, inter alia, greater interaction between
the Peacebuilding Commission and the relevant
organs of the African Union in order to develop better
coordination and streamline efforts on the ground,
thereby enhancing complementarity and eliminating
duplication. This also requires joint assessments of the
nature of the challenges to peace and security in Africa,
which are becoming increasingly complex.
Finally, there must be ongoing dialogue in
order to best harmonize support for countries on the
peacebuilding agenda.
The President (spoke in French): I ask the
representative of Senegal to thank President Macky
Sall for his hospitality and kind words addressed to me.
Before adjourning this meeting, I wish to thank
the members of the Security Council, the international
community and the countries we invited to attend for
sending their representatives, as well as the members
and non-members of the Security Council that spoke
today. I also wish to extend special thanks to my
brothers Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat and Mr. JeanClaude Brou for coming to be here with us today.
This debate has been particularly rich and
enriching. I have learned a great deal by listening to
today’s speakers. I too would note that reconstruction
and reconciliation are long-term endeavours. We need to
get to work; we cannot let ourselves believe that we have
already won the battle. Relapse is a very real possibility
and we must remain highly vigilant. The Government
and the people of Côte d’Ivoire will greatly benefit
from the important statements, comments and remarks
made today. The resolutions that will emanate from our
presidency in relation to peacekeeping will be beneficial
for everyone, particularly for the African continent. We
will endeavour to provide appropriate solutions.
I would like to highlight that this has been a
wonderful moment for me and for the people of Côte
d’Ivoire. We are very proud to have had this opportunity,
for which I thank the Council both personally and on
behalf of my delegation.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

18-41380
