S/2015/85

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 February 2015
Original: English

Letter dated 29 January 2015 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 2149 (2014), by
which the Council established the United Nations Multidimensional I ntegrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).
By the aforementioned resolution, the Security Council decided that, as from
15 September 2014, MINUSCA would initially comprise up to 10,000 military
personnel, including 240 military observers and 200 staff officers, and 1,800 police
personnel, including 1,400 formed police unit personnel and 400 individual police
officers, in addition to 20 corrections officers.
I am pleased to report that, since the adoption of the resolution , MINUSCA
has deployed some 75 per cent of its authorized uniformed personnel. This includes
the deployment of 9 of the 10 infantry battalions and 260 staff officers and military
observers, as well as the generation and ongoing deployment of nearly all the
necessary enablers for the military component. In addition, 7 of the 10 formed
police units and 159 individual police officers are currently deployed. It is
anticipated that MINUSCA will reach 90 per cent of its full strength by April 2015,
including 10 infantry battalions and 10 formed police units, with the exception of
those units for which pledges have yet to be received or accepted, including attack
helicopters, a C-130 aircraft and special forces.
The rapid operationalization of MINUSCA alongside the efforts of the French
Operation Sangaris forces and the European Union Force in Bangui has resulted in a
significantly improved security situation, especially in the capital. The phased
deployment of MINUSCA in Bangui and progressively throughout the co untry has
been focused on targeting those areas where civilians have been assessed, jointly
with humanitarian partners, to be at most risk, in particular in the central and
western areas. In Bangui, through an innovative joint military and police presence,
the task force has been instrumental in improving day-to-day life by providing a
renewed sense of security through active patrolling and efforts to prevent a
deterioration in the security situation. MINUSCA has also contributed to the arrest
of more than 240 individuals throughout the country, including high-profile
members of armed groups and criminal networks alleged to have committed serious
crimes. The relative improvement in the security situation in the capital has been
vital to ensuring the continuation of the political process that will culminate in the
presidential and legislative elections planned for July and August.

15-01370 (E)

030215

*1501370*

S/2015/85

Those improvements notwithstanding, the security situation remains volatile
and clashes between anti-Balaka and ex-Séléka elements continue, while criminal
activities aimed at, among other things, controlling the country’s natural resources
are increasing. Pockets of vulnerable Muslim communities remain under nearly
constant threat and in dire humanitarian conditions, despite the eff orts of the
international forces.
In response to the situation, and in keeping with its flexible and robust
approach, MINUSCA has taken some steps to recalibrate its force deployment.
Following the violence in Bangui in October 2014, MINUSCA strengthened the task
force in Bangui in order to secure the capital and critical infrastructure, including
with quick-reaction capability. Doing so has, however, left fewer troops available to
deploy outside Bangui, including in the north-east, which is an ex-Séléka
stronghold. It has also required committing the force reserve to tasks in Bangui,
thereby limiting the ability of MINUSCA to respond flexibly and rapidly to
emerging crises throughout the country.
In addition, MINUSCA has had to dedicate 280 police personnel to the close
protection of senior Central African Republic officials. Those tasks, which are
currently being performed by two formed police units, have left the police
component of MINUSCA overstretched. This has hampered its ability to carry out
its mandated activities, including those relating to the implementation of the urgent
temporary measures, and to deploy beyond Bangui as planned. As I indicated in my
report to the Security Council of 28 November 2014 ( S/2014/857), additional
corrections officers are also needed to cover the operational and security needs
arising from the implementation of the urgent temporary measures and the
reopening of prisons outside Bangui.
I would therefore request the Security Council to authorize an increase of
750 military personnel and 280 police personnel for MINUSCA, in order to enable
the deployment of an additional infantry battalion and two formed police units,
bringing the complement of formed police units back to 1 0, as originally envisaged.
An additional 20 corrections personnel are also needed to perform the above mentioned tasks.
It will be especially important for the additional capability to be made
available in time to enhance security before, during and aft er the electoral period,
including in the light of the announced drawdown of the Operation Sangaris forces.
Having received preliminary commitments from troop - and police-contributing
countries for the additional capability, I am confident that deployment, if authorized
soon, can be achieved by July 2015.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2/2

15-01370
