S/PV.7798

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7798th meeting

Monday, 31 October 2016, 12.45 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Akahori
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 21 October 2016 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2016/888)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-35153 (E)
*1635153*

S/PV.7798

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 12.45 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 21 October 2016 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/888)
The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/888, which contains a letter dated
21 October 2016 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2016/905, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in Russian): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2314 (2016).
I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements after the vote.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): The United
States welcomes the decision of the Security Council
to extend the mandate of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM). This brief extension is intended to
give the Council additional time to ensure the renewal
of the JIM mandate for another year.
The Council faces some very difficult decisions
around its core responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security. This should not be
2/6

31/10/2016

one of them. All of us need only recall the situation
before the JIM was created to address chemical
weapons allegations in Syria. The Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons was able to tell
us that chemical weapons were used, but there was
no mechanism to ascertain who was using them. As a
result, users of chemical weapons felt that they enjoyed
complete impunity. The international system had a
huge gap in its prevention and response architecture.
The work of the JIM is critically important
to identifying the individuals, entities, groups or
Governments involved in chemical weapons attacks.
That information is invaluable to the Council, to the
international community and to the victims of those
dreadful attacks. Last Thursday’s Council briefing
by the JIM panel and Under-Secretary-General Kim
Won-soo was deeply sobering. As we all know, the JIM
affirmed yet another incident in which the Al-Assad
regime used chemical weapons. That was the third
attack in which the JIM has reached that conclusion.
There is credible evidence that there have been many
more chemical weapons attacks by the regime. In
other words, an independent, impartial body of experts
operating under a mandate of the Security Council has
determined unambiguously that a State Member of the
United Nations has repeatedly used chemical weapons
against its own people.
The JIM has also found the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) at fault for the chemical weapons
attack on Marea. We have seen the allegations of
additional use and agree that use by terrorists poses a
profound threat. Use by ISIL is yet one more affirmation
of the importance of the United States-led coalition’s
fight against that monstrous group. We reaffirm the
importance of the JIM maintaining its mandate to
investigate alleged use by any actors, whether they by
the Syrian air force or terrorist groups.
Lest we lose sight of the effects of such weapons,
I will give one example from the many first-hand
accounts. Here is what a doctor observed after an
incident on 10 August in which a helicopter reportedly
dropped a barrel bomb containing a toxic chemical on
Aleppo’s Zabdiya neighbourhood. He said that at first,
two children and their mother arrived at the hospital.
“The children were unconscious and
unresponsive. Their mother was shivering,
coughing and wheezing. She could barely breathe
and was drooling heavily from her mouth. Her
16-35153

31/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

clothes were covered in a wet substance with a
sharp smell, like chlorine. The two kids went into
cardiac arrest after around 15 minutes. We tried to
resuscitate them, to no avail. Five minutes later, the
mother also died.”
The question is, why would the Council not want to
know who was involved in those attacks? Why would
we stop the work of the JIM when there are multiple
credible allegations of the use of chemical weapons that
have yet to be fully investigated? And why would we
stop a group whose findings could one day help to hold
accountable those involved in such grotesque acts? The
answer is simple. We must condemn and hold responsible
whomever is involved in those chemical-weapon
attacks. The JIM is a key tool for helping us to do that.
We cannot pinpoint its precise deterrent value, but we
can say that in the year since it was created, the number
of reported attacks has significantly decreased.
Now, even a single chemical-weapon attack is one
too many, but why would any Council member risk
going back to the world we had before the JIM, when
there were many more such attacks? Why would we
create a new gap in the international system? Others
may argue that we should broaden the JIM’s mandate
so as to focus on multiple countries. To take time
and resources from the JIM’s work in Syria would
constitute a significant distraction and further delay
its critical work. The JIM was set up in Syria for a
specific reason — to find out who was involved — and
for that reason it should remain focused on Syria. We
look forward to discussions in the next few days. It is
imperative that the JIM be allowed to continue this
critically important and unfinished work.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.
The Russian delegation found it possible today
to support the short-term technical extension of the
mandate of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mission (JIM) on the use of chemical weapons in
Syria. We are grateful to the authors of resolution 2314
(2016) for their understanding of our position, which
has enabled us to preserve the constructive spirit of
the work on the Syrian chemical-weapons dossier, as
represented by resolutions 2118 (2013) and 2235 (2016).
We took this step in the belief that during the
interval provided for in the new resolution, Council

S/PV.7798

members will be able to have a thorough discussion
of possible ways to improve the JIM, based on the
experience that has been gained, and to address the
systemic shortcomings that were revealed during the
presentation of the reports on its results. We submitted
our detailed comments on them to a wide audience after
the Council’s consultations on 27 October, and they are
available to all, so I will not repeat them now. We do
not intend to be severely critical of the Mechanism’s
leadership, since we realize that it was obliged to present
at least some of the results of its work and was not able
to do that convincingly, given the circumstances.
No one should resort to chemical weapons. The
scale of the threat of chemical terrorism in the Middle
East should put the international community on alert
and force it to come up with an appropriate response.
Thanks to the serious military conflicts in the region,
terrorists have learned to synthesize complex poisonous
agents and are able to transport them across borders,
exploiting weakened State control and often with
assistance from outsiders. We firmly believe that in
such circumstances, the JIM’s geographic scope should
not be limited to Syria alone and that it should focus its
thrust on the military and chemical danger posed by
non-State actors in general and terrorists in particular.
It would make sense to invite Syria’s neighbours to
cooperate fully with the Mechanism in its fulfilment
of its mandate and to inform it about any activities of
non-State actors relating to chemical weapons. It should
trace occurrences and conduct impartial investigations.
This will mean collaborating productively with all
the States in the region, many of which are already
experiencing the negative effects of chemical
terrorism attacks.
If at the next stage of this discussion the members
of the Security Council consider the JIM’s continued
work under a reoriented mandate appropriate, it will be
important to avoid the politicization of the issue that has
so far seriously hindered the work of the Mechanism.
Everyone should understand that this is not a toy for
yet again enabling someone to criticize the Syrian
Government, which, as we know, has already begun to
investigate the JIM’s findings at the national level.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption today of
resolution 2314 (2016). Its short-term extension of the

16-351533/6

S/PV.7798

The situation in the Middle East

Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM)
was needed to allow additional time for the Council to
continue its consultations on a full renewal of the JIM’s
mandate for another year.
The continuing need for the JIM is painfully clear.
The pattern of chemical attacks in Syria continues.
The Fact-Finding Mission of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) is currently
investigating at least four cases that have arisen since
August. The OPCW will not itself be able to identify
the perpetrators of those attacks. Both the Syrian
Government and Da’esh have been blamed, and that
is precisely why we first created the JIM and why its
work remains as important now as it was more than
a year ago, when we adopted its first mandate to fill
the gap in the international architecture for attributing
responsibility for the use of chemical weapons that had
been proven by the OPCW.

31/10/2016

cooperate with it — all countries should — but the JIM’s
mandate concerns attacks that have happened in Syria,
whether perpetrated by the Syrian regime or Da’esh,
and that should continue. There is a big difference
between Syria, on the one hand, and countries such as
Iraq and Turkey, on the other. It is only Syria that has
used chemical weapons against its own people.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution
2314 (2016). France wholeheartedly supports the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) and
therefore, of course, today’s resolution, which enables
us to extend the JIM’s mandate until 18 November. We
hope that this is simply a preparatory step before the full
and complete renewal of the mandate for another year.
We urge all Council members to commit immediately
and in good faith to that effort.

Thanks to the JIM’s hard work, we know without
doubt who is responsible for killing and maiming
civilians in Syria with chemical weapons. It has now
been conclusively demonstrated that both the Al-Assad
regime and Da’esh have used chemical weapons against
civilians in Syria. Those weapons continue to be used
in flagrant violation of international norms and laws,
and at complete odds with basic human decency. Such
barbaric weapons had no place on the battlefield 100
years ago, never mind today. But in the light of the
continuing use of chemical weapons, it is imperative
that we retain the JIM, both to act as some sort of
deterrent and to determine who is responsible for such
attacks. It is simply not good enough to determine
whether chemical-weapon attacks have occurred
without knowing who was responsible. We need to
know who was responsible in order to bring them to
justice. As I have said on many previous occasions,
there must be accountability for every single person
involved in any use of chemical weapons, in Syria or
indeed anywhere else.

The JIM’s latest report (S/2016/888) leaves no
more room for doubt. We know that the Syrian Arab
Army and Da’esh have not hesitated to use chemical
weapons against civilians in Syria on at least four
separate occasions. In addition to the overwhelming
evidence against the Syrian regime and Da’esh, this
especially serious and unacceptable attack undermines
the non-proliferation and our collective security as
a whole.

I agree with Russia that we should improve the JIM
and refrain from politicizing it, and that action should
be taken, including against any use of chemical weapons
by non-State actors. That is why much work has been
done, led by Spain and others, on strengthening our work
under resolution 1540 (2004). What I do not think we
should agree to is any distracting of the JIM away from
its central mandate, which is to focus on the situation
in Syria. Yes, the countries neighbouring Syria should

We need to draw all the appropriate lessons from
the reports issued by the Mechanism and ensure that
those crimes reported do not go unpunished. As Foreign
Minister Ayrault has said repeatedly and openly, France
is in favour of the eventual adoption of a resolution
under Chapter VII to sanction the perpetrators of
the chemical attacks, as identified by the JIM. Given
the serious nature of those crimes, it is of paramount
importance that we ensure that the JIM continues to

4/6

Given such dire stakes, political divisions within
the Council on the Syrian conflict must be set aside so
that we can act. Given such dire stakes, action is not
an option but a necessity, and it is our responsibility.
We cannot allow violations of international law
prohibiting chemical weapons and their use, and we
cannot take the risk of allowing such actions to become
commonplace. It is up to all members of the Security
Council to shoulder their responsibilities pursuant to
the commitment undertaken in establishing the Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM).

16-35153

31/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

function so that any further resort to chemical weapons
against civilians will be reported.
The Joint Investigative Mechanism has fully lived
up to our expectations by reaching accurate findings
in very difficult circumstances, despite failing to enjoy
the full cooperation of all actors. The Mechanism
was established upon a unanimous decision of the
Security Council. There is therefore no question about
its legitimacy. France commends the the commitment
and professionalism of its members and the rigour and
earnest of their methodology.
Let us call a spade a spade. If the Security Council
is not in a position to shoulder its responsibilities
vis-à-vis the proliferation and use of weapons of mass
destruction — in this case, chemical weapons — against
civilian populations, its credibility and utility will
be at stake. France therefore calls on all members of
the Security Council to come together, set aside our
differences about the Syrian conflict to put a swift end
to the use of chemical weapons and hold the perpetrators
to account. When proliferation and the use of weapons
of mass destruction are at stake, weakness and division
for tactical purposes cannot be an option.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2314
(2016). China’s position on chemical weapons is clear
and consistent. We are strongly opposed to the use of
chemical weapons by any State, organization or person
in any circumstances.
China is deeply concerned about the use of
chemicals as weapons in Syria against the civilian
population and strongly condemns such use. China
consistently advocates for the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism to perform its functions in
line with its mandate and in an objective, impartial and
professional manner. We hope that the Joint Investigative
Mechanism, while respecting the sovereignty of the
countries concerned, will fully investigate and establish
the facts regarding the use of chemicals as weapons.
China hopes that the Security Council will remain
united on the question of chemical weapons in Syria and
speak with one, positive voice so as to play a positive
role in the final destruction of chemical weapons in
Syria and the maintenance of peace and security in
the country.

S/PV.7798

Political settlement is the only realistic way
to resolve the Syrian question. The international
community should adhere to the general direction of
political settlement and comprehensively promote
efforts on the four parallel tracks of ceasefire, peace
talks, humanitarian relief and joint forces to combat
terrorism. Through a Syrian-owned and led political
process, it should facilitate the conclusion of an
arrangement that addresses the interests of all parties
concerned so as to reach a comprehensive, long-term
and appropriate settlement of the Syrian question at an
early date.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We welcome the
adoption of resolution 2314 (2016) and commend the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM)
for its efforts in executing its mandate based on the
principles of impartiality, objectivity and independence.
All four JIM reports have proved the importance of
having the Mechanism in the future, since there are
still many cases of possible use of chemical weapons
in Syria, including in 2016, that deserve to be
thoroughly investigated.
We are deeply concerned over the continuous
allegations of the use of toxic substances as chemical
weapons in Syria, which cause enormous suffering
among civilians and are a blatant violation of
international legal norms. Removing the threat of any
use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic
is an essential element in creating proper conditions
for de-escalating tensions on the ground, tackling
extremism and attaining a sustainable political solution
to the crisis in a broader context. The international
community must have full confidence that Syria
has irreversibly abandoned its chemical weapons
programme and that those responsible for organizing
and committing horrible crimes using chemical
weapons as a tool of war are held accountable.
To conclude, I would like to thank the Joint
Investigative Mechanism for its efforts and significant
contributions to deterring any further use of chemicals
as weapons against the Syrian people. My delegation is
ready to cooperate actively and in a constructive way
in order to ensure that the JIM mandate will be further
extended for a sufficient term in order to execute its
crucial tasks, in accordance with paragraph 1 of the
resolution adopted today.

16-351535/6

S/PV.7798

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Akahori (Japan): Japan is in favour of the
renewal of the mandate of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM) by 18 days while it
considers a further extension. The JIM has conducted
its work in an impartial, objective and independent
manner and identified those responsible for the use of
chemical weapons in four cases. On the other hand, it
is very regrettable that another 14 allegations have been
reported to the Joint Investigative Mechanism in the
past 30 days, according to Ms. Gamba, Head of the JIM.
The international norm of prohibiting chemical
weapons must remain solid. We need to continue efforts
to uncover the whole picture of the alleged uses of
chemical weapons in Syria and hold accountable those
responsible. The JIM still has a major role to play. Japan
is in favour of a further extension of the JIM mandate
beyond the 18 days and intends to be actively engaged
in the Council’s consideration.

6/6

31/10/2016

The President (spoke in Russian): On behalf of
the delegation of the Russian Federation, I would like
to express sincere appreciation to the members of
the Council, especially my colleagues the Permanent
Representatives, their Deputies and colleagues, as well
as the staff of the secretariat of the Security Council,
for all of the support that they have given to us.
In this busy month, we have managed to reach
consensus on several important issues, although not
all. We could not have done it alone or without the hard
work, support and constructive contributions of every
delegation and representative of the secretariat, as well
as the interpreters, translators, meeting services and
sound engineers, in addition to security officers, who
kept the Council safe this month.
As we end our presidency, I know I speak on behalf
of the Council in wishing the delegation of Senegal
good luck in the month of November.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

16-35153
