UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/659
16 July 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 16 JULY 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ADDRESSED
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 15 July 1998,
which I have received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members
of the Security Council.

(Signed)

98-20908 (E)

170798

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1998/659
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 15 July 1998 from the Secretary-General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed
to the Secretary-General

In accordance with United Nations Security Council resolution 1088 (1996)
of 12 December 1996, I attach the eighteenth monthly report on the operations of
the Stabilization Force (see appendix). I would appreciate your making the
report available to the Security Council.

(Signed)

Javier SOLANA

/...

S/1998/659
English
Page 3

Appendix
Monthly report to the United Nations Security Council on
the operations of the Stabilization Force

1.
On 20 June 1998, the Stabilization Force (SFOR) continued its mission under
the renewed mandate provided by Security Council resolution 1174 (1998).
2.
There are approximately 36,000 troops currently deployed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia. This includes contributions from all North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) nations and, with effect from 20 June, from
22 non-NATO nations, Argentina and Slovakia being the latest additions.
3.
Over the reporting period (21 May to 20 June 1998), SFOR continued to
conduct surveillance and reconnaissance by means of ground and air patrols.
Approximately 2,270 sorties were flown by combat aircraft, with the SFOR
helicopter fleet flying approximately 125 hours.
4.
In late May, in line with the restructuring agreement concluded by the
Office of the High Representative in February 1998, SFOR began its withdrawal
from the five transmission towers used by Srpska Radio Television at Duga Nijva,
Udrigovo and Veliki Zep in Multinational Division (North) and at Trebevic and
Leotar in Multinational Division (South-East). The Leotar Tower was returned on
22 May, the Duga Nijva Tower on 28 May and the Udrigovo Tower on 30 May. The
other two towers will be transferred in due course.
5.
The Stabilization Force has continued to increase its monitoring of
crossing points on the border with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in order
to help ensure compliance with the prohibition on the transport of weapons
established by Security Council resolution 1160 (1998). The Stabilization Force
has been tasked, within its existing mission and capabilities, to forward to
NATO headquarters any information on suspected violations of resolution
1160 (1998), so that it can be transmitted to the United Nations Secretariat.
Cooperation and compliance by the Parties
6.
The Parties remain substantially compliant with most military provisions of
the Peace Agreement across the whole area of operations. However, over the
reporting period a number of Bosniac and Bosnian Serb homes were destroyed by
arson attacks.
7.
The Stabilization Force continues to monitor compliance with the Common
Licence Plate Programme. Over the reporting period, SFOR confiscated 4 Bosnian
Croat and 9 Bosniac military vehicles for a 30-day period from non-compliance
with the Programme.
8.
On 12 June, a group of approximately 150 Bosnian Croats set up 2 roadblocks
near the village of Zepce, in Multinational Division (North) to protest the lack
of common vehicle licence plates. The protest continued on 13 June, when a
third roadblock was established 5 kilometres east of the village. After several
meetings over the 2 days between SFOR troops in the area, the mayor of Zepce and
/...

S/1998/659
English
Page 4

the representatives of the local businessmen who had organized the roadblocks,
the situation was resolved and civilian freedom of movement restored on all
roads. No violent incidents were reported.
9.
Over the reporting period, SFOR troops conducted a total of 314 military
weapons storage sites inspections: 80 Bosniac; 70 Bosnian Croat; 146 Bosnian
Serb; and 18 Federation. The following weapons were confiscated: from the
Bosnian Serbs, 3 64-mm rocket launchers, 1 rifle grenade, 2 boxes of small arms
ammunition and several 82-mm mortar rounds; from the Federation, 11 grenades; in
addition, on 3 June, SFOR troops confiscated 150 kilograms of ammunition, 2
rifles, 3,500 cartridges, 21 grenades and several explosive devices during
inspections of a further 15 sites. In accordance with SFOR policy, the
confiscated weapons will be destroyed, after a period of time to allow for
appeals.
10. With regard to the Republika Srpska Specialist Police, the Police
Anti-Terrorist Brigade and the Police Unit for the Protection of Persons and
Buildings have now met the requirements established by SFOR on 15 August 1997.
On 10 June, SFOR and the Republika Srpska Ministry of the Interior agreed on the
proposed structure for the new Republika Srpska Specialist Police Service and
their training programme, which will be led and implemented by the United
Nations International Police Task Force. The training programme is scheduled to
last from 29 June to 4 September 1998. On completion of certification under the
new structure, the former Republika Srpska Specialist Police will be employed as
a specialist police force by the Republika Srpska Government, capable of
responding to civil requirements and disasters beyond the capability of the
local police. However, the decision to transfer the Republika Srpska Specialist
Police supervision from Annex 1-A to Annex 11 of the Peace Agreement remains the
decision of the Commander of the Stabilization Force.
11. Over the reporting period, SFOR monitored a total of 1,609 training and
movement activities: 525 Bosniac; 68 Bosnian Croat; 942 Bosnian Serb; and 74
Federation. The Stabilization Force imposed a training and movement ban (from
25 May to 28 June) on the 505th Bosnian Serb Army Brigade, due to the presence
in the Pale area of 5 armed soldiers without identification cards. A second ban
was imposed (from 25 June to 14 July) on the 521st Bosnian Serb Brigade and on
the 55th Battalion of Military Police, due to non-compliance during an exercise
on 7 June.
12. Stabilization Force troops monitored 675 demining operations: 233 Bosniac;
211 Bosnian Croat; 221 Bosnian Serb; and 10 Federation. A total of 175
anti-tank mines, 1,255 anti-personnel mines and 84 items of unexploded ordnance
were removed. There are currently no bans imposed on the Entity Armed Forces
for non-compliance with demining operations.
13. On 4 June, a meeting of the Joint Military Commission took place at the
Bosnian Serb Army Officers’ club in Banja Luka, the first such meeting to be
held outside Sarajevo. The Stabilization Force invited the army commanders to
consider ideas for joint activities between the Entity Armed Forces as a means
to develop further confidence and security building measures.

/...

S/1998/659
English
Page 5

Cooperation with international organizations
14. Within its capabilities, SFOR continues to provide assistance to the
international organizations in theatre, working routinely with the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the International Police Task
Force, the Office of the High Representative, the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
15. The Stabilization Force continues to support OSCE in its preparations for
the September elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina, through the provision of a
secure environment for voters’ registration. Registration of candidates and
parties is proceeding, although the registration period has been extended until
28 June.
16. On 28 May, in Banja Luka, and on 15 June in Foca, SFOR troops detained two
individuals indicted for war crimes and ensured their transportation to the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in The Hague.
17. The Stabilization Force continues to provide assistance to the Office of
the High Representative in the field of civil air traffic. The revisions to the
Memorandum of Understanding, which will permit cargo operations and allow
commercial aircraft to remain overnight at Sarajevo airport, have been agreed by
SFOR and are now awaiting approval from the Council of Ministers. In addition,
two scheduled services have been introduced over the last month in Banja Luka
airport.
18. The Stabilization Force continues to play an active role in providing
support to the efforts of the Office of the High Representative to establish
joint institutions, particularly the Standing Committee on Military Matters. At
the Standing Committee on Military Matters meeting of 21 May, SFOR presented a
paper on possible cross-Inter-Entity Boundary Line helicopter flights being
conducted by the Entity Armed Forces, in order to transport senior ministers on
political duties. The paper was accepted by the Tri-Presidency, who instructed
that further work be carried out on the concept, supervised by the secretariat
of the Standing Committee on Military Matters.
Outlook
19. Returns of refugees and displaced persons are likely to continue to
increase tension and to be accompanied by acts of intimidation and violence,
particularly in Central Bosnia and Mostar. The Stabilization Force will
continue to help ensure the provision of a secure environment to support and
promote phased and orderly returns in accordance with its mandate, but not
forcibly return displaced persons or undertake to guard individual locations.
20. The continuation of SFOR beyond 20 June will permit the force to continue
to deter renewed hostilities and to contribute to a secure environment for the
ongoing implementation of the civil aspects of the Peace Agreement, promoting a
transition of emphasis from military to civil implementation. At the same time,
SFOR will provide broad support, within its mandate and within means and
capabilities, for civil implementation, in particular to key aspects such as
/...

S/1998/659
English
Page 6

public security, the return of refugees and displaced persons, the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the September
elections. Through the incorporation of a multinational specialized unit which
will operate as an integral part of SFOR under the same rules of engagement as
other elements, it will have an enhanced capability to support the local
authorities in responding to civil disorder, without engaging in police
functions, in close cooperation with the Office of the High Representative and
the International Police Task Force.
21. The continuation of SFOR has been accompanied by the adoption of a
transition strategy as an integral part of the force’s mission. This strategy
will permit and promote a gradual and progressive reduction in the size, role
and profile of the force as emphasis shifts from military to civil
implementation, leading to eventual full withdrawal, with residual
responsibilities being transferred to the common institutions, other civil
authorities or other international organizations, as appropriate. Formal
reviews will be conducted after the September elections and no later than
December 1998, and thereafter at intervals of not more than six months to
assess, against a set of identified criteria for measuring progress, the
security situation and the overall implementation of the Peace Agreement. These
reviews will permit the Allies, in consultation with other SFOR contributors, to
consider the possible scope for force reductions, taking into account the level
of support required for military and civil implementation and the requirements
for deterrence.

-----
