Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Bearing in mind the findings, conclusions and recommendations set forth in the two reports,
Having heard the petitioners,
Expressing its deep concern that the continuance of
the critical situation in South \Vest Africa constitutes a
serious threat to international peace and security,
1. Reaffirms its solemn proclamation of the inalienable right of the people of South West Africa to independence and national sovereignty;
2. Condemns the continued refusal of the Government of South Africa to co-operate with the United
Nations in the implementation of resolution 1702 (XVI)
as well as other resolutions concerning South 'vVest
Africa;
3. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to discharge, mutatis mutandis, the tasks
assigned to the Special Committee for South West
Africa by resolution 1702 (XVI), taking into consideration the special responsibilities of the United Nations
with regard to the Territory of South Vv est Africa, and
to submit to the General Assemblv, at its seventeenth or
eighteenth session, a report on the' implementation of the
present resolution;
4. Further requests all Member States to extend to
the Special Committee such assistance as it may require
in the discharge of these tasks;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to appoint a
United Nations Technical Assistance Resident Representative for South West Africa to achieve the obiectives
outlined in General Assembly resolution 1566 (XV) of
18 December 1960 and paragraph 2 ( g) of resolution
1702 (XVI), in consultation with the Special Committee;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary steps to establish an effective United Nations presence in South West Africa;
7. Urges the Government of South Africa to refrain
from:
( a) Employing direct or indirect action involving the
forcible removal of indigenous inhabitants from their
homes or their confinement in any particular location ;
(b) Using the Territory of South West Africa as a
base for the accumtilation, for internal or external purposes, of arms or armed forces ;
8. Urges all Member States to take into consideration the anxieties expressed by a large number of Member States concerning the supply of arms to South
Africa, and to refrain from any action likely to hinder the
implementation of the present and previous General
Assembly resolutions on South West Africa;
9. Decides to maintain the question of South West
Africa on its agenda as an item requiring urgent am!
constant attention.
1194th plenary meetinr,,
14 December 1962.

1806 (XVII). Special Committee for South West
Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling that the Special Committee for South West
Africa was established by its resolution 1702 (XVI) of
19 December 1961,
Considering that, under its resolution 1805 (XVII)
of 14 December 1962, it decided to request the Special

39

Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to discharge
the tasks assigned to the Special Committee for South
West Africa by resolution ~702 (XVI),
1. Decides to dissolve the Special Committee for
South West Africa ;
2. Expresses its gratitude to the Special Committee
for South West Africa for its efforts and for its contribution to the achievement of the objectives of the United
Nations.
1194th plenary meeting,
14 December 1962.

1807 (XVII). Territories under Portuguese
administration
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples, set out in its
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Recalling further its resolutions 1542 (XV) of 15 December 1960 and 1699 (XVI) of 19 December 1961,
and all its other resolutions relating to Territories under
Portuguese administration,
Having examined the report of the Special Committee
on Territories under Portuguese Administration 6 and
chapters VIII and XI of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the I mplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples,1
N otinq the statements of the petitioners.
Greatly deploring the continued disregard by the Portuguese Government of the legitimate aspirations for
immediate self-determination and independence expressed by the peoples of the Territories under its
administration,
Greatly concerned at the intensified measures of oppression being carried out by the PortugttP!-e Government against the indigenous peoples of Territories under
its administration,
Noting that the Portuguese military and other forces
of repression have used extensively and continue to ttse,
for the repression of the nationalist movements, military
and other equipment supplied to Portugual by some of
its allies for other purposes and also equipment obtained
from other sources,
Noting the opinion of the Special Committee on Territories under Portuguese Administration, expressed in
paragraph 439 of its report, concerning the implications
of the supply of military equipment to the Portugnese
Government,
Noting with deep concern that the policy and acts of
the Portttg-ttese Government with regard to the Territories under its administration have created a situation
which constitutes a serious threat to international peace
and security,
1. Approves the report of the Special Committee on
TerritoriPs under Portuguese Administration;
2. Condemns the attitude of Portugal, ·which is inconsistent with the Charter of the United Nations;
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of the
Territories under Portuguese administration to selfdetermination and independence and upholds without any
6 Ibid., Sc1Jcnternth Session. Amic.rcs, agenda item 54, documents A/5160 and Add.1 and 2.
