S/PV.9350

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9350th meeting

Friday, 16 June 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Nusseibeh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Ishikane
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2023/402)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-17311 (E)
*2317311*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9350

The situation in Mali

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

reiterated their commitment to complete the transition
in March of next year, in accordance with the schedule
agreed with the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS). Presidential elections are also slated
for February next year.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2023/402)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Mali to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. El-Ghassim
Wane, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/402, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.
I now give the floor to Mr. Wane.
Mr. Wane (spoke in French): First of all, I would
like to thank the President of the Security Council and
the other members of this organ for the opportunity
given to me to address them once again. This is clearly a
special moment for the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
as it coincides with discussions on the renewal of the
mandate, as it also is for Mali, which continues to face
complex security and other challenges.
The constitutional referendum will be held the
day after tomorrow and will mark the first stage of
the process leading to the restoration of constitutional
order. The voting was originally scheduled to be held
on 19 March. Mali’s authorities have not yet clarified
what could be the impact of the delay that was incurred
in holding other referendums on the timetable made
public in June 2022, including local, regional and
legislative elections planned for June, October and
November, respectively. But the authorities have
2/20

16/06/2023

The draft constitution that is the subject of the
referendum follows on the national dialogue on the
reform process organized in December 2021. The
discussions that took place revealed a strong aspiration
for reform, in particular with regard to more honest
government — something that underpinned many of the
recommendations resulting from the national dialogue.
As finalized, the constitutional text was the subject of
divergent assessments by local stakeholders, whether
from the political class, civil society or religious groups.
The fact remains that several political parties, including
parties that have dominated political life in recent
decades, civil society organizations and other actors
expressed their support and called for an affirmative
vote in the referendum. Those urging a negative vote
include political groups and religious organizations.
The referendum campaign, which began on 2 June,
ends today. The authorities mobilized significant
resources for the holding of the referendum, including
the Malian air force, which made its contribution by
transporting election materials — something that
should be welcomed.
In accordance with our mandate, MINUSMA and
the United Nations country team provide multifaceted
support to the process. That support includes a
contribution to transport the material required for
the referendum and the personnel involved in the
process, including vehicles and equipment; training,
including for the benefit of members of the Independent
Authority for Election Management; the deployment
of 182 officers to assist the Authority in the field; the
mobilization of technical expertise; a major effort to
raise awareness about the draft constitution in support
of the National Transition Council; and support to the
Constitutional Court in exercising the responsibilities
assigned to it. Our involvement is an extension of the
support we have extended to the transition since it
began, including in the context of the local committee
tasked with monitoring the transition, which also
includes ECOWAS and the African Union.
The debates that took place on the draft constitution
have shown, if proof were needed, the close links that
exist between the transition and the peace processes.
In fact, one of the questions that arose in the course
23-17311

S/PV.9350

The situation in Mali

of the debates on the draft constitution concerned the
extent to which the text takes account of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali emanating from
the Algiers process. On 28 March, the Coordination des
mouvements de l’Azawad and the Plateforme and some
of the Mouvements de l’inclusivité, grouped within the
Cadre stratégique permanent pour la paix, la sécurité
et le développement, issued a communiqué stating that
they did not see themselves in the draft constitution.
Other signatories to the Agreement took the opposite
position, calling for a yes vote in the referendum.
As a reminder, last December the signatory
movements had announced their decision to suspend
their participation in the mechanisms for monitoring
the implementation of the Agreement, citing what they
considered a lack of commitment on the part of the
Government. Sustained efforts have since been made by
the international mediation team to overcome that issue.
The visit on 12 May of the Minister for Reconciliation,
Peace and National Cohesion to Kidal was an important
step in that regard, which should rebuild confidence and
facilitate the resumption of direct dialogue between the
parties. In that context, we — that is, MINUSMA and
Algeria, as chef de file — also sought to help the Malian
parties overcome their differences surrounding the draft
constitution, commissioning international expertise to
facilitate a common understanding of the relationship
between the draft constitution and the peace agreement.
It emerged from that exercise that nothing in the draft
constitution stands in the way of the implementation of
the agreement, including the legislative and regulatory
provisions relating to the institutional framework and
territorial reorganization.
It is in that context that the international mediation
team, after in-depth consultations with the parties, led
by Algeria and MINUSMA, published a communiqué
on the situation on 11 June. The text listed the elements
on the basis of which the peace process could resume,
and asked the signatory movements to facilitate the
early voting, which took place on 11 June, by members
of the Malian Defence and Security Forces in the areas
concerned in the north of the country. It was part of
an overall effort to ensure that the constitutional
referendum, to be held on 18 June, takes place smoothly
throughout Mali. It is regrettable that the call for
members of the Malian Defence and Security Forces
in the Kidal region to vote was not heeded. I encourage
the parties to seek consensus on the issues that divide
them, on the basis of the international mediation
3/20

16/06/2023

team’s communiqué of 11 June. As emphasized in
that text, the difficulties facing the peace process are
not insurmountable, and any path other than that of
dialogue will lead only to more suffering for the Malian
people and greater instability for the region.
The resumption of the normal course of the peace
process will make it possible to address the security
situation more effectively. The situation continues
to be affected by the pressure that the Islamic State
is still exerting in north-eastern Mali in the Gao and
Ménaka regions, and by its continued acts of violence
against the civilian population. In the centre of the
country, terrorist groups and community self-defence
militias remain active. One of the incidents during the
reporting period was a complex attack on 22 April on
a Malian Armed Forces base in the Sévaré area, which
was repulsed.
It should be noted that the Malian Armed Forces
conducted several operations during the reporting
period in various parts of Mali, which are described
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/402).
MINUSMA has also been the target of attacks, most
recently on 9 June near the town of Ber, about 60
kilometres from Timbuktu. Two soldiers from Burkina
Faso were killed and seven others wounded. Since
January, five Blue Helmets have died and 31 have
been wounded in hostile acts. Malian civilians are also
paying a heavy price for this insecurity. The impact of
improvised explosive devices, which are a preferred
weapon for terrorist groups, is particularly noteworthy.
The Mission is conducting several activities to raise
public awareness of the danger that they pose, in
addition to the close cooperation we maintain with the
Malian Armed Forces on the issue.
The ongoing insecurity is clearly having a negative
impact on the humanitarian situation. As of May,
approximately 375,000 internally displaced people
were displaced, with 55 per cent of them in the central
regions and 40 per cent in Gao, Kidal, Ménaka and
Timbuktu. About 8.8 million people around the country
will need assistance this year. It is worrisome to note in
that context that as of May, the humanitarian response
plan had received only 11 per cent of the $751 million
of funding required.
The Mission also continued to implement its human
rights mandate. In that context, we have continued
to support training programmes for members of the
Malian Defence and Security Forces. At the same
23-17311

S/PV.9350

The situation in Mali

time, we have continued to investigate allegations of
human rights violations, the majority of which take
place remotely, owing to difficulties of access or in
the absence of authorization from the authorities. Our
quarterly human rights report for January through
March is currently being finalized and should be
published around the end of the month, following the
usual consultations with the Malian Government. One
of the major human rights developments of the period
was the publication of the report by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
on the Moura incident, whose conclusions elicited
a strong response from the Malian authorities, who
announced that an investigation would be opened.
With MINUSMA’s mandate coming to an end, and
with a view to the decision that the Council will have
to take, it will be useful to take stock of the past year
and draw lessons for our future efforts. I believe three
points are important in that regard.
First, despite the complex environment in which it
operates and the many constraints it has to deal with,
including restrictions on freedom of movement, the
Mission has endeavoured to discharge its mandate as
effectively as possible. I would like to highlight our
support for the ongoing transition process, the role
we play as part of the international mediation, led
by Algeria, to facilitate the resumption of the peace
process, and the action we have taken in support of the
parties in maintaining the ceasefire.
It is equally important to note the stabilizing
effect of the Mission’s presence in urban centres and
its efforts aimed at protecting civilian populations; the
multifaceted aid provided to initiatives by the Malian
State to restore and extend its authority; the many
projects carried out for the benefit of civilians in both
the centre and the north and the contribution made to
infrastructure development. Our response is resolutely
multidimensional, with a view to addressing the various
facets of the crisis confronting Mali.
Those efforts are certainly crucial and provide
invaluable support to many civilians. But let us admit
that we can and must do more and better — much better,
so that we can meet needs and so that our action responds
better to current demands, such as the people’s demand
for security, which is certainly the issue that is most
widely shared in Mali. In that respect, it is impossible
to overemphasize the fundamental importance of
cooperation with the host country and the relationship
4/20

16/06/2023

of trust that has been built or should be built with it. It
is helpful in that regard to recall the emphasis that the
internal strategic review placed on the need for a stable
and predictable relationship. There is a legitimate
expectation on the part of the Malian people that our
action will produce greater results, and the criticisms
they have expressed are perfectly understandable. But
only closer cooperation and a more trusting relationship
can produce that greater effectiveness.
Lastly, the degree of robustness of the mandate has
continued to fuel discussions in Mali. That is obviously
a matter for the Council to decide. For my part, I
would like to highlight a less debated issue — that of
the complementarity between the action taken by the
Malian State and by MINUSMA. MINUSMA has
undeniable comparative advantages that can and
must be used more effectively to support the Malian
State. That functional coordination depends on a
relationship of trust between the Malian authorities and
MINUSMA. It requires a more sustained commitment
from the Government, through regular dialogue with
the Mission, to broaden the scope of possibilities and
take advantage of the many opportunities that exist for
the benefit of the Malian people.
In conclusion, and after an almost 10-year presence
in Mali, I would like to stress that MINUSMA, like
all the other United Nations peacekeeping operations,
has a duty to create the conditions that will enable its
departure by helping Mali to ensure the security of its
population and its territory, and to lay the foundations
for lasting stability. It is now more important than ever
that we voluntarily dedicate ourselves to that task in a
spirit of consultation, cooperation and complementarity.
The President: I thank Mr. Wane for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his briefing and to welcome
Mr. Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali, to the Council.
I would like to begin by paying tribute to the
memory of the victims of terrorism in Mali, be
they civilians or members of the Malian forces or
international forces. France condemns those terrorist
attacks, particularly the one that claimed the lives of
two Burkina Faso peacekeepers last week. I once again
23-17311

S/PV.9350

The situation in Mali

offer our condolences to their families and to Burkina
Faso, and I would like to take this opportunity to express
our gratitude to all troop-contributing countries.
With the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) expiring on 30 June, the Council
is once again seized of the topic. It is an important
issue for the entire region as well as Mali. France
commends the quality of the strategic review drawn up
by the United Nations in January in consultation with
all stakeholders and signed by the Secretary-General
(S/2023/36). It underlines the major contribution that
MINUSMA has made to supporting peace in Mali and
acknowledges the remarkable work done by the Blue
Helmets over the past 10 years.
The Secretary-General also set clear parameters
that must be respected, including for the viability and
effectiveness of MINUSMA’s action. As we in the
Council have often said, peace is sustainable only when it
is based on political solutions involving all stakeholders.
In that respect, the top priority is the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
There is an urgent need for progress to be made on the
ground with the support of international mediation,
and we should continue to support Algeria’s efforts in
that regard. The second priority is the completion of
the political transition within the framework agreed
between Mali and the Economic Community of West
African States, with a return to constitutional order in
March 2024. MINUSMA remains ready to contribute
to the organization of elections.
MINUSMA has been providing essential support
to the people of Mali since 2013. The Mission protects
civilians, works to ensure respect for human rights,
promote the fight against impunity and guarantee
the full participation of women in decision-making
processes, and it facilitates humanitarian access. But
as the Secretary-General notes in his latest report
(S/2023/402), despite the dialogue that MINUSMA
is pursuing with the Malian authorities, the Mission
is still hampered in its movements. Since the Wagner
Group’s arrival in Mali those restrictions have only
increased, as have the serious violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. That is
why MINUSMA’s troops need comprehensive support
and full freedom of movement in accordance with the
status-of-forces agreement. That is why the SecretaryGeneral made several recommendations in his strategic
review for adapting MINUSMA’s deployment to those
5/20

16/06/2023

realities. In his report, submitted at the beginning of
June, the Secretary-General assessed those parameters
for MINUSMA’s success and noted some mixed signals.
It is therefore a call for all parties to assume their
responsibilities, starting with the Malian authorities,
as, of course, should the Council, by speaking with one
voice and supporting the United Nations so that it can
be functional and effective in its support for the people
of Mali.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Council, Gabon, Ghana and my own
country, Mozambique (A3).
We welcome the quarterly report of the SecretaryGeneral on Mali (S/2023/402) and thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. ElGhassim Wane, for his important and insightful briefing
and for his effective leadership of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA). We welcome the participation
in this meeting of His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye
Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali.
Since the previous briefing to the Council (see
S/PV.9302), we have witnessed some positive signs in
the political situation in Mali. We welcome the gains
that have been made, including the announcement of
a date for the referendum, the inclusive processes in
the drafting of a constitution and the commitment of
the Malian authorities to addressing the challenges
to the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali resulting from the Algiers
process. We also acknowledge the accelerated progress
towards the restoration of constitutional order,
the resumption of cooperation between Mali and
neighbouring countries and the diplomatic efforts of the
Local Follow-up Committee of the Transition in Mali,
made up of the African Union (AU), the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
and MINUSMA.
Alongside those positive developments there are
political, security and humanitarian challenges. They
include determining the preferred option from those
provided by the Secretary-General in his strategic
review of MINUSMA (S/2023/36) in view of the
Mission’s upcoming mandate renewal this month. That
is coupled with heightened insecurity following the
increasing incidence of terrorist activities, which have
23-17311

S/PV.9350

The situation in Mali

led to loss of life and injury among both civilians and
security personnel. We also note with concern the gaps
resulting from the withdrawal of troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), the deteriorating humanitarian
situation and the persisting challenges concerning the
protection of civilians.
The A3 condemns all terrorist attacks in the
country in the strongest terms. We express our deep
condolences to the families and victims of those
atrocious acts. The tragic loss of life among civilians
and security personnel due to those terrorist attacks
is deeply regrettable. It emphasizes how important it
is that we move beyond a business-as-usual approach
by embracing more robust measures to help deal with
the situation. We commend the Malian authorities for
their efforts to develop a new security strategy, as well
as their huge investment in building military capacity.
We encourage more support from donor partners to
contribute to their ability to deal effectively with the
security situation.
In that connection, the A3 would like to acknowledge
MINUSMA’s proactive actions in maximizing its
limited resources by implementing an integrated
plan. We are very concerned about the security gaps
that have been created with the withdrawal of some
TCCs, as well as about restrictions on the use of air
assets for intelligence surveillance and reconnaissance
purposes and other logistical challenges that hamper
the Mission’s effectiveness. We welcome the efforts
to expedite the deployment of troops in areas affected
by the withdrawals in order to enhance the Mission’s
effectiveness. We note the Secretary-General’s call
for streamlining MINUSMA’s tasks around a limited
set of priorities, with a view to improving its overall
effectiveness. However, with regard to that, we share
the view that consideration should be given to certain
useful elements, among them the Mission’s ability to
improve the protection of civilians and the safety and
security of personnel, facilitate the restoration of State
authority in vulnerable areas in order to strengthen
confidence and cooperation with the host country’s
authorities, enhance its presence in all the critical areas
of the country to tackle insecurity, support the road
map for peaceful elections and promote trust among all
the signatory parties to resume dialogue towards the
implementation of the peace agreement.
In addition, we should consider elements that would
help position MINUSMA to better support regional
counter-terrorism mechanisms to address the terrorist
6/20

16/06/2023

threat. We also encourage the host country’s authorities
to step up their cooperation with the Mission to enable
it to fulfil its mandate, including removing restrictions
on their land and air movement. Furthermore, we would
like to reiterate our long-standing position that effective
regional mechanisms, such as the Multinational Joint
Task Force, the Joint Force of Group of Five for the
Sahel and the Accra Initiative, are crucial. They
can complement the efforts to tackle the protracted
insecurity in the country and the region. It is therefore
essential that the best elements of those regional
mechanisms find space in the forthcoming strategic
review by the Independent High-level Panel on Security
and Development in the Sahel, led by former President
Issoufou, as part of a comprehensive approach to dealing
with the security challenges in Mali and the Sahel at
large. We are mindful of the constraints on resources
facing those regional initiatives. We believe more than
ever that the Council has to come to together to meet its
goal of answering the long-standing call for adequate
and predictable funding for the regional mechanisms
from assessed contributions.
The insecurity in Mali and the Sahel region is
also related to the destabilization of Libya, and we
are concerned about its adverse impact on the country
and the region in general. Coordinated action by the
competent national, regional and international actors to
prevent the return of foreign terrorist fighters and the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons should
be prioritized.
On the political front, we commend the Malian
authorities for their efforts in setting a date for the
referendum. We encourage them to sustain a dialogue
with all stakeholders in order to address differences
on the draft constitution and, more importantly,
the restoration of constitutional order. We welcome
the cooperation and support of the Local FollowUp Committee and development partners towards
enhancing the work of the Independent Authority for
Election Management. We share the view that such
sustained support will help it deliver the peaceful and
credible holding of elections for the Malian people.
In all of that, the A3’s ultimate goal is to ensure the
implementation of the peace agreement, which is at the
heart of achieving lasting peace in Mali. We welcome
the forward-looking proposals by the international
mediation team to help address the concerns of all the
parties to the agreement. We encourage them to remain
engaged and present their responses and views in a
23-17311

S/PV.9350

The situation in Mali

manner that will help chart a way forward. We further
call on the parties to remain united in a way that will
foster progress in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes, including the development of
the national strategic plan for 2022 to 2024, which will
advance the reconciliation process. Overall, the A3
shares the view that much more needs to be done at
the national, regional and international levels to help
consolidate the gains made in addressing the situation
in Mali.
On the humanitarian front, the heightened level
of insecurity resulting from terrorist activities, which
has put an estimated 8.8 million people in need of
humanitarian assistance — an increase of 17 per cent
compared to last year — is of great concern and requires
urgent attention. Other aggravating factors, including
the food crisis and the adverse impact of climate change,
continue to persist and must be tackled. It is essential
for donor partners to scale up humanitarian support to
help meet the 2023 humanitarian response plan’s target
of $751.5 million. In that regard, we appeal to donor
partners and encourage them to consider increasing
their contribution to that worthy cause to help alleviate
the situation.
While we acknowledge the efforts being made to
tackle the human rights situation, including the signing
of a memorandum of understanding for the provision
of support by MINUSMA to the Malian authorities to
protect human rights, as well as the integration of human
rights into the operations of the Malian Defence and
Security Forces, the situation remains one of concern.
We advocate that all incidents of violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law, such as
abductions, sexual violence and attacks on schools
and hospitals, be investigated and the perpetrators
held to account. In that regard, we acknowledge the
determination of the Malian authorities to address the
issue through their ongoing judicial investigation and
encourage them to do more in order to deliver justice to
the victims of those violations.
The A3 considers it pertinent to scale up interventions
that prioritize the governance and development deficits,
since they are at the heart of addressing the root
causes of instability in Mali. We therefore welcome
the introduction of interventions that empower women
and young people to contribute to the development and
peace processes, and we embrace a whole-of-society
approach to include civil-society organizations, the
private sector and community and religious leaders.
7/20

16/06/2023

In our view, the role of the Peacebuilding Commission
in supporting the development and peace processes,
including by fostering entrepreneurial skills and
promoting community-based dispute resolution
mechanisms, among other things, is critical and should
be sustained.
In conclusion, Gabon, Ghana and Mozambique
reiterate their solidarity with the Malian people. We
reaffirm our respect for the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Mali. We believe that
strong cooperation between the host authorities and
its multilateral and regional partners, including the
United Nations, the AU and ECOWAS, remains crucial
in laying a strong foundation for peace in Mali. Going
forward, we believe that MINUSMA’s continued
engagement in Mali, in close cooperation with the
Malian authorities, will be essential to consolidating
the gains made towards finding lasting peace in that
sister country.
The A3 would like to take this opportunity to
inform the Council of the successful completion of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
in Mozambique. The ceremony marking the final stage
of the process took place on 15 June in Vanduzi in
Manica province, in the presence of His Excellency
President Nyusi and the leader of Resistência Nacional
Moçambicana, Mr. Ossufo Momade. The conclusion of
the process testifies to the political will of the two leaders
to engage in a dialogue to put an end to the conflict
in the country. The A3 in general, and Mozambique in
particular, would like to extend their profound thanks
to the Secretary-General, as well as his Special Envoy
and the wider international community, for their
staunch support to the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process in Mozambique.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative Wane for his briefing and
welcome the participation of Foreign Minister Diop in
today’s meeting.
We are pleased to see that the Secretary-General
has continued to monitor the Malian transitional
Government’s progress towards full compliance with
the four benchmarks included in the United Nations
internal review of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
(S/2023/36). The benchmarks are clearly defined and
fully attainable. They ask the Malian authorities to
uphold their existing obligations under the 2015 Algiers
23-17311

S/PV.9350

The situation in Mali

Accord, the status-of-forces agreement with the United
Nations and the timetable agreed by the Economic
Community of the West African States (ECOWAS) for
completing the political transition.
We are disappointed that the transitional
Government displayed obstructionist behaviour during
the reporting period. We are especially frustrated by
Mali’s ongoing restrictions on MINUSMA’s freedom of
movement and access, and by the fact that has it denied
170 MINUSMA flight authorization requests in the past
three months alone. The transitional Government also
denied four out of five MINUSMA requests to conduct
investigations into reports of human rights violations
and abuses. Despite those restrictions, which are in
contravention of Mali’s status-of-forces agreement,
we commend MINUSMA for conducting dozens of
other investigations using widely accepted remote
forensic tools.
In the same vein, we commend MINUSMA and the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights for
their diligent investigation into and factual reporting on
the human rights abuses and violations committed by the
Malian Armed Forces and the Kremlin-backed Wagner
Group last March in Moura, despite being denied access
to the area. The United Nations ability to shine a light
on abuses and violations despite such obstructionism
reinforces the importance of MINUSMA’s mandate to
promote and protect human rights in Mali. Statements
accusing MINUSMA of espionage for conducting an
independent investigation as part of its mandate are
unacceptable, and they present a serious threat to the
safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers
authorized by the Security Council, who deserve
nothing less than our full support.
On 25 May, the United States imposed visa
restrictions on two Malian military officers who
commanded units involved in the human rights
violations committed in Moura. We are appalled by
the disregard for human life by elements of the Malian
Armed Forces in cooperation with the Kremlin-backed
Wagner Group in Moura. Never has the destabilizing
role of Wagner Group forces and the direct threat they
pose to the Malian people and the country’s sovereignty
been more evident. Council members should also take
note of how military operations such as that in Moura,
harming civilians in central Mali, are undermining both
the efforts to protect civilians and the implementation
of a politically focused strategy.
8/20

16/06/2023

In a more positive development, the United
States applauds the transitional Government’s robust
preparation and planning for the 18 June constitutional
referendum. We once again reiterate our support for the
transition process and for elections in February 2024, in
which neither the transitional Government’s President
nor its Prime Minister can run for office, as the
transitional Government agreed to with ECOWAS. We
encourage the transition authorities and the signatory
armed groups to demonstrate a similar commitment
to the peace agreement by responding to the proposals
of the international mediation constructively and in a
spirit of compromise.
It is clear that MINUSMA cannot achieve its
mandate in the current conditions. We therefore
reiterate our rejection of business as usual. Only the
transitional Government’s fulfilment of the four
benchmarks should convince the Council to continue to
support MINUSMA’s deployment in its current form.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Wane for his
briefing and acknowledge the participation of Mr. Diop
in our meeting today.
Malta expresses its deepest condolences to the
families of the peacekeepers who were killed in
the attack on the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
on 9 June. We also pay tribute to the thousands of
peacekeepers that bravely carry out their duties despite
continuous threats to their safety and well-being, and
we wish the injured a full and speedy recovery.
Malta supports a future for MINUSMA, which
continues to work with the people of Mali. The strategic
review shared earlier this year (S/2023/36) provides us
with a solid outlook to this effect. We look forward to the
outcome of the constitutional reform, which is a step in
the right direction. We thank the Economic Community
of West African States and the African Union for their
efforts in supporting an inclusive process that places
the will of the Malian at the core. We also acknowledge
these efforts. We remain firm in our belief that a secure
return to democratic and constitutional order, including
the presidential elections, is key.
We also urge the Malian authorities and all parties
to create an environment conducive for women’s
rights and their protection. They must strive to ensure
the full equal, safe and meaningful participation of
women in the political transition and electoral and
23-17311

S/PV.9350

The situation in Mali

peace processes. In this context, we welcome efforts
to counter hate speech and violence against women
peacebuilders and human rights defenders.
Malta welcomes the meeting between the Minister
for Reconciliation, Peace and National Cohesion of
Mali with representatives of the Coordination des
mouvements de l’Azawad and the Plateforme in Kidal.
We also thank Algeria for its efforts in leading the
international mediation.
We continue to call for neutral engagement with
tangible outcomes in full respect of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, the issues of
self-determination, deeper decentralization and
local governance. Furthermore, the socioeconomic
development for the northern region of Mali remains
crucial. Dissipating any existing frictions between
signatory parties is a necessity.
Malta recognizes the urgent need to address the
ongoing security, humanitarian and human rights
situation in Mali, which are both a cause and a product
of years of conflict in the region. The people of Mali are
facing increasing humanitarian needs and displacement
compounded by the effects of climate shocks, deep
poverty and acute malnutrition, with 8.8 million people
requiring humanitarian assistance.
Humanitarian operations continue to face multiple
access-related challenges, due to insecurity and
instances of criminality. We call on all parties to
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance and
live up to their obligations under international law.
Although relatively less severe when compared to the
east, we are very alarmed that extremist attacks are
now also reported in the west and south of Mali.
Malta calls for an immediate end to ongoing human
rights violations and abuses. We are alarmed by the
hundreds of incidents of conflict-related sexual and
gender-based violence against women and girls recorded
in April. Perpetrators must be held accountable, cases
must be investigated, and victims must be given
effective and prompt protection.
We are also alarmed by the other grave violations
against children, including recruitment and use, killing
and maiming, and attacks on schools, which continue
to occur at a high rate. Child protection capacities in
MINUSMA need to be strengthened. Additionally, we
remain deeply concerned with the bleak conclusions
that emerged from the Moura report.
9/20

16/06/2023

MINUSMA’s capacity to deter violent extremism by
being present on the ground should not be underestimated.
We continue to call for greater cooperation from
the authorities to guarantee the required freedom of
movement for the Mission. We also commend the work
of the Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace Operations,
which continues to assist an enabling and inclusive
environment for women peacekeepers in MINUSMA.
Malta will continue to support the Mission’s crucial
presence in the region and the work of the Special
Representative as they support Mali in their course
towards peace and stability.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, for his briefing. I
welcome His Excellency, Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation
of Mali.
Switzerland condemns all the violence and attacks
perpetrated against peacekeepers and civilians since
our last meeting (see S/PV.9302). I express my deepest
condolences to the victims and their families. I would
also like to acknowledge the losses suffered by the
Malian Armed Forces.
In the face of insecurity, population displacement
and an alarming humanitarian situation, the efforts of the
United Nations and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
remain crucial to peace, stability and sustainable
development in Mali. In view of the renewal of the
mandate, I would like to highlight three key points.
First, as we have just heard and read in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2023/402), MINUSMA’s ability
to fulfil its mandate effectively and predictably is being
hampered. A complex operational context combined with
the vast perimeter of the zone of intervention and the
lack of personnel make this mission particularly arduous.
Adjustments are therefore necessary. Indeed, we need to
reconcile the Mission’s tasks with current realities, while
leaving it the necessary flexibility to use the resources at
its disposal. MINUSMA’s effectiveness will also depend
on better cooperation with the Malian authorities and
their progress on the four parameters identified by the
Secretary-General last January (S/2023/36), including
freedom of movement. Yet the Mission continues to
face restrictions, including the non-authorization of
reconnaissance flights.
23-17311

S/PV.9350

The situation in Mali

Secondly, we are concerned by the persistence
of allegations of violations and abuses of human
rights and international humanitarian law committed
throughout Malian territory. We were deeply concerned
to learn of the report published by the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights on the events
that took place in Moura in March 2022 as part of a
military operation. Switzerland strongly condemns all
these violations, some of which could constitute war
crimes and crimes against humanity. It calls on all
parties to the conflict — State, non-State and private,
Malian and foreign — to respect their obligations
under international humanitarian and human rights
law. Violations must be impartially, independently and
effectively investigated and prosecuted. Switzerland is
convinced that impunity is an obstacle to lasting peace
and continues to fuel cycles of violence in Mali.
Thirdly, the Peace and Reconciliation Agreement
remains as crucial as ever. Despite delays in its
implementation and ongoing blockages, it has made it
possible to maintain the ceasefire since 2015. We cannot
and must not lose the benefits of nine years of work,
dialogue and efforts towards national reconciliation.
Switzerland calls on all parties to resume dialogue by
establishing concrete confidence-building measures,
with the support of international mediation. Diligent
implementation of the Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement in its entirety would enable a united front
to be forged against the new threats. We reiterate
the importance of a peaceful political transition,
enabling credible and transparent elections to be held
on schedule and leading to a stable, democratic and
civilian Government. We welcome the constitutional
referendum scheduled for Sunday, and we hope that it
will be held throughout Mali.
In the face of multiple challenges, the Security
Council’s continued support for Mali and MINUSMA
is crucial. Switzerland believes that the Mission’s
priorities remain relevant, which is why we reaffirm
our full support for its important mandate, in particular
the protection of civilians and the implementation of
the peace agreement.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Wane for
his briefing. I welcome the participation of Foreign
Minister Diop at our meeting today.
I want to underline our unwavering support for the
hard work and courage of the peacekeepers of the United
10/20

16/06/2023

Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and other United Nations
staff. On behalf of the United Kingdom, I pay tribute to
the two Burkinabe peacekeepers killed and the seven
injured in the recent attack in the Timbuktu region.
No one can deny the scale of the challenges facing
the Malian people — severe security and humanitarian
threats, political instability, a fragile peace agreement.
Malian civilians and armed forces have paid a heavy
price. Through the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and other United Nations agencies, as well as bilateral
security, development and humanitarian efforts, we
have made huge investments in pursuit of the stable,
prosperous, democratic society the Malian people
deserve. That has come at great cost over the past
decade — not just financial, but also in terms of human
lives, many of them United Nations peacekeepers.
MINUSMA still has an important role to play in
supporting the Malian people. Following the SecretaryGeneral’s review, we stand ready to adapt the Mission
to improve its impact. But for the Mission to function
properly, the four parameters set out in the review must
be met.
Those parameters are not unreasonable. They
are not imposed upon Mali from outside. They are
commitments that have been made by the Malian
transitional authorities to their people, their neighbours
and to the international community — to deliver a
timely political transition, to implement the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, to uphold United
Nations freedom of movement, in accordance with the
status-of-forces agreement and to respect the mandate
set by the Council. Against those four parameters, we
would like to make several remarks.
First, we urge progress on a timely and peaceful
transition to constitutional order by March 2024. We
call for the full participation of civil society in this
Sunday’s constitutional referendum and in presidential
elections next February.
Secondly, urgent efforts are needed to revive
dialogue between the signatories to Mali’s faltering
peace agreement, building on the International
Mediation proposals.
Thirdly, restrictions on MINUSMA’s movements — on which there has been no improvement — need to be lifted.
23-17311

S/PV.9350

The situation in Mali

Fourthly, obstruction of MINUSMA’s mandated
human rights tasks must end. The tragic massacre, in
Moura, of more than 500 people by Malian forces and
the Wagner Group is deeply concerning. There must be
accountability for those crimes. MINUSMA must be
allowed to fulfil its human rights mandate without fear
of reprisals. Ultimately it is for the Malian transitional
authorities to choose its partners. But let us be clear — the
Wagner Group, whether operating autonomously or
under the direct control of Moscow, is not the answer in
Mali or anywhere else.
The United Kingdom, with most members of the
Council, remains committed to supporting MINUSMA’s
efforts to help build the future Mali’s people deserve. We
sincerely hope that the Malian transitional authorities
will live up to their responsibilities and allow the United
Nations Mission to fulfil its mandate. That is a choice
that only they can make.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): My delegation
thanks Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Wane for his comprehensive briefing and welcomes
Minister Diop to this meeting.
We received with dismay the news of the terrorist
attacks against the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in
Ber on 9 June. We regret the deaths of two peacekeepers
from Burkina Faso and offer our sincere condolences
and solidarity to the Government of that country, to the
families of the victims, as well as to MINUSMA.
Brazil reiterates once more its firm condemnation
of terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations. There
is no justification for such acts. The security situation
in Mali remains unstable and continues to take a heavy
toll — not just on MINUSMA, but also on civilians.
Although the numbers improved slightly in that respect,
we must renew our efforts to protect the most vulnerable.
In order to carry out that task effectively, it is
essential to ensure MINUSMA’s freedom of movement.
In that vein, we regret that no solution for the
resumption of unmanned intelligence, surveillance and
reconnaissance (ISR) flights has been reached, despite
the fact that MINUSMA adopted the measures agreed
with the Malian transition Government. The safety and
security of peacekeepers should be a top priority. We call
on the Malian authorities to work with MINUSMA on
the review of the procedure for drone ISR flights, as well
as on the lifting of ground movement restrictions.
11/20

16/06/2023

The Council has just started discussions on the
renewal of MINUSMA’s mandate. My delegation believes
it is crucial to ensure that the Mission is duly equipped to
support the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali and the political transition, as
well as to protect civilians and support the restoration of
the Malian State authority across the country.
Regional cooperation is a key factor to help Mali
pave the way towards a successful transition process. In
that regard, Brazil reiterates its support to the current
engagement with the Economic Community of West
African States and hopes that the dialogue with the Malian
transitional authorities will lead to further collaboration
on the development and implementation of a transition
plan conducive to the restoration of constitutional order.
As we pointed out in previous discussions with
regard to the drafting of a new constitution, the return
to democratic normalcy is a collective endeavour that
must include women, youth and ethnic and religious
minorities. We hope that the efforts of the Malian
authorities to add more voices to that exercise will
reflect on a more inclusive and peaceful constitutional
referendum on 18 June.
In addition, we welcome the ongoing cooperation
between MINUSMA and the Independent Authority
for Election Management, with a view to coordinating
the technical and logistical support for the elections
and the provision of capacity-building to civil society
organizations on gender promotion in electoral
processes, to name just a couple of examples. These are
encouraging concrete steps towards more inclusivity and
participation in the polls.
While the developments on the transition process and
constitutional reforms I mentioned are commendable,
they are not sufficient to the lay the ground for
durable peace without the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. We therefore wish to voice our
support for the leadership of Algeria in the mediation
process to overcome the present impasse and urge all
Malian political forces to remain engaged in dialogue
and to redouble efforts aimed at the full implementation
of the peace agreement.
Before I conclude and in view of the dire
humanitarian situation, my delegation would like to
seize this opportunity to underscore once again the need
to address the root causes of conflict. That notion should
be at the core of our work throughout the mandate
renewal talks.
23-17311

S/PV.9350

The situation in Mali

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to thank Special Representative
Wane for his briefing. I also welcome Foreign Minister
Diop to today’s meeting.
Recently, Mali has made active efforts to maintain
the country’s stability and development, promote the
political transition and combat terrorism and has made
significant progress in that regard. The political and
peace process in Mali is now at a critical stage. Mali’s
cooperation with the international community and the
United Nations has also entered a crucial phase. Foreign
Minister Diop’s presence at this meeting will help the
Security Council to better understand Mali’s position
and concerns on relevant issues.
I would like to stress the following points.
First, the constitutional referendum is an important
step for Mali in advancing the transition process and
maintaining lasting stability. China welcomes the
positive progress achieved by Mali in such areas as
drafting the constitution, preparing for the referendum
and building electoral institutions. We encourage all
parties concerned in Mali to resolve any potential
differences through dialogue and create favourable
conditions for the constitutional referendum. The
constitutional referendum is an internal affair of Mali,
and the international community should respect Mali’s
sovereignty and ownership in that regard.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) should be
available to provide Mali with logistical and technical
support on the ground based on its actual needs. China
encourages relevant regional organizations to strengthen
their communication with the Malian Government
and play a constructive role in supporting Mali’s
political transition.
Secondly, China commends the Malian Government’s
active efforts in counter-terrorism operations, which
serve as a deterrent to terrorist forces. According to the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/402), in the past
10 months the number of civilian casualties caused by
terrorist attacks decreased significantly compared to
the previous period. Mali is at the forefront of counterterrorism in the Sahel and West Africa and has made
considerable efforts to curb the spread of terrorism. The
international community should fully recognize those
efforts and step up the provision of funding, equipment,
intelligence and logistical support to help Mali strengthen
its security sector capacity-building.
12/20

16/06/2023

Some colleagues referred to the issue of human
rights in counter-terrorism operations. It should be
noted, without a doubt, that human rights need to be
protected. It should be noted too that terrorism endangers
people’s lives and security. Eliminating that threat
through counter-terrorism efforts is in itself a means
of protecting human rights. China has consistently
opposed the politicization of human rights issues. The
reports on the human rights situation of MINUSMA
and relevant United Nations bodies should be based on
facts, and any allegations should be verified against
facts. We must not adopt double standards on counterterrorism. More important, we must avoid stigmatizing
counter-terrorism operations, which would only play
into the hands of terrorist forces.
Thirdly, peacekeeping operations are an important
means for the Security Council to fulfil its mandate
of maintaining international peace and security.
Experience has shown that peacekeeping operations
must follow the basic principles developed in practice
over a long period of time, in particular the principle
of consent of the parties concerned. Missions should
maintain communication with the Governments of the
countries concerned and maintain a relationship of
mutual trust and cooperation, which is a prerequisite
for smooth peacekeeping operations. As the political
and security situations in the countries concerned
evolve, the mandates of peacekeeping operations
must be adjusted and optimized accordingly in a
timely manner. In that process, the sovereignty of the
countries concerned should be respected, the views of
the Governments should be fully heeded and the real
needs of the countries should be prioritized. The past
experience of successful peacekeeping operations
shows that clear and focused mandates and a timely
formulation of time-bound exit strategies are important
ingredients in the recipe for their success.
MINUSMA has been deployed for 10 years with
a great deal of investment. In June 2022, the Security
Council adopted resolution 2640 (2022) requesting
an internal review of the Mission to analyse new
developments and optimize and streamline the
Mission’s mandate.
The current mandate of the Mission is due to
expire at the end of this month. China looks forward
to the Council members fully listening to Mali’s
views and concerns, having a constructive and
responsible discussion on the future arrangements
for the Mission and conducting their discussions and
23-17311

S/PV.9350

The situation in Mali

making a decision grounded in broad consensus. In that
process, we encourage the penholder to maintain close
communication with Mali and the Council members.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Special
Representative Wane for his insightful briefing. I also
welcome the participation of Foreign Minister Diop.
First, I wish to pay tribute to the personnel of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) who are
working in one of the most dangerous United Nations
missions in the world. We honour those who have
perished in the line of duty, most recently the two
peacekeepers from Burkina Faso.
Today I want to highlight three points.
First, long-term stability cannot be achieved
without a return to constitutional order. The support
MINUSMA provides for the electoral process is
essential. We join the Economic Community of West
African States and the African Union in welcoming the
constitutional referendum to be held this Sunday and
commend the efforts made by the Malian transitional
authorities in that regard. We expect all stakeholders to
take advantage of that important step in the transition
timetable and continue to make every effort to hold
inclusive, transparent and peaceful elections.
The second point concerns the stalled implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
The agreement is the only existing framework to
achieve durable peace and reconciliation. We call on
the transitional authorities and the signatory parties
to expeditiously resume talks. Strengthened dialogue
and steady implementation of the Agreement will
build mutual trust which is essential for stability. We
appreciate the work of the international mediation
and encourage them to accelerate their efforts to build
confidence in the process.
Thirdly, we are deeply concerned about the security
and humanitarian situation. Terror attacks continue
unabated, as do human rights violations, including
conflict-related sexual violence and crimes against
children. Japan notes the Malian-led stabilization efforts
and the support provided by MINUSMA, including on
joint patrols, the protection of civilians and securing
access for humanitarian organizations.
Nevertheless, military efforts to tackle insecurity,
whether by Malian Defence and Security Forces or
foreign security forces, must respect human rights. We
13/20

16/06/2023

are deeply disturbed by the findings in the report of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, published on 12 May, on the events
in the village of Moura from 27 to 31 March 2022, and
echo the Secretary-General’s call to the transitional
authorities for an early completion of a credible and
transparent investigation and a swift publication of the
results in order to hold perpetrators accountable.
In order to achieve sustainable peace and stability,
building people’s trust through establishing democratic
governance with resilient and accountable institutions
and providing basic social services is key. To achieve
that, the points I have highlighted today — a return
to constitutional order, advancing the peace process
and addressing the security and humanitarian
situation — must proceed together.
MINUSMA has been playing a crucial role in the
efforts to advance all three points. At the same time, we
are cognizant of the difficulties the Mission is facing.
We reiterate our request to the Malian transitional
authorities to further cooperate with MINUSMA
to enable it to execute its mandate without undue
restrictions or constraints.
Japan believes that MINUSMA’s work remains
highly relevant and important to the people of Mali as
the country strives for sustainable peace and stability.
Since we on the Council are tasked with the Mission’s
mandate renewal this month, we need to assess and
candidly discuss the best way forward in order to
contribute to the stability that Malians deserve. We
need to give MINUSMA a clear and realistic mandate
in a united voice and provide robust support with
a concerted message. Japan remains committed to
engaging with our colleagues and all stakeholders, with
the best interests of the Malian people at heart.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), for his important
briefing. I acknowledge the presence in this meeting
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Republic of Mali.
The situation in Mali remains complex, especially
thanks to the precarious security situation affecting
the entire Sahel region and the activities of terrorist
groups, which have a direct impact on civilians,
displacing them and forcing them to flee, and causing an
23-17311

S/PV.9350

The situation in Mali

unprecedented humanitarian crisis. Ecuador rejects the
scourge of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
Terrorism continues to gain ground through the use
of misinformation and disinformation, improvised
explosive devices and suicide attacks. Combating such
campaigns must be a priority, particularly when they
jeopardize the safety of MINUSMA personnel and
make it impossible for MINUSMA to carry out its
mandate to protect civilians.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/402)
reflects the position of the transitional Government
regarding the fact-finding mission by the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights into the Moura
massacre. My delegation hopes that the transitional
Government will accept the recommendations for an
independent investigation. We again call for the lifting
of restrictions on the Mission’s movement and for respect
for the status-of-forces agreement. MINUSMA’s security
and the need for greater openness and cooperation are
essential to its ability to conduct activities related to the
protection of civilians, which is seriously affected when
a quarter of its requests are denied.
Ecuador is concerned about the deadlock in the
peace process. We commend the efforts of the Algiers
process international mediation team and the visit to
Bamako by Algeria’s Minister for Foreign Affairs at the
end of April, which resulted in a renewed commitment
by the transitional Government to implementing the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. The
process must start with a resumption of the work of the
monitoring mechanisms, which has been at a standstill
since December.
Mali’s return to the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel, and its close cooperation with regional
organizations such as the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States, will help
to stabilize the region. We look forward to seeing the
electoral process develop further and to the adoption of
a new constitution on 19 June, with a view to achieving
a political transition. We support MINUSMA’s efforts in
the electoral process and in the broader political process,
providing training for women from civil society in order
to increase their participation.
The Council must take decisions on the future of the
Mission, which has worked intensively on the political
transition and on the efforts to fully implement the
peace agreement, as well as on training programmes
and on consolidating peacebuilding. The worsening
14/20

16/06/2023

humanitarian situation in Mali, including in the areas of
food insecurity, malnutrition and fresh displacements in
some regions, requires sustained contributions to the 2023
humanitarian response plan. It also requires protection
for humanitarian workers to ensure the delivery of that
vital aid. Ecuador therefore believes that the preferences
set out by Mali on the future of MINUSMA should
be accompanied by cooperation in building capacity
and ensuring delivery of the Mission’s mandate. That
would create openness, which would help ensure
that States continue to contribute troops and thereby
enable further implementation of the peace agreement,
which is essential to building trust among all actors.
In conclusion, we have heard the concern regarding
the need to avoid the politicization of human rights. That
is why my delegation reiterates its view that the only way
to protect human rights is to agree that their application
must be governed by the principles of universality,
indivisibility and interdependence.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Wane for his
informative briefing and honour the brave peacekeepers
who have lost their lives in the line of duty, including
most recently in Ber. We also welcome Foreign Minister
Diop, who is with us today. Albania commends the
dedicated peacekeepers and personnel of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), who operate in a
very challenging environment. The situation in Mali
continues to deteriorate, with civilians bearing the brunt
of increased violence, a lack of protection and a dire
humanitarian situation. I would like to address three key
areas of concern.
First, the political transition is at a crucial phase. We
hope that this weekend’s referendum will be conducted
peacefully, and that it will take place all over the country
and allow all who wish to vote to do so. At the same
time, we stress the need for the political transition to
be transparent and inclusive, taking into consideration
the concerns of all stakeholders and civil society.
Additionally, the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali remains instrumental
to stabilizing the north. We commend the international
mediation team’s efforts to engage with the signatories.
However, the transitional authorities and signatory groups
must demonstrate their commitment to cooperating and
to implementing the agreement, while refraining from
escalating tensions.
23-17311

S/PV.9350

The situation in Mali

Secondly, the security situation poses increasing
challenges. The escalating tensions between terrorist
groups in Gao and Ménaka are threatening regional
stability, as those groups are expanding their presence,
gaining territorial control and causing forced
displacement. We condemn the violence against
civilians and call for enhanced protection measures.
We are deeply concerned about the dramatic increase
in violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, which have risen following the
involvement of the Wagner Group. We call on the
transitional authorities to act on the recommendations of
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
following the investigation of the Moura atrocities. It
is imperative that counter-terrorist operations comply
with international obligations.
Thirdly, we commend MINUSMA for its efforts
to implement its mandate and support the stabilization
of Mali. However, we remain deeply concerned about
the restrictions on the Mission’s freedom of movement,
which impede its full implementation of its mandate
and pose a significant risk to peacekeepers’ safety and
security. During the internal review, the SecretaryGeneral outlined four parameters for MINUSMA’s
continued operation. It is regrettable that progress on
those fronts has been limited. MINUSMA has a crucial
role to play in documenting violations of human rights
and international law, and the Mission should not be
hampered in carrying out its assigned mandate.
In conclusion, as Mali prepares to restore
constitutional order by March 2024, several crucial
tasks need to be addressed to ensure credible elections.
The restrictions imposed on MINUSMA have posed
significant barriers to the Mission’s effective and safe
operation, leaving the Council with critical decisions to
make regarding the mandate’s renewal. It is important
to emphasize, as the Secretary-General highlighted,
that maintaining the status quo is neither viable nor
desirable. It is therefore imperative that the Council
take action to navigate through the evolving situation
and steer Mali towards a stable and peaceful future.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General El-Ghassim Wane for his briefing,
and we welcome the participation in today’s meeting of
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali.
15/20

16/06/2023

The situation in Mali remains complicated, to say
the least. The subversive activities of the terrorists of the
Islamic State in the Greater Sahara and Jama’a Nusrat
ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin have noticeably increased.
Attacks on civilians, the Malian Armed Forces and
United Nations peacekeepers continue unabated, as do
armed confrontations between extremist groups.
The intensifying terrorist threat is further
exacerbating the humanitarian situation. According to
the United Nations, almost 9 million people in Mali are
in need of some form of humanitarian assistance. The
grave humanitarian situation has been worsened further
by the chronic underfunding of the humanitarian appeal
for Mali. We call on Bamako’s international partners to
refrain from politicizing the issue of donor assistance,
which has resulted in cuts to aid programmes in Mali.
It is civilians first and foremost who are suffering from
such decisions. For our part, we are providing food aid
both bilaterally and through the World Food Programme.
The Malian authorities are making significant
efforts in difficult circumstances to restore constitutional
order to Mali in accordance with the provisions agreed
with the Economic Community of West African States.
The transitional road map is being implemented, the
country’s new territorial division has been approved and
the Independent Authority for Election Management has
been formed. Voting by the military in the referendum on
the new constitution, the main date for which is 18 June,
is already under way. We wish Bamako every success in
organizing the free and democratic expression of the will
of its citizens.
The Malian leadership has also continued to
demonstrate its commitment to implementing the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali resulting
from the Algiers process, which is the basis for ensuring
lasting peace and national reconciliation. In that context,
we should not fail to mention the visit to Kidal in May
by the Minister for Reconciliation, Peace and National
Unity of Mali, Mr. Ismaël Wagué. Despite the suspension
of the Local Follow-up Committee to monitor the
implementation of the agreement, the Tuareg movements
are still committed to reaching an agreement with the
authorities. It will be important for the signatories to the
peace agreement to show flexibility and a willingness to
compromise in the national interest.
Given the security vacuum in Mali following
the inglorious withdrawal of the French Operation
Barkhane and the European Union’s Takuba Task Force,
23-17311

S/PV.9350

The situation in Mali

the Malian Government has been developing legitimate
partnerships with international partners who can help
to ensure security and protect the population. Thanks
to support from Russia, among others, the Malian
Armed Forces have been able to significantly increase
their capacity to combat terrorism and convert it into
real results on the ground. For example, from February
to March this year, the army carried out 59 successful
operations against terrorists in the centre of the country.
In addition, the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/402) noted that one of the results of the Malian
army’s efforts was a drop in civilian casualties.
The sharply negative reaction of some countries to
the strengthening of the cooperation between Russia
and Mali is a manifestation of neocolonialist attitudes
and double standards. What needs to be done is to
provide the Malian authorities with effective support
rather than putting a spanner in the works, which is
unfortunately what Paris and its allies continue to do,
including by leveraging multilateral structures. From
that point of view, the report of the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights published in May this
year on the events in Moura in March 2022 looks like
yet another politically motivated attempt to discredit
Bamako’s efforts to combat terrorism. And clearly,
as the Malians themselves have officially stated, the
report is blatantly biased. At the very least we should
wait for the results of Mali’s national investigation.
We note the efforts of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and are aware of the threats that
serving in the Mission poses to peacekeepers. We honour
the memory of the peacekeepers who have given their
lives for the sake of peace and security in the country
and express our condolences to the Government of
Burkina Faso, which lost two Blue Helmets as a result
of the attack on 9 June, as well as wishing the wounded
a speedy recovery. We believe that close coordination
with the host country and respect for Mali’s sovereignty
are vital to MINUSMA’s successful fulfilment of
its tasks.
In the light of the discussion that has already begun
in the Security Council on the renewal of MINUSMA’s
mandate, we would like to remind members that the
Malians have expressed their dissatisfaction with
the options proposed by the Secretary-General in his
strategic review for the reconfiguration of the Mission
(S/2023/36). The fact is that the primary issue is not
the number of peacekeepers but the functions they
16/20

16/06/2023

perform. One of the Malian Government’s key tasks
is combating terrorism, which does not come under
the Blue Helmets’ mandate. The fundamental element
in the existing mandate is the protection of civilians
and the provision of appropriate assistance to Mali in
that regard. An excessive focus on internal political
aspects and a shift to the protection of human rights in
the peacekeepers’ activities are undermining their core
task of maintaining peace and security in the country.
In the context of discussing the possible options for
reconfiguring the Mission, we believe that any proposals
for changing the modalities of its work should be based
on the opinion of the host country. Russia will continue
to provide Mali with comprehensive assistance,
including to enhance the State’s ability to respond to
security challenges. Our bilateral interactions take
place at Bamako’s request and in strict compliance with
the applicable norms of international law. We will also
continue to constructively promote the normalization
of the situation in Mali within the Security Council,
which is in the direct interests of achieving lasting
peace and stability throughout the Sahel-Sahara region,
which is still suffering from the consequences of the
events in Libya in 2011. We nevertheless firmly believe
that the leading role in stabilizing the country belongs
to the Malian people themselves.
The President: I shall now make a statement
in my capacity as the representative of the United
Arab Emirates.
I want to begin by thanking Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Wane for his valuable briefing
today and welcoming the presence of Foreign Minister
Diop in this meeting.
The United Arab Emirates is committed to
supporting Mali in this challenging period in full
complementarity with the aspirations of the Malian
people. We took careful note of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2023/402). In that respect, I
would like to make three points.
First, we must maintain a resolute focus on a
sustainable political transition in Mali. The electoral
timeline over the next 12 months will be crucial,
including the constitutional referendum in two days’
time and the presidential elections set for February
2024. The United Arab Emirates firmly believes that
those political processes should be inclusive, in order
to shape the right approach to sustainable conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and peacebuilding. The
23-17311

S/PV.9350

The situation in Mali

full, equal and meaningful participation of women
is critical to achieving that. A welcome step in that
direction would be the effective implementation by
the Malian authorities of the country’s national action
plan on women and peace and security. Also, in a
country where roughly 50 per cent of the population is
under the age of 15, the perspectives of the country’s
young people should be part of that process. Dialogue
is the cornerstone for overcoming difference and
fostering trust. In that context, the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
remains essential, and we encourage the parties to
engage openly with international mediation efforts.
Secondly, the myriad security threats facing the
country have clearly intensified. Among them, terrorist
attacks, including transnational outbreaks, are the most
pressing. We offer our condolences for the lives lost.
Burkina Faso and Mali accounted for 73 per cent of
terrorism-related deaths in the Sahel in 2022 and 52 per
cent in sub-Saharan Africa. The escalation in violence
is meanwhile spreading to neighbouring countries.
Therefore, coordination on a national level alone is
not enough. Domestic efforts must be complemented
by bilateral and regional approaches. And, to be
successful, they must be developed with the views of
the communities most affected in mind. It is clear that
those security challenges feed into the devastating
humanitarian situation across the country, which I will
now turn to.

16/06/2023

change and peace and security. Mali is a place where
we see those circumstances writ large. Increased
desertification and reduced rainfall is shrinking the
already-scarce food and water supplies in the country.
That hinders seasonal agricultural work, leaving
Malians without food, employment and other basic
needs, rendering them increasingly vulnerable to
recruitment into Mali’s armed groups. In that regard, we
reiterate the need to ensure that the Secretary-General’s
reporting on Mali include data and analysis on how the
adverse effects of climate change could drive conflict or
instability in Mali. In the same vein, we welcome Mali’s
launch of a new project, with the support of the United
Nations Development Programme, aimed at enhancing
climate security and the sustainable management of
natural resources for consolidating peace.

Thus far this year, 8.8 million Malians need
humanitarian assistance and protection across the
country — a 17 per cent increase from last year. As
always, women and girls are hardest hit. Women-headed
households are twice as likely to suffer from food
insecurity. In May, the overall displaced population was
nearing 400,000 people. We are particularly concerned
about levels of insecurity in central Mali, Gao and
Ménaka, where the most intense fighting is occurring,
and the numbers of those internally displaced continue
to grow. The absence of adequate action and basic
services renders the dire situation even more fragile and
undermines confidence in the State. The international
community must continue to collectively support
Mali’s efforts to increase State presence to ensure the
protection of all civilians.

Thirdly, the United Nations work on the ground
through the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) remains
essential to creating and maintaining a stabilizing
environment in Mali. We therefore believe that it is
imperative that the Council renew the MINUSMA
mandate and support its work on the ground. The best
chance of success for the mandate will come about if
Malian authorities and MINUSMA build a stronger
relationship based on cooperation. Greater dialogue
between the United Nations and Malian authorities
is an opportunity to have their security concerns met
and for deeper cooperation to emerge. This would
be welcome to the United Arab Emirates. It will
also help combat the problem of disinformation and
misinformation that we have witnessed there. This
week, the Security Council adopted resolution 2686
(2023) to that effect, condemning misinformation,
disinformation and incitement to violence against
United Nations peacekeeping operations as harmful
to peace and security. Mali is a case in point. By
capitalizing on resolution 2686 (2023), MINUSMA can
better monitor data related to hate speech, racism and
acts of extremism that might affect peace and security
and lead to increased threats against peacekeepers
on the ground. The United Arab Emirates remains
committed to ensuring a safer, more peaceful future for
the people of Mali.

In that increasingly challenging security and
humanitarian environment, climate change is acting
as a risk multiplier. The United Arab Emirates has
consistently flagged the connection between climate

Finally, let me take this opportunity to extend the
United Arab Emirates’ congratulations to Mozambique
for its successful completion of its disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process.

17/20

23-17311

S/PV.9350

The situation in Mali

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Mali.
Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): I thank
everyone for their kind words to us. First of all, I
would like to congratulate the United Arab Emirates
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. The Government of Mali takes note of the
report of the Secretary-General before us (S/2023/402)
and thanks Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, Head of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), for his briefing and
updates. The detailed observations of the Government
of Mali are contained in the memorandum transmitted
to the Security Council.
For my part, I would like to make the following
main observations.
I will begin with the political situation, in particular
developments in the transition process. Council
members will recall that one of the priority tasks
conferred upon the transitional Government was to
carry out political and institutional reforms that would
guarantee a better future for our people by achieving
lasting institutional stability. That legitimate demand
made by our compatriots is on the verge of becoming
a reality. Indeed, within the framework of an inclusive
and broadly consensual process, the transitional
Government has taken strong and irreversible
steps towards a return to a peaceful and secure
constitutional order within the agreed time frame.
The transitional Government has set about working
towards the successful holding of the referendum on
a new constitution for Mali, scheduled for 18 June, in
line with the aspirations of the Malian people, which
have been voiced through the national dialogue on the
reform process. The process of publicizing the issue of
the draft constitution and the related electoral campaign
have proceeded smoothly, and this augurs well for the
peaceful and credible holding of the referendum.
With regard to the security situation, I recall
once again that, since the military intervention in
Libya in 2011, the people of my country, Mali, and of
the Sahel region have truly been living in upheaval.
Unfortunately, our countries and populations continue
to wait, and have been waiting for more than a decade,
for an international response commensurate with
the resultant threat and its worrisome humanitarian
18/20

16/06/2023

consequences for the region. In the specific case of
my country, Mali, as only one example, I must say
that international responses, including those provided
by MINUSMA since its creation in 2013, have shown
their limits. How else can we explain the fact that the
security situation in Mali in 2013 was so much better
than it is today? The reality of the situation forces us to
acknowledge the failure of MINUSMA, the mandate of
which does not meet the security challenges.
For its part, the transitional Government has never
lost sight of the fact that the primary responsibility for
defending the nation and protecting the people and their
property lies, above all, with the Malian State. That is
why the Government has prioritized capacity-building
for and the equipping of the Malian Defence and Security
Forces to enable them to carry out their noble mission.
Thanks to that judicious decision, the Forces continue
to decisively prevail over armed terrorist groups, which
has met with acknowledgement and gratitude on the
part of the Malian people. I know that the increase
in the strength of the Malian Defence and Security
Forces has given rise to much discussion and even
hostile disinformation and destabilization campaigns,
to which Mali has unfortunately been subjected since
2021, including through the instrumentalization and
politicization of the issue of human rights, which others
have brought up around this table.
I would like to take this opportunity to respond to
certain comments and statements concerning the report
by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights on the events in Moura. It was
common knowledge that the town of Moura and its
surrounding villages had been under siege by terrorist
groups for many years. During that time, no force, not
even the international forces that had been deployed,
had access to the location, which meant the people were
left to their sad fate. I wonder, in passing: where were the
voices that are being raised today, when terrorists were
inhumanely treating and degrading our defenceless
civilian populations, stoning women, burning villages
and crops and carrying off livestock, which happened
in Ogossagou, Sobane Da and Diallassagou, to name
but a few?
Based therefore on reliable and detailed intelligence
indicating the presence in Moura of major terrorist
leaders seeking to benefit from extorting the population
and to organize and plan large-scale attacks, the
Malian Defence and Security Forces decided to carry
out an air-land operation commensurate to that threat
23-17311

S/PV.9350

The situation in Mali

in order to put an end to our people’s suffering. The
first units deployed by our airborne resources, as well
as their reinforcements, came under fire, confirming
the terrorist presence. Clashes ensued in and around
the town of Moura, resulting in the neutralization of
203 terrorist fighters, the seizure of a large quantity of
weapons and ammunition, the destruction of more than
200 motorcycles and the arrest of several suspected
terrorists and their transfer to the courts. Sadly, eight
of our valiant soldiers also died in battle during this
operation, which liberated the people of Moura from
the yoke of the terrorists.
Following the allegations of abuses, the competent
authorities immediately launched investigations. A
judicial team comprising the Mopti and Bamako public
prosecutors, investigators from the gendarmerie and the
forensic police and a forensic pathologist arrived on the
scene. The investigations are continuing in accordance
with the prevailing procedures and deadlines. Their
conclusions will be made public.
The Government firmly rejects the hasty
conclusions of the biased report by the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights. We see in
that biased report a real desire on the part of certain
States to use our common Organization to harm or
even punish Mali for its sovereign choices. Moreover,
what credence can be given to a report that desperately
seeks to make people believe that the Malian Defence
and Security Forces are targeting the very civilians
they are protecting in accordance with their mandate?
Furthermore, the report includes images apparently
obtained from satellites without the knowledge of
national authorities — a classic case of espionage. We
must show humility and understand that nobody loves
Mali more than the Malians, and nobody loves the
Malians more than the Malian authorities.
The Government is in fact not alone in rejecting
the fictitious conclusions of that report. A number of
residents of Moura, including women, have travelled
to Bamako to disprove the contents of the report. The
testimonies of the inhabitants of Moura, documented
and widely available, clearly disprove the unfounded
accusations contained in the report and, what is
more, they denounce the methods employed by the
investigators. Those residents have testified that the
Malian forces targeted terrorists only.
In the same vein, and as soon as the first allegations
were made in April 2022 by certain States and human
19/20

16/06/2023

rights organizations, the President of the Tabital
Pulaaku association categorically rejected accusations
that were levelled against the Malian Defence and
Security Forces, in particular the accusations of rape
of women. In addition, the President of the Malian
Human Rights Association strongly denounced the
methodology and conclusions of the inquiry. Those
firm, freely expressed positions deserve to be noted,
as they come from organizations and individuals who
lived through the events or received credible, verifiable
information about them.
We reiterate our firm opposition to any attempt to
instrumentalize or politicize the issue of human rights
and to address this problem in a lopsided manner. In
that regard, it is paradoxical to note how quickly the
fact-finding mission was set up, while, at the same
time, Mali had lodged its complaint with the Security
Council, on 15 August 2022, about France’s serious acts
of aggression against Mali’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity for the purposes of destabilization.
Regarding the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali emanating from the Algiers
process, despite the unilateral decision of the
Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad and
the Plateforme to suspend their participation in the
Agreement’s follow-up mechanisms, I hereby reaffirm
the Government’s commitment to continuing its
effective and judicious implementation, in particular
through the Mouvements de l’inclusivité. We remain
open to dialogue with our brothers in the signatory
movements — all of them — as demonstrated by the
Minister of Reconciliation’s visit to Kidal on 12 May.
My main observation concerns MINUSMA. At a
time when the members of the Security Council have
begun the negotiations to renew MINUSMA’s mandate,
I would like to briefly review the evolution of the
Mission from its establishment to the present day.
First, allow me to pay tribute to all the civilian and
military victims who have fallen in Mali, including our
recently fallen brothers from Burkina Faso, for whom
we express our deepest sympathy.
The rationale behind the establishment of
MINUSMA in 2013 included supporting the Malian
authorities in stabilizing the situation in Mali’s northern
regions, averting threats and actively taking steps to
prevent the return of armed elements to those areas,
particularly through the re-establishment of State
authority throughout the country. After several years
23-17311

S/PV.9350

The situation in Mali

of deployment of MINUSMA forces on the ground,
the security situation, which had once been a matter
of concern in the north of the country, has gradually
deteriorated in other regions of Mali, in particular the
centre. For the Government of Mali, the facts are clear:
MINUSMA has not achieved its core objective.
Today the people of Mali are happy to see the Malian
Defence and Security Forces carrying out missions with
complete autonomy to ensure the security of people
and goods; combat crime, organized crime, and human
and drug trafficking; escort transport vehicles; ensure
security at weekly markets in sensitive locations; and
secure borders through strengthening the security and
defence toolkit, in line with the vision of His Excellency
Colonel Assimi Goïta, President of the Transition and
Head of State.
Mali is fully aware that the fight against terrorism
is not part of the doctrine of peacekeeping operations,
but we have always called for a change in MINUSMA’s
posture to enable it to carry out its mandate properly
and strengthen its support to the Government’s efforts.
Mali has always cooperated with the United Nations in
good faith. An example of that constructive approach
was our full engagement with the Secretariat in the
context of the internal review of MINUSMA in order
to strengthen its operational capabilities with a view to
supporting Mali’s stabilization efforts.
I regret to reiterate today that the options proposed
by the Secretary-General in his report on the internal
review of MINUSMA do not respond to the concerns
and expectations repeatedly expressed by the
Government and people of Mali. We have no choice but
to come to the objective conclusion that, given the track
record of MINUSMA’s ten-year-long presence, the
Mission has failed to provide adequate responses to the
security situation in Mali, and that the future outlook

20/20

16/06/2023

of its operations does not meet the security needs of
the Malian people. Neither the Secretary-General’s
proposals, nor — and even less so — the draft resolution
currently being negotiated by the members of the
Council provide an appropriate response to Malians’
expectations. The content of this draft resolution is
so hostile to Mali that it justifies France’s recusal as
a penholder.
Beyond security, which we are now ensuring
through our own resources, we legitimately expected
MINUSMA to be a mission that would assist and support
the Government’s efforts. Unfortunately, MINUSMA
seems to have become part of the problem, fuelling
inter-community tensions exacerbated by extremely
serious allegations that are highly detrimental to
peace, reconciliation and national cohesion. The
situation is creating a feeling of mistrust among the
Malian population towards MINUSMA and causing
a crisis of confidence between the Malian authorities
and MINUSMA.
In view of all of the aforementioned, the
Government of Mali calls for the immediate withdrawal
of MINUSMA. However, the Government is willing to
cooperate with the United Nations in that regard.
In conclusion, I would like to express the gratitude
of the Government and people of Mali to all our partners,
both bilateral and multilateral, who are helping us to
shore up the efforts involved in rebuilding Mali. The
Government of Mali remains ready to cooperate with
partners who respect its sovereignty, its strategic
choices and the interests of the Malian people. Faithful
to our tradition of hospitality, the diatiguiya, Mali
remains, of course, open to all countries and peoples
of the world.
The meeting rose at noon.

23-17311
