Resolutions adopted on the repOl't-' of the Second Committee

it to the General Assembly,, together with its comments
and suggestions;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-ninth session an item entitled "Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States".
2192nd plenary meeting
6 December 1973

308:{ (XXVIII). Study on the indexation of prices

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Trade and Development Board on its thirteenth session, 12
Recalling General Assembly resolutions 1995 (XIX)
of 30 December 1964, 2904 (XXVII) of 26 September 1972 and 3041 (XXVII) of 19 December 1972,
Recalling also resolutions 55 (Ill) of 19 May 1972,
80 (III) of 20 May 1972 and 83 (III) of 20 May
1972 of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, 13
Recognizing the importance of the interrelation between the reform of the international monetary system
and existing or prospective arrangements among countries, including those that involve int~rnational trade and
the flow of capital as investment or development assistance,
. Recalling the Declaration and Principles of the Action Programme of Lima, in particular paragraph 3
(a) (iv) of section B of the Programme of action, 14
Recalling also the Economic Declaration adopted by
the Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Algiers from
5 to 9 September 1973., 15
Bearing in mind the review and appraisal of the implementation of the International Development Strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade
now being undertaken by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and by other bodies,
. Mindful of the fact that the structure and organizat10n of the global import-export tr~de is significantly
advantageous to the developed countnes,
1. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to prepare, after consultation with the President of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development,
a comprehensive study on the indexation of prices of
commodities produced in, and exported by, developing
countries and to examine ways and means whereby unit
p~ices of m~nuf~ctured imports from developed countnes and umt pnces of exports from developing countries could be automatically linked;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
to submit a report on the findings of the study to the
General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session, through
the Trade anCJ Development Board.
2192 nd plenary meeting
6 December 1973
12 !hid., part three.
1 ~ See Proceedinf:{s

of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Develorment, Third Session, vol. I. Rr11ort and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.IT.D.4),

annex I.A.
14 Ibid ..

annex Vlll.F.
and Corr.1, p. 57.

15 A/9330

41

308-1- (XXVIII). Reform of the international
monetary syste111

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2806 (XXVI) of 14 Decemb~r 1971, as well as resolution 84 (Ill) of 20
May 1972 of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, 16
Noting that the Chairman of the Committee on Reform of the International Monetary System and Related
Issues, established by the Board of Governors of the
International Monetary Fund, has submitted a report on
the present status of the Committee's work and a First
Outline of the Reform,
Recogni-:.ing that the problems in the monetary, trade
and finance fields should be resolved in a co-ordinated
manner, taking into account their interdependence,
through appropriate consultations as envisaged in the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, with the full participation
of developed and developing countries,
l ._ Draws attention to the danger of harmful disruption of :-1orld trad~ and development, in particular
for devclopmg countnes, as a result of the continuing
uncertainty in _the international monetary sphere, and
welcomes the mtention of the Committee on Reform
of the International Monetary System and Related Issues to settle the issues of reform by '.H July 1974;
. 2. Stre~ses th~t the reformed monetary system should
?1m at universality and should take into account the
mterests of_ t~e i?ternational community as a whole,
thereby. ass1stm_g m the evolution of a system of world
cconom1e relations based on the equalitv :md interest
of all countries;
,
3. Welcomes the provisions for full and effective
p_articipation of the developing countries in the discussions and in. the decision-making process of the reform
and emphasizes the role of the Committee on Reform
of the International Monetary System and Related Issues as the body fully responsible in all negotiations
on the reform;
4_. . I:ec?gniz<'s the need for an appropriate degree of
flex1b1hty m the new monetary system to take into account int~r alia, specifically, the special characteristics
a~d specific structural probkms of developing countries;
5. _Invites the International Monetary Fund to give
atte~t1on to _the concerns of the developing countries,
particularly m the forthcoming review of its current
CJUOta, and through that, consequentially, voting structure;
6. _En_dorses further examination of proposals for
establishmg a new fund facility to provide longerte:m balance-of-payments finance for developing countries:
7. R e~ngni"zes the need for reviewing the methods
of <?Perat10n of the International Monetary Fund, in
particular the terms for both credit repayments and
"stand_-by" arrangements, the system of compensatory
fma.ncnw, and the terms of the financing of commodity
butter s:och. so as to enable the developing co,mtries
to ma1.:c more effectiw use of them;
H\ See Prnceedings of thP United Nations Confcr 1,ncc un
Tradr an:/ [),-1·clorml'nl. Th.'rd Session. v"I. T, T?r,":irr ,rnd
,1,,,·, .-. , \ UniL'd Nati,,ns publication, Sales N:i: E.7,.ll.fi.4),
:,rr,.,, I -·'.

42
Session
= - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -General
- - _Assembly-Twenty-eighth
: _ _____________________________
-

8. Asserts the fundamental importance of ensuring
that the reformed system should both create conditions
and contain arrangements for promoting an increasing
flow of real resources from the developed countries
to the developing countries;
9. Recommends that, within the framework of the
reform of the international monetary system, the earliest possible decision should be reached, in accordance
with the time-table established by the Committee on
Reform of the International Monetary System and Related Issues, on the outstanding issues, including the
question of establishing a link between special drawing rights and additional development finance;
10. Emphasizes that the additional creation of
special drawing rights in an adequate and orderly
manner by the International Monetary Fund should be
determined on the basis of global liquidity needs;
11. Agrees that wherever possible the developing
countries will be exempted from import and capital
outflow controls for balance-of-payments purposes and
that special circumstances of developing countries will
be taken into account in assessing controls which these
countries feel it necessary to apply;
12. Welcomes the decision of the Committee on
Reform of the International Monetary System and
Related Issues to set up a Technical Group on the
Transfer of Real Resources in order to examine in detail specific suggestions for action which could be taken
by the Committee in accordance with its mandate so
as to promote the flow of real resources from developed to developing countries.
2192nd plenary meeting
6 December 1973

3085 (XXVIIl). Multilateral trade negotiations

The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution 82 (III) of 20 May _1972 of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development17 and General Assembly resolution 3041
(XXVII) of 19 December 1972,
Recalling the important declaration of 14 September
1973, which was approved by the Ministerial Meeting
of the Contracting Parties to the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade held in Tokyo, as well as the
concluding statement of the Chairman of the Meeting,
Reaffirming that the multilateral trade negotiations
shall aim, inter alia, at securing additional benefits for
the international trade of developing countries, so as
to achieve a substantial increase in their foreign exchange earnings, the diversification of their exports,
the acceleration of the rate of growth of their trade,
taking into account their development needs, an improvement in the possibilities for these countries to participate in the expansion of world trade, and a better
balance as between developed and developing countries in the sharing of the advantages resulting from
this expansion, through, in the largest possible measure, a suhstantial improvement in the conditions of
access for the products of interest to the developing
countries and, wherever appropriate, measures designed
to attain stable, equitable and remunerative prices for
primary products,

1, Ibid.

Taking note of the Economic Declaration adopted
by the Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Algiers
from 5 to 9 September 1973, 18 in which they expressed
the belief that the multilateral trade negotiations will
pave the way for a new and just international division
of labour and help in the establishment of a new sys~em of world economic relations based on equality and
the common interests of all countries,
1. Takes note of the report of the Trade and Development Board for the period from 26 October
1972 to 11 September 1973;rn
2. Emphasizes that the Tokyo Declaration is expressed in broad terms and opens the way for advancing further work along lines expressed by delegations
at the Ministerial Meeting and, in particular, enables
Governments, in the course of the work of the Trade
Negotiations Committee, to take due account of the concerns, perspectives and principles voiced at Tokyo by
different delegations, particularly those of developing
countries;
3. Notes with satisfaction that a number of Governments have decided to enter into comprehensive multilateral trade negotiations within the framework of
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in which
all countries, developed and developing, will be enabled
to participate;
4. Expects that among the basic objectives guid-ing these negotiations will be the concepts, as agreed
upon in Tokyo, of non-reciprocity and of special and
more favourable treatment through differential measures in favour of developing countries, throughout
the negotiations, where this is feasible and appropriate;
5. Invites the participants in the multilateral trade
negotiations to ensure that:
(a) The Trade Negotiations Committee will enable
the Secretary-General of the United Nations Confcr-ence on Trade and Development to attend its meetings
as appropriate;
(b) The Director-General of the Genera.I Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade will keep the Secretary-General
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development informed, on a continuing basis, of developments in the multilateral trade negotiations in such
a manner as to facilitate the work of the SecretaryGeneral of the Conference in assisting the developing
countries;
6. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to r,>
port to the Trade and Development Board at its fourteenth session on all aspects of the negotiations pertinent to the trade and development of develnpini'.
countries.
2192nd plenary meeting
6 Decembrr !973
3086 (XXVJII). Aetivities of the lhiil••d i\a1imH
Industrial Development Orµ;a11i:t.alio11

The General Assembly,
Hal'illg ,·onsidered the repo1t of the Industrial fk-

velopment Board on the work of its seventh scssion/0
IBA/9330 and Corr.I, p. 57.
19 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twc111_1•-t1gh1h
Scssio11, Supplement No. 15 (A/9015/Rev.1).
20 Ibid., Supplement No. 16 (A/9016).
