S/2014/708*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 September 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2155
(2014), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) until 30 November and requested that I report on the
implementation of the Mission’s mandate every 60 days. The report provides an
update on developments from 25 July, the date of my previous report (S/2014/537),
to 24 September 2014, including on force generation, the reconfiguration of
UNMISS and the review of the staffing of the Mission, as requested in paragraphs 8
and 9 of the resolution.

II. Political developments
2.
While the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), supported by
international partners, continued its efforts to mediate a political settlement of the
conflict in South Sudan, the parties have thus far made little concrete progress. They
have continued to engage in sporadic fighting on the ground, with severe
consequences for the civilian population, a deepening humanitarian crisis and
violations of the cessation of hostilities agreement.
3.
Following a six-week adjournment, peace negotiations were reconvened in
Addis Ababa on 4 August. In accordance with the agreement of 9 May to resolve the
crisis in South Sudan, negotiations were conducted in the format of multi-stakeholder
round-table discussions. The 60-day deadline for the completion of negotiations on
transitional arrangements expired on 10 August without the formation of a
transitional government of national unity. The talks nevertheless continued, with the
establishment of three committees for participants to discuss provisions on security,
governance and economic and financial management during a period of transition.
On 16 August, however, the talks were again derailed when the Government decided
to suspend its participation until the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army
(SPLM/A) in Opposition signed the cessation of hostilities implementation matrix.
The Government also demanded that the mediation team revise its decision-making
formula for the talks, in particular the definition of “sufficient consensus”.

* Reissued for technical reasons on 16 October 2014.

14-61581* (E)

171014

*1461581*

S/2014/708

4.
On 21 August, following a briefing by Seyoum Mesfin, the Chairperson of the
IGAD special envoys, the African Union Peace and Security Council, in a
communiqué, urged the parties to immediately end the fighting and expeditiously
conclude the IGAD-facilitated talks. It also reiterated its readiness to impose
targeted multilateral sanctions and other punitive measures against any party that
failed to honour its commitments and continued to undermine the search for a
negotiated solution to the conflict.
5.
The lack of progress at the talks set the stage for an extraordinary summit of
IGAD Heads of State in Addis Ababa, held on 25 August. The summit, chaired by
the Prime Minister of Ethiopia and IGAD Chairperson, Hailemariam Dessalegn, was
attended by all IGAD member States, including Salva Kiir, President of South
Sudan, and the leader of SPLM/A in Opposition, Riek Machar. The purpose of the
summit was threefold: to secure the signature by both sides of a revised matrix on
the implementation of the cessation of hostilities agreement; to obtain a final
agreement on the participation of all stakeholders in the negotiations and resolve the
impasse over decision-making modalities during the talks; to obtain an agreement
by the two leaders on a power-sharing formula within a transitional government.
6.
Unfortunately, none of the three targets was met. The chief negotiators of the
warring parties signed a statement entitled “Rededication of and implementation
modalities for the cessation of hostilities agreement”, but their signatures did not
appear on the revised matrix and the addendum thereto. No final resolution of the
dispute on stakeholder participation and decision-making in the talks was found, and
President Kiir and Mr. Machar were unable to reach agreement on a power-sharing
formula. The IGAD Heads of State and Government, however, endorsed a protocol
on agreed principles on transitional arrangements towards resolution of the crisis in
South Sudan and called upon stakeholders to conclude an agreement establishing a
transitional government of national unity within 45 days and to operationalize the
principles set out in the protocol.
7.
The protocol confirmed President Kiir as the Head of State, Government and
the armed forces for an interim period of 30 months, as well as his powers to
appoint a Vice-President, a position currently held by James Wani Igga. The
SPLM/A in Opposition was granted authority to nominate a Prime Minister,
mandated to coordinate the implementation of the agenda for the transition. The
nominee would have to be agreed on by the President and would not be able to run
for any public office in the national elections at the end of the transitional period.
The IGAD Heads of State also called upon SPLM/A in Opposition to sign the
protocol, adding that those who obstructed the peace process would be held
responsible and be denied participation in future political arrangements.
8.
SPLM/A in Opposition rejected the Protocol, stating that it heavily favoured
President Kiir and the Government. It also denied having signed the implementation
matrix, declaring that the signature of the rededication statement indicated its
endorsement of only the cessation of hostilities agreement, not of the
implementation matrix. Former detainees and other political parties also criticized
the protocol. They argued that it diverged from their views on transitional
arrangements and on the right of political leaders under the transition to run for
office thereafter. Accordingly, they have argued in favour of reverting to discussions
that had taken place prior to the summit of 25 August. On 15 September, the
national Legislature, in a session attended by members of the Council of States and

2/19

14-61581

S/2014/708

the National Legislative Assembly, endorsed the IGAD protocol of 25 August as a
working document, amid concerns raised by the political opposition over the
proposed power-sharing arrangements.
9.
Disagreements on the protocol also caused divisions within the Political Party
Leadership Forum. On 13 September, Lam Akol and some other members of the
Forum were prevented from boarding a flight from Juba to Ethiopia, where the sixth
session of the peace talks officially commenced on 22 September.
10. During the Independence Day ceremonies on 9 July, remarks made by
Government officials that the adoption of federalism would lead to violence
heightened tensions in Juba and the Equatorias, as many Equatorians favour
federalism. Since July, the federalism debate has largely faded from public forums,
although it remains a sensitive subject, particularly in the context of controlling
natural resources.
11. On 24 July, President Kiir signed a decree establishing the Greater Pibor
Administrative Area, an autonomous area within Jonglei State. This was followed on
30 July by the appointment of David Yau-Yau to the position of Chief Administrator.
Mr. Yau-Yau was sworn in by the President on 12 August. The establishment of the
Area is one of the provisions of the agreement on the resolution of the conflict in
Jonglei State of 9 May 2014 between the Government and the South Sudan
Democratic Movement/South Sudan Defence Army Cobra Faction, led by the Chief
Administrator. Mr. Yau-Yau is currently touring the Area and establishing county
commissioner positions, but has not received a development budget as yet.
12. On 12 August, the National Legislative Assembly, in a session attended by
202 of 332 parliamentarians and 30 of 50 members of the Council of States,
approved the budget and appropriation bill for fiscal year 2014/15. The budget
amounts to about 11.2 billion South Sudanese pounds. Oil continues to be the major
source of revenue, with the Government expecting oil revenues to finance nearly
80 per cent of the overall budget. Some 85 per cent of the expenditure is allocated to
salaries, operating costs and transfers to states. Within that amount, the security
sector accounts for about 35 per cent of the spending.
13. On 26 August, the National Legislative Assembly passed a motion to dismiss
23 of the 24 members who had failed to attend the 12 previous consecutive
parliamentary sessions without the permission of the Speaker of the Assembly.
These included Mr. Machar and his deputy, Alfred Ladu Gore, as well as four of the
former SPLM detainees.
14. In a separate development, on 3 September, the National Legislative Assembly
ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women.

III. Security situation
A.

Security developments
Upper Nile State
15. During the reporting period, the security situation in Upper Nile State was
dominated by events in Panyikang, Nasir and Maban Counties. The SPLM/A in

14-61581

3/19

S/2014/708

Opposition and armed Nuer youth elements attempted to take control of Nasir,
which fell to the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) on 4 May. Throughout the
month of August, UNMISS reported artillery and small-arms fire from SPLA, in the
areas surrounding Nasir, particularly across the Sobat River. On 9 August, SPLM/A
in Opposition launched an attack on Nasir, which was repelled by SPLA.
16. In Bunj, Maban County, on 3 August, a group of Nuer SPLA soldiers defected
from their barracks in the town and clashed with members of a local militia, the
Maban Defence Force (MDF), a few kilometres south of Bunj. Between 3 and
5 August, MDF elements targeted Nuer civilians residing in Bunj and killed five
Nuer humanitarian workers. UNMISS military arrived in Bunj on 6 August to
extract non-essential humanitarian workers and secure the airstrip as well as the
compound of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
where humanitarian workers were being sheltered. The presence of UNMISS helped
to stabilize the security situation, allowing for the continuation of life-saving
humanitarian activities, including the delivery of food to the 130,000 refugees at
four nearby camps. MDF personnel were brought to the vocational training centre
together with SPLA surge troops brought from Paloich. MDF was also deployed to
the outskirts of Bunj. Despite the efforts of the local authorities to reduce inter-ethnic
tensions, Nuer SPLA soldiers and family members remain confined to the SPLA
barracks; 45 Nuer civilians were relocated to Longechuck County.
17. On 16 August, UNMISS received reports that the SPLM/A in Opposition was
mobilizing in Pigi County, northern Jonglei State, in order to push north towards
Malakal, the capital of Upper Nile State. On 21 August, SPLM/A in Opposition
forces arriving from Pigi reportedly shelled SPLA forces near Dolieb Hill, south of
Malakal, in Panyikang County. SPLA reportedly repulsed SPLM/A in Opposition
during this incident. Fearing that the violence would spread to Malakal,
approximately 400 civilians sought shelter in the UNMISS protection site, while
others fled to nearby Wau Shilluk town, where there are an estimated 40,000
internally displaced persons. The fighting did not reach Malakal. SPLM/A in
Opposition once more attempted to take Dolieb Hill on 19 September, but was again
repulsed by SPLA. On 18 September, SPLM/A in Opposition forces were reported
to have advanced towards Renk in Upper Nile State from different directions. They
took control of Duk Duk, Girbanat and Amduluz, some 70 km east of Renk town.
This development prompted some 39 personnel from humanitarian organizations to
seek refuge at the UNMISS base. From 19 to 21 September, SPLM/A in Opposition
shelled Renk town and surrounding areas. As a result, up to 300 people sought
protection just outside the UNMISS base in Renk. On 22 September, UNMISS was
informed by SPLA in Renk that SPLA had recaptured the areas of Gongbar,
Duk Duk and Gosfamy.
Unity State
18. In Unity State, SPLA and SPLM/A in Opposition continue to be deployed in
close proximity to one another in the Rubkona area, with the state capital, Bentiu,
remaining under SPLA control. On 15 August, UNMISS reported heavy gunfire and
observed SPLA and SPLM/A in Opposition clash briefly near the Bentiu/Rubkona
town boundary, with SPLM/A in Opposition repelling SPLA from parts of Bentiu
town. Both sides are reported to have sustained heavy casualties. The county
commissioner and an SPLA commander were killed in the fighting. UNMISS
extracted about 350 civilians who had sought shelter from the fighting at the

4/19

14-61581

S/2014/708

Rubkona airstrip and relocated them to the UNMISS protection site. On 18 August,
a child in the UNMISS protection site was wounded by small arms fired from
Rubkona, which is controlled by SPLA. The shooting also damaged the quarters of
humanitarian partners living in the UNMISS compound. Following the fighting in
Bentiu on 15 August, SPLA prevented UNMISS patrols and internally displaced
persons from entering Bentiu town and ordered the temporary closure of the
UNMISS protection site gate. The gate was reopened on 26 August after discussions
with community leaders and women’s groups about potential security risks.
19. In the most serious of incidents, on 26 August an UNMISS helicopter crashed
approximately 10 km south-west of Rubkona during a flight from Wau to Bentiu.
Three of the four Russian crew members died in the crash. The preliminary finding
of a civil aviation investigation team, which included officials of the South Sudan
civil aviation authority, the UNMISS aviation safety unit and the federal air
transport agency of the Russian Federation, has confirmed that the helicopter was
shot down by hostile fire. The investigations are continuing in line with the 1944
Convention on International Civil Aviation. This incident is one in a series of other
incidents in which United Nations helicopters have been the target of hostile action,
resulting in the loss of lives and seriously impeding the efforts of UNMISS to fulfil
its mandate.
Jonglei State
20. While the situation in Bor, the capital of Jonglei State, has remained calm, the
security situation in Ayod and Duk Counties remains a concern. While Ayod remains
under SPLA control, IGAD monitoring and verification mechanism teams confirmed
several clashes between SPLA and SPLM/A in Opposition in the area between
22 and 27 July and on 15 August. The IGAD teams reported heavy SPLM/A in
Opposition casualties and observed evidence of fierce fighting in the vicinity of
Ayod. In addition, UNMISS reported movements of hundreds of Lou Nuer youth
from Uror to Duk County, which increased tension before they returned to Uror in
early August. Rumours of the Lou Nuer youth movements caused the displacement
of civilians from Duk County and the mobilization of local youth in Duk and Twic
East Counties to protect their respective communities against the Lou Nuer youth.
21. The security situation continues to be fragile in Lakes State owing to
inter-communal fighting between Dinka sub-clans living in the counties of Cuibet
and Rumbek North. Rumbek Central and Rumbek East counties continued to
experience cross-border clashes with Dinka communities in Warrap State. Those
clashes necessitated the deployment of an UNMISS military patrol on 6 August to
deter further inter-communal revenge killings. On 12 September, tensions increased
following the ambush and killing of five Dinka Agar persons in Cueibet County,
reportedly by the Dinka Gok.
22. In Western Equatoria State, several clashes took place between Dinka
pastoralists, originally from Lakes State, and host communities in Mvolo and
Mundri West Counties, with the most significant clash taking place in Mundri West
on 2 August. The clashes led to the displacement of almost 3,000 local inhabitants,
who abandoned their farms. On 7 September, in Warrap State, inter-communal
clashes reportedly occurred between the Wun-Thuc and Wun-Adel Dinka sub-clans.

14-61581

5/19

S/2014/708

B.

Regional dimensions of the conflict
23. Ugandan soldiers remain deployed in Juba and Bor in support of the
Government. A limited number of Justice and Equality Movement elements
continued to be observed in Bentiu and Rubkona, Unity State, often deployed
alongside SPLA troops. An unknown number of Justice and Equality Movement and
SPLM-North forces are present in Yida and Pariang, Unity State.

IV. Humanitarian situation
24. The ongoing fighting in Jonglei, Unity and Upper Nile States and the
inter-communal conflicts in other states continued to disrupt livelihoods and cause
displacement. More than 1.7 million people have fled their homes since December
2013. Of those, close to 1.3 million are displaced within South Sudan. Some 96,000
of these internally displaced persons are currently on UNMISS bases seeking
protection. In addition, approximately 450,000 people have fled to neighbouring
countries. By 18 September, aid agencies had reached 3.1 million (82 per cent) of
the 3.8 million people targeted to receive assistance by the end of the year.
25. By the end of August, some 3.5 million people were at crisis and emergency
levels of food insecurity. Most of them were in the conflict-affected states of
Jonglei, Unity and Upper Nile, where violence and displacement had taken a heavy
toll on livelihoods and access to markets. Women are especially vulnerable to food
insecurity, as 57 per cent of households in the protection sites are headed by women.
Recent reports show that the large-scale aid operations in Unity State in the form of
food assistance and livelihood supplies to the displaced and vulnerable households
have improved food security in some of the most affected counties. The Integrated
Phase Classification modality group is completing an updated analysis of food
insecurity in September, following the finalization of which new data on current
levels of food insecurity will be available. Preliminary indications suggest that in
several of the areas most affected by conflict, food security has not deteriorated to
projected levels owing to ongoing food assistance and nutrition treatment. At the
same time, the ongoing harvest will help to stabilize the most food-insecure areas
until December. To further stabilize the situation, it will be critical to pre-position
aid supplies, resume trade and restore livelihoods during the dry season, expected to
begin in November. If, however, violence continues, food insecurity will likely
deteriorate further in 2015.
26. Malnutrition, especially among children and pregnant and lactating women,
remains extremely serious. Some camps for internally displaced persons have up to
40 births per week, yet reproductive health and information services are weak or
non-existent. Nutritional surveys conducted between April and July indicated an
estimated prevalence of global acute malnutrition of over 30 per cent in some
counties in Jonglei and Unity States. In August, malnutrition screenings by aid
agencies in Longechuk County in Upper Nile State found an estimated global acute
malnutrition rate of close to 50 per cent. Nutrition agencies forecast that more than
900,000 children will suffer from severe or moderate acute malnutrition before the
end of the year and require treatment. Up to 50,000 children under the age of 5 years
may die before the end of the year if they do not gain access to appropriate
treatment for severe acute malnutrition.

6/19

14-61581

S/2014/708

27. The cholera outbreak in South Sudan has largely stabilized. As at 7 September,
6,065 cholera cases, including 139 related deaths, had been reported. While the
concerted efforts of health and sanitation partners have limited the spread of cholera
in the sites, the continued grave health risks posed by poor hygiene and unsanitary
conditions are manifested in the high caseload of acute watery diarrhoea, acute
respiratory infections and malaria. Despite the efforts of UNMISS and humanitarian
agencies, health and sanitary conditions in the UNMISS protection sites remain of
serious concern.
28. Heavy rains also triggered the first seasonal floods of the year. Of the
1.3 million internally displaced people, more than a million are in areas that are at
risk of flooding. Some people are likely to be displaced again because of the floods,
or be forced to stay in extremely unsanitary areas if hostilities prevent them from
moving freely to higher ground. Flooding has already been experienced in the lowlying civilian protection sites in the UNMISS bases in Bentiu, Bor and Juba, which
has resulted in people living in standing water for weeks, which has had a
significant impact on people’s living conditions, health and sanitation in the
protection sites.
29. Humanitarian access continued to be hampered by fighting and violence
perpetrated by both sides against aid workers, equipment and infrastructure. Active
hostilities and insecurity in several states, especially Unity and Upper Nile,
continued to disrupt humanitarian response activities and restrict road and air access
for humanitarians. Insecurity also continued to hamper river transport, but for the
first time since the outbreak of conflict barges were able to travel from Juba to
Upper Nile State in August/September.
30. As at 19 September, the crisis response plan for 2014 had been 53.5 per cent
funded, leaving a shortfall of around $837 million to meet people’s needs until the
end of the year. Some 78 per cent of donor pledges made at the conference on South
Sudan in Oslo in May had been committed. To prepare for the upcoming dry season
towards the end of the year, aid agencies are reviewing their requirements for
procurement and the pre-positioning of supplies in late 2014 to respond to urgent
needs in the first months of 2015.

V. Implementation of the Mission’s reprioritized
mandated tasks
A.

Realignment of the Mission
31. In line with the new mandate under Security Council resolution 2155 (2014),
UNMISS continued to realign its structures and activities. Owing to the increase in
protection and humanitarian needs across the country, the Mission has redeployed
staff and resources to improve its capacity to protect civilians in the most affected
areas, increase human rights reporting and investigations, create conditions
conducive to the delivery of humanitarian assistance and support the monitoring by
IGAD of the cessation of hostilities.

14-61581

7/19

S/2014/708

B.

Protection of civilians
32. As set out in the Mission’s revised strategy for the protection of civilians, the
Mission continues to focus on a three-tiered approach, namely protection through
political processes, physical protection and establishing a protective environment.
33. Under the first tier, protection through political processes, UNMISS and other
United Nations officials continue their active engagement with all parties to stress
their obligations to respect international humanitarian and human rights law and
ensure the protection of civilians. This political messaging was further strengthened
by the Security Council during its visit to South Sudan on 12 and 13 August.
34. The maintenance of the civilian character of UNMISS civilian protection sites
remains a priority. While UNMISS adheres to international humanitarian law in the
determination of who is a civilian (i.e. persons taking no active part in the
hostilities, including members of armed forces who have laid down their arms and
uniforms and those placed hors de combat by sickness, wounds, detention or any
other cause), both parties to the conflict continue to claim that UNMISS is
supporting the opposite side.
35. UNMISS, the United Nations country team and humanitarian actors also
continued to implement conflict management and mitigation measures, including by
engaging internally displaced communities in protection sites and surrounding
communities. Through such engagement efforts, the Mission and its partners have
helped to maintain stability within and around the protection sites and avoid a
possible escalation of inter-communal tensions. In the UNMISS protection site in
Malakal, Upper Nile State, for example, UNMISS helped to facilitate the
establishment of the Peace and Security Council Committee, which has been
instrumental in managing internal conflict, resolving disputes between internally
displaced persons and humanitarian actors and assisting in the relocation of
displaced persons to the new site. In Unity State, a similar Central High Committee
has been supported by UNMISS to address gang-related insecurity and internal
conflicts in the Bentiu protection site. UNMISS works regularly with this body,
facilitating its activities as well as delivering messages on women’s participation in
the camp committees.
36. Under the second tier of its protection strategy, protection from physical
violence, UNMISS continued to provide physical protection to the estimated 96,000
civilians taking refuge at 10 of its sites. The largest sites are located in Bentiu, Unity
State, which was sheltering nearly 47,000, Juba, with 28,000, and Malakal, with
17,000. UNMISS continued to work closely with humanitarian actors to ensure that
assistance was provided for the displaced persons at those sites.
37. In an ongoing effort to promote the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) and related resolutions on women and peace and security, as
well as address the demands of women’s civil society in South Sudan, advocacy on
women’s rights continued at all UNMISS protection sites, with an emphasis on the
critical need for women’s full participation and representation in all conflict
prevention and peacebuilding activities in order to enhance their protection and to
ensure an equitable and sustainable peace process.
38. HIV/AIDS awareness, sensitization, testing and counselling services continued
to be offered to the internally displaced persons at the UNMISS protection sites in

8/19

14-61581

S/2014/708

Bentiu, Bor, Juba and Malakal, as well as in the displaced persons camp in
Mingkaman in Lakes State.
39. As at 18 September, 215 security incidents were recorded in the UNMISS
protection sites during the reporting period, including assault, rape, attempted
murder, theft, smuggling of alcohol, possession of drugs and drunk or disorderly
conduct, and continue to pose problems inside the protection sites. In an effort to
enhance security, holding facilities were operationalized within the protection sites
in Juba, Bor, Bentiu and Malakal for the isolation of persons responsible for security
incidents pending referral to community-led mitigation and dispute resolution
mechanisms or, in the event of repeat offenders, expulsion from the sites, and in
case of incidents that may constitute serious crimes, referral to national authorities
for investigation and prosecution. In order to facilitate the latter, on 28 July,
UNMISS agreed with the Minister of Justice on the need to conclude a
memorandum of understanding between the Mission and the Government on the
transfer of cases and suspects to national authorities. Discussions on the content and
format of this legal instrument are ongoing.
40. To assist UNMISS in addressing security incidents within the protection sites,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations deployed, in late July, a team of experts
to review the scope of the problem and to recommend ways of improving the
security of internally displaced persons as well as that of staff working at the sites.
The team looked into the use of holding facilities, the process of assessing the risk
posed by individuals responsible for the incidents and the potential handover of
persons to national authorities. The recommendations of the report are under
discussion.
41. In addition to community-led informal mitigation and dispute resolution
mechanisms, UNMISS patrols inside the protection sites and the use of holding
facilities have proven vital in maintaining safety and security. UNMISS police and
humanitarian agencies provided crime prevention training to community watch
groups at the protection sites, emphasizing the importance of gender and of
women’s leadership.
42. Concurrently, the Mission is extending its reach to provide physical protection
to civilians outside the UNMISS premises, with an additional focus on integrated
patrols and joint field missions to assess and further map threats and vulnerabilities.
UNMISS conducted an average of 85 to 90 short-duration patrols and 12 to
15 integrated daily patrols, including at night, in Bor, Malakal, Bentiu and Juba.
Specific patrols were organized to enhance protection from sexual and gender-based
violence, including conflict-related sexual violence, taking into account reports of
incidents targeting women and girls leaving UNMISS protection sites to collect
firewood or go to markets.
43. Moreover, UNMISS integrated patrols inform the early warning and response
mechanism that includes UNMISS and the United Nations country team. Early
response activities include improving situational awareness through preventive
military patrols, integrated assessment team deployments and other conflict
prevention approaches.
44. The third tier of the Mission’s protection strategy is related in particular to the
fostering of a secure environment for the eventual safe and voluntary return of
internally displaced persons and refugees. In this regard, UNMISS continued

14-61581

9/19

S/2014/708

discussions with national authorities and international partners on ways to support a
pilot project aimed at creating a security environment that would enable internally
displaced persons in protection sites to return to identified neighbourhoods of Juba.
A national police emergency call centre was established for Juba by the national
police with assistance from the United Nations Development Programme. UNMISS
operational coordination with the national police, aimed at strengthening the
protective environment, will be provided in strict compliance with the United
Nations human rights due diligence policy. A United Nations-wide working group
on return and reintegration has been established to ensure coherence and
complementarity between United Nations system activities in this area and to devise
common strategies.
45. UNMISS enhanced its public outreach activities through focused messaging to
increase public understanding of the Mission’s reprioritized mandated activities. The
United Nations radio station, Miraya, in particular, has played a critical role,
inter alia, in disseminating information on Mission activities and serves as a
platform for discussion on conflict mitigation and resolution activities.
46. The Mine Action Service continued operations during the rainy season in areas
affected by the conflict. The Service released 201,987 m2 of land and destroyed
888 hazardous items, 60 landmines and 28,773 rounds of small arms ammunition
and provided risk education to 18,360 civilians. The Service removed and safely
destroyed explosive remnants of war from UNMISS bases and airstrips in conflict
areas, including Nassir and Bentiu, and surveyed and cleared buildings such as
schools, churches and other public spaces.

C.

Human rights monitoring and reporting
47. During the reporting period, UNMISS continued to receive reports of civilians
being killed and wounded by parties to the conflict and other armed groups. In
addition, UNMISS continued investigations into alleged human rights violations
occurring earlier in the year. These included allegations of the killing of civilians
and the perpetration of conflict-related sexual violence by Government and
associated forces between February and April 2014 in such areas as Leer County in
Unity State. Further verification, including through field visits to the affected areas,
is ongoing. UNMISS continued its investigations into violations associated with the
attacks on Bentiu and Rubkona, in Unity State, on 15 April, the attack on the
UNMISS civilian protection sites in Bor, Jonglei State, on 17 April, and the alleged
shooting of two internally displaced persons by the national police in Bor on
30 April, resulting in the death of one and injury to the other. A public report on the
15 and 17 April incidents is being prepared.
48. Incidents of conflict-related sexual violence also continued to be reported,
both in the context of the large-scale hostilities and cyclical inter-communal clashes.
For example, the killing of the Paramount Chief of Cuei-Chok Payam, Rumbek East
County, Lakes State, on 5 August reportedly led to multiple incidents, including
gang rape, widespread destruction and virulent revenge attacks. At least eight cases
of rape, two involving minors, were confirmed to have taken place between
approximately 6 and 8 August. One of the minors died as a consequence of the
attack. Other forms of gender-based violence, including domestic violence, sexual
assault, sexual harassment, sex in exchange for food and water, sexual exploitation

10/19

14-61581

S/2014/708

and abuse, unwanted pregnancies and abortions within protection sites and child
marriage, have also been reported in high numbers.
49. UNMISS continued to receive reports of human rights violations by the
security forces, in particular the arbitrary detention of civilians, with associated ill
treatment in many cases. These reports were of particular concern in Juba, Bentiu
and Bor. Cases of major concern included the alleged arbitrary detention of seven
women since 22 July by the national police in Bentiu, reportedly on suspicion of
prostitution and spying for SPLM/A in Opposition. UNMISS was repeatedly denied
access to the police detention facility in connection with this allegation, raising
significant concerns of potential ill treatment, including sexual violence. While
UNMISS was subsequently informed of the release or escape of all of the women,
the continued denial of access prevented verification of the claim.
50. A steep deterioration of respect for the freedom of expression and assembly
was observed during the reporting period, with such incidents as the detention of
journalists, the confiscation of newspapers, the censorship of political news
programming and the closure of radio stations reported. Bakhita Radio, a Juba-based
station, was temporarily closed by the Government on 16 August. On 9 September,
the Office of the President informed media practitioners that the President had
signed three media bills, on the right of access to information, on the public
broadcasting corporation and on media authority. The bills have yet to be published.
In another disturbing development, the Acting Chairperson of the South Sudan Civil
Society Alliance was shot and wounded by an unknown gunman in Juba on
1 August, two days before his scheduled departure to Addis Ababa to lead civil
society organizations in the peace negotiations.
51. Respect for international human rights standards in the administration of
justice showed no improvement, with reports of prolonged and arbitrary detention,
including proxy detention, continuing to be received from across the country.
Conditions of detention fell short of international standards, with reports of
persistent overcrowding and the detention of juveniles together with adults.
UNMISS monitoring revealed that the absence of judges and prosecutors in Upper
Nile, Jonglei and Unity States was contributing to shortfalls in the overall
dispensation of justice in the country. Also, increased security measures imposed in
connection with inter-communal violence continued to be a factor in detention
cases, in particular in Lakes State, where some traditional chiefs were detained in
place of youth from their clans suspected of offences.
52. Accountability for human rights violations, in particular those committed since
15 December 2013, remained a principal area of concern, with little progress
registered. Following the creation of a presidential investigation committee on
human rights abuses in January, UNMISS has been able to confirm only that one
official from a concerned state had given a statement. On his part, Mr. Machar
announced that SPLM/A in Opposition had investigated the incidents of 15 April in
Bentiu and that 10 persons were responsible. The Mission has not been able to
ascertain whether any action had been taken against them.
53. UNMISS continued to provide technical and logistical support for the field
visits of the African Union Commission of Inquiry on South Sudan, which is
investigating the human rights violations that have occurred since conflict erupted
on 15 December 2013.

14-61581

11/19

S/2014/708

54. While focusing on monitoring, investigation, verification and reporting on
human rights violations, UNMISS also continued to take action to address violations
where possible, including by conducting human rights sensitization with non-state
partners throughout South Sudan. These included training for journalists, women’s
groups, religious and civil society organizations, hospital social workers, returnees
and primary and secondary school students, complemented by human rights talk
shows on local radio stations. UNMISS also engaged in human rights awarenessraising activities with displaced persons within its civilian protection sites, including
with women’s and youth groups and community leaders. In accordance with
Security Council resolution 2155 (2014), emphasis was placed on women’s right to
full participation and representation in decisions and activities related to the
prevention and resolution of conflict and the protection of civilians.
55. Children continue to bear the brunt of the violence, suffering from
psychological distress and lack of access to services, including education. During
the reporting period, 60 incidents of grave violations of children’s rights were
reported, affecting 4,942 children (3,335 boys, 1,606 girls, 1 sex unknown), of
which 38 incidents involving a total of 2,872 children (1,733 boys and 1,139 girls)
have been verified. Child protection services were extended to a total of 89,476
children affected by conflict during the reporting period, of whom 47 per cent are
girls. A total of 387 out of 5,110 children registered as either unaccompanied or
separated have been reunified with their families. Given the subregional dimension
of the crisis, protection actors are also strengthening efforts to improve cross-border
tracing efforts.
56. Following the Government’s recommitment in June to implement the SPLAUnited Nations revised action plan to end the recruitment and use of children in
armed forces and other grave violations against children, the United Nations
supported SPLA and relevant Government ministries in developing a workplan for
the operationalization of the recommitment agreement. On 26 August, that workplan
was endorsed by the Minister of Defence and Veterans Affairs. On 18 July, the
United Nations submitted to the President’s office a list of 33 schools reportedly
used by SPLA for military purposes, with targeted advocacy urging those schools to
be vacated. Eight schools were subsequently vacated in July. Despite this progress,
however, as at 10 September, 124 schools were being used for military purposes.
There were reports of large-scale recruitment of children by all parties to the
conflict, despite assurances given by Government and opposition forces to the
contrary.

D.

Creating conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance
57. UNMISS continued to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
civilians affected by the crisis. UNMISS assets and personnel have been utilized to
support humanitarian agencies in safely delivering humanitarian assistance,
supporting the relocation of internally displaced persons and enhancing community
engagement. UNMISS provides force protection for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance through riverine access and for humanitarian aircraft at key airstrips,
notably Bentiu (Unity State) and Malakal (Upper Nile State). The UNMISS military
component, in close cooperation with the Office for the Coordination of

12/19

14-61581

S/2014/708

Humanitarian Affairs, has encouraged liaison and coordination of its activities with
humanitarian actors.
58. In response to the fighting in Bunj, Maban County, Upper Nile State, between
the Maban defence force and deserting SPLA soldiers of Nuer origin, UNMISS
military personnel secured the airstrip in Bunj for relocation flights for staff of
United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations and patrolled Bunj
town. UNMISS military continued to provide protection to facilitate the ongoing
relief operation in the town and nearby refugee camps.
59. To address the deteriorating health and sanitary conditions inside UNMISS
sites since the onset of the rainy season, UNMISS and humanitarians continued to
facilitate the relocation of internally displaced persons from existing protection sites
to newly constructed sites. Simultaneously, UNMISS is continuously engaged in
improving the drainage and other infrastructure in UNMISS bases in Juba and
Malakal. By 24 September, 13,640 persons had been relocated to areas with
improved conditions within the Malakal site, with the remaining 4,200 planned to be
relocated upon the completion of additional site improvement works. In Juba, as at
24 September, relocation operations had resulted in the movement of 9,920 persons
to the new site, leaving approximately 4,100 persons to be relocated.
60. Both UNMISS and humanitarian partners have contributed substantial
resources to the construction and maintenance of protection sites. UNMISS
investments in site construction, support and protection alone have exceeded
$50 million since the onset of the conflict. With the Mission’s resources severely
overstretched and the 2014 crisis response plan only about 53 per cent funded,
additional funding for the enhancement and maintenance of protection sites is
urgently needed.

E.

Supporting the implementation of the cessation of
hostilities agreement
61. UNMISS has supported the work of the IGAD monitoring and verification
mechanism as described in the cessation of hostilities agreement of 23 January,
including by providing mobile and dedicated fixed site security. Material support is
provided on a cost-reimbursable basis under a memorandum of understanding,
which has been signed by both parties. IGAD has recently requested amendments to
the memorandum of understanding, which are currently being assessed by the
Mission. IGAD monitoring and verification teams have now been deployed to
Malakal, Melut and Nassir in Upper Nile State, Bentiu and Pariang in Unity State,
Bor in Jonglei State and a reserve team in Juba in Central Equatoria State. The team
assigned to Akobo (Jonglei State) is co-located in Bor.
62. At the headquarters level in Juba, a joint coordination mechanism established
to bring together senior operations, logistics and coordination staff from UNMISS
and IGAD to share information and coordinate the provision of logistical support to
the teams and joint patrols has been meeting regularly. At the local level, IGAD
monitoring and verification team leaders and the UNMISS state operations centres,
civil affairs teams and senior military liaison officers plan and coordinate joint
patrols. The patrols are conducted either with dedicated force protection patrols for
the team or UNMISS patrols that the monitoring and verification teams can join.

14-61581

13/19

S/2014/708

63. On 23 August, upon landing in Buoth, Mayom County, Unity State, an IGAD
monitoring and verification team was arrested by SPLM/A in Opposition youth and
forced to walk to Wicok, about four hours by foot from Buoth. As a result, the
team’s SPLA liaison officer died, reportedly from a heart attack. The team was
released on 24 August as requested by IGAD, and UNMISS extracted the team in
Wicok and transported the group to Bentiu.

VI. Mission staffing and status of deployment of surge capacity
64. Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2155 (2014), UNMISS undertook a
full staffing review. The resulting changes are being incorporated into the 2014/15
budget.
65. In the resolution, the Security Council increased the military component of
UNMISS to a maximum of 12,500 troops of all ranks and the police component,
including appropriate formed police units, to 1,323 personnel. As at 24 September,
the Mission’s troop strength stood at 10,509 military personnel and its police strength
stood at 941 officers, including 363 formed police personnel and 578 individual
police officers.
66. As at 18 September, of the 5,500 additional military personnel authorized,
3,525 had been deployed. During the reporting period, the deployment of
850 personnel of the Rwandan battalion from the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and two Ethiopian battalions with a total of 1,250 troops
arrived, but they were not yet fully operational. In addition, 500 personnel arrived
from Nepal to complete the deployment of the 850-person Nepalese battalion in
Juba. The remaining 400 members of the Ghanaian battalion, deployed from the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, and 310 members of the Kenyan
battalion, are expected to arrive in October. The arrival of those additional troops
will complete the second phase of the surge deployment. The third phase of troop
reinforcement is expected to include an additional infantry battalion from China in
November, a tactical force riverine unit and two tactical armed helicopter units, with
the time of arrival still to be determined.
67. One additional Rwandan military utility helicopter arrived in August and two
more are expected to arrive by mid-October. A Sri Lankan military utility unit
comprising three helicopters is also scheduled to deploy by the end of October,
raising the capacity to nine helicopters.
68. UNMISS has taken steps to manage public order and security. The Mission has
established tactical operation centres for improved and well-coordinated response to
security threats. Furthermore, the police component continues to interact with
members and leaders of the communities of internally displaced persons,
augmenting public awareness on security and safety issues. Police officers deployed
outside UNMISS protection sites also perform protection-related tasks and
contribute to the Mission’s early warning system by monitoring security and
criminal incidents and interacting with the local population.
69. UNMISS is developing long-term plans to ensure that the force is supported
and sustained to allow it to carry out its operational activities. Likewise, support to
the police component, including the induction of new formed police units, is being
prioritized. Despite security challenges, movement restrictions, long procurement

14/19

14-61581

S/2014/708

lead times and the lack of commercial engineering capacity, basic camp facilities
have been set up for 3,500 newly deployed troops in the capitals of the conflictaffected states of Bentiu, Malakal, Bor and Juba.
70. UNMISS is stringently enforcing the United Nations policy of zero tolerance
for sexual exploitation and abuse and other misconduct by personnel. The Mission
continued its prevention activities, targeting all categories of United Nations
personnel, communities and members of the local population across all 10 states.
Outreach activities were conducted with community leaders and internally displaced
persons, local organizations, refugees, children and teachers, as well as women’s
groups, in an effort to continue raising awareness on the prevention and reporting of
sexual exploitation and abuse.

VII. Violations of the status-of-forces agreement, international
humanitarian law and security of United Nations staff
71. UNMISS continued to engage officials on violations of the status-of-forces
agreement, which adversely affected the implementation of its mandate. During the
reporting period, 30 violations of the agreement involving UNMISS members,
premises and equipment were recorded. All but one of the violations were
committed by uniformed personnel of the Government of South Sudan, including
SPLA and the national police. While the large majority of the violations were
related to restrictions on the movement of UNMISS members (both civilian and
military) by land and water, there were also incidents of harassment, unlawful arrest
and detention, illegal searches of United Nations property, illegal entry into United
Nations premises and interference with the implementation of the Mission’s
mandate.
72. On 22 and 23 August, two UNMISS national staff members were arrested by
the National Security Service in Wau, Western Bahr el-Ghazal State, and
subsequently transferred from Wau to Juba. The Mission so far has not been
officially notified of the reasons for the arrest and continued arbitrary detention of
those staff members, which it protested. The Mission has been granted regular
access to them and has confirmed that the two staff members appear to be in good
health.
73. The SPLM/A in Opposition was involved in two incidents of restriction of
movement by water. As at 18 September, 49 access incidents affecting agencies,
funds and programmes were recorded. The majority of incidents consisted of
constraints related to active hostilities, the harassment of humanitarian personnel
and restrictions of movement within the country perpetrated by both state and
non-state actors. UNMISS and United Nations officials continued to engage
government officials at all levels with a view to ensuring respect for the status-offorces agreement. On a regular basis, UNMISS formally notified the Government of
violations through notes verbales and official meetings with Government
authorities. A total of 11 notes verbales were sent and two formal meetings were
held during the reporting period. While there has been a declaration of commitment
at the senior levels of government to address the problem, this has not been
effectively communicated and understood in the field. Furthermore, the Government
has so far not shared with UNMISS the outcome of any of the investigations it has
committed to undertaking.

14-61581

15/19

S/2014/708

VIII. Financial aspects
74. The General Assembly, by its resolution 68/293, authorized the SecretaryGeneral to enter into commitments for the Mission in a total amount not exceeding
$580,830,400 for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2014. As at 5 September,
unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for UNMISS amounted to
$392.4 million. Total outstanding assessed contributions for all peacekeeping
operations at the same date amounted to $3,756.3 million. As at 5 September 2014,
troop-contributing Governments have been reimbursed for troop- and contingentowned equipment for the periods to 30 April 2014 and 31 March 2014, respectively,
in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

IX. Observations
75. Throughout the reporting period, fighting between SPLA and SPLM/A in
Opposition forces continued, with strong indications of further mobilization. The
continuous violation of the cessation of hostilities agreement seems to indicate that
the parties continue to see military action either as a possible solution to the crisis or
a viable negotiating tactic. The parties must commit fully to a negotiated peace
process and engage in meaningful dialogue without preconditions. This is necessary
to end the suffering of the hundreds of thousands of displaced South Sudanese, both
in the protection sites and in other parts of the country, and to reduce the continuing
vulnerability of the millions who have remained in their communities.
76. The Security Council delegation that visited South Sudan in mid-August
witnessed first-hand the catastrophic humanitarian situation unfolding in the
country. I welcome the visit of the Council, the strong message that was delivered to
both parties and the Council’s determination to continue pushing for an end to the
conflict.
77. Against this backdrop, there is clearly a need for more pressure to be exerted on
the parties to overcome their differences and implement the cessation of hostilities
agreement in letter and in spirit. They must urgently engage in an inclusive dialogue
and reach a comprehensive political settlement acceptable to all sides.
78. I remain deeply concerned about the living conditions of the hundreds of
thousands of displaced South Sudanese in protection sites in UNMISS camps and in
other parts of the country. I am also concerned about the continuing vulnerability
and suffering of the millions who have remained in their communities. Their plight
can be ameliorated only by silencing the guns. I therefore call upon both the
Government and the armed opposition to uphold the cessation of hostilities
agreement and to expeditiously conclude a comprehensive agreement that can bring
durable peace to South Sudan. In the meantime, UNMISS and the United Nations
country team are identifying transitional solutions for the protection sites, which are
clearly not a sustainable solution for the internally displaced population, and to
support initiatives aimed at creating conditions that will eventually allow internally
displaced persons to return to their homes. Specific proposals regarding transitional
solutions for the protection sites will be provided in my report to be submitted to the
Security Council in November.
79. The humanitarian operations in South Sudan now constitute the largest aid
operation inside any single country. The capacity and funding of the humanitarian

16/19

14-61581

S/2014/708

operations fall well short of the overwhelming need, however, with only 53.5 per
cent of the crisis response plan funded as at 19 September. To date, 1.3 million
people have been internally displaced by violence and fear and about 450,000 have
fled across the borders. Approximately 3.5 million people are facing crisis and
emergency levels of food insecurity. There is a looming risk that the situation could
deteriorate further in the first quarter of 2015. This crisis, to a great extent, is
man-made. The suffering of the people of South Sudan is on the shoulders of their
political leaders. They must provide full cooperation and access to UNMISS and
humanitarian actors. I reiterate my appeal to the international community to provide
the humanitarian funding required to assist the people of South Sudan.
80. I note the expressed commitment of the Government and the leadership of the
SPLM/A in Opposition to work in partnership with UNMISS, the United Nations
country team and humanitarian partners to allow full freedom of movement and
humanitarian access. Attacks against United Nations and humanitarian personnel
and facilities nevertheless continued to occur. I therefore call upon both parties to
take concrete steps to translate public statements into action on the ground.
I condemn in the strongest possible terms the abhorrent killing of innocent civilians
and humanitarian aid workers in Maban County. I am particularly disturbed by
reports that civilians may have been murdered on the basis of their ethnicity.
Accountability for the crimes committed during this conflict will be a critical
element of long-term peace and stability in the country.
81. I condemn in the strongest possible terms the shooting down of the UNMISS
helicopter on 26 August and extend my deepest condolences to the bereaved
families. If the ongoing investigation confirms that it was shot down, this hostile act
against the United Nations would be considered a war crime, the perpetrators of
which must face justice and be held accountable.
82. I commend IGAD for its steadfast work in mediating the ongoing
multi-stakeholder peace negotiations with a view to establishing a transitional
government of national unity. I also commend its central role in carrying out the
monitoring and verification mechanism agreed upon by the warring parties in the
cessation of hostilities agreement. The United Nations will continue to make every
effort to support the mediation team, including by providing experts in key
substantive areas of the negotiations, and the work of the IGAD monitoring and
verification teams on the ground.
83. I welcome the continuing work of the African Union Commission of Inquiry
on South Sudan, which has been tasked with investigating violations of human
rights and humanitarian law committed during the conflict and making
recommendations relating to healing, reconciliation, accountability and institutional
reform. All accountability measures must meet international standards. The United
Nations stands ready to continue providing assistance to facilitate the work of the
Commission.
84. The international community is united in its call for both parties to the conflict
to honour their commitment to finding a peaceful solution to their differences and
putting the interests of the country and its people first. The political leadership must
now heed that call and honour the people’s right to live in peace.
85. I wish to express my deepest appreciation for the courage and sacrifice of
UNMISS personnel, who, under the able leadership of my new Special
Representative, Ellen Margrethe Løj, will continue to work to protect tens of
thousands of civilians under threat of physical violence and to stabilize the security

14-61581

17/19

S/2014/708

situation. I reiterate my full support for them. In particular, I wish to thank the
troop- and police-contributing countries that have provided much-needed uniformed
personnel and assets to the Mission. I also commend the personnel of the United
Nations country team and non-governmental organization partners for their tireless
efforts to provide urgently needed coordinated humanitarian emergency assistance
to the population, under arduous and often extremely dangerous circumstances.

18/19

14-61581

1461581e

S/2014/708

19/19
