Resolutions adoph•d on the reports of th" Fifth Commiu,·-:_ ________________

2990 (XXVII). United Nations International
School

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 32
Recognizing the important role of the United Nations
International School in providing international education facilities of a high academic and cultural standard
for children of the United Nations community in New
York and the need to preserve the international
character of the School,
Noting that this international character is being
endangered by the diminishing percentage of the enrolment of children of United Nations staff members,
1. Decides, subject to review by the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session, to increase the_ maximum
of the education grant provided in regulation 3.2 of
the Staff Regulations of the United Nations from $1,000
to $1,500, effective 1 January 1973, and to amend that
regulation accordingly;
2. Urges as increased funds become available in
future year; through the operation of the United
Nations International School Development Fund, that
consideration should be given to increasing bursaries,
to the extent practicable, and using them as a means
of attracting additional children from members o_f the
diplomatic and consular corps who do not receive a
substantial education grant from their Governments;
3. Appeals to Governments to continue to assist the
United Nations International School to the extent possible, especially by providing scholarships and making
available qualified teachers.
2111 th plenary meeting
15 December 1972

3006 (XXVII).

United Nations Juridical
Y earbookH:i

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by its resolution 1814 (XVII) of
18 December 1962, it decided that the United Nations
Juridical Yearbook should contain the documentary
materials listed in the annex to that resolution,
Having considered, at its twenty-sixth session, the
comments concerning the United Nations Juridical
Year book set forth in the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on the programme of recurrent publications
of the United NationsH 4 and, at its twenty-seventh session, the views concerning the Year book contained in
the report of the Secretary-General on the programme
of recurrent publications, 35
Decides that the United Nations Juridical Yearbook
shall contain henceforth the documentary materials
listed in the annex to the present resolution.
2113th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
32 A/8856.
3:1 At its 2037th plenary meeting, on 23 September 1972, the

General Assembly decided to refer to the Sixth Committee,
for prior consideration, the part of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on recurrent publications which dealt with publications in the legal field. The present resolution was adopted on
the recommendation of the Sixth Committee, a~ set forth in
the report of the Fifth Committee (A/8978).
a4 See A/8362, paras. 59-70.
3~ See A/8851, para. 9.

101

ANI\EX
OutlinP of the United Nations Juridical Yearbook

Part One. Le!,lal statlls of the United Nations and related
intcrgoi·crnmental organi::.oti,ms
Chapter I. Legislative texts concerning the legal status of
the United Nations and related intergovernmental organi7ations
Chapter II. Treatv provisions concerning the legal status of
the United Nations and related intergovernmental organizations

Part Two. Legal activities of the United Nations and related
i11tcrgo,·,·mme11tal organi::.ations
Chapter III. General review of the legal activities of the
Unikd Nations and related intergovernmental organizations
Chapter IV. Treaties concerning international law concluded under the auspices of the United Nations and
related intergovernmental organizations
Chapter V. Decisions of administrative tribunals of the
United Nations and related intergovernmental organizations
Chapter VI. Selected legal opinions of the secretariats of
the United Nations and related intergovernmental organi,ations

Part Three. Judicial dcci,1io11s on questions relating to the
United Nations and related intcrgovcmmental organizations
Chapter VH. Decisions of international tribunals
Chapter VIII. Decisions of national tribunals

/'art Four. Lrga/ bibliography of the United Nations and
related i11tcrgm·rrn111ental organi;:ations

3007 ( XXVII). (:omposition of the Secretariat
T/ip General Asscmblr,
Having considered the compos1tlon of the Secretariat:rn and the long-term recruitment plan, 37
/ksirous of ensuring that, in accordance with Article 8 of the Charter of the United Nations, no restriction, arc placed on the eligibility of men and women
to participate in any capacity and under conditions of
equality in the work of the Secretariat,
Desirous f 11rther of avoiding any discrimination between staff members on grounds of sex,
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at it-; twenty-eighth session a study
on those provisions of the Staff Rules and Staff Regulations of the United Nations whose application might,
in certain cases, give rise to discrimination between
staff members on grounds of sex.
2113th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

:{008 (XXVII). Anwmhnent8 to the Staff Regulation,; and Staff Rul<-8 of the l1nited Nation8

The General Assembly,
I laving cunsiderecl the note by the SccretaryGencrai::x on a proposed :11nendment to the Staff Regulatiuns of the United Nations,
,: Sec/\ 1 8831 and Corr. I and Add. I.
, Sec A/8836.

'' AiC5lt439.
