S/PV.7177

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7177th meeting

Monday, 19 May 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oh Joon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Republic of Korea)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Omaish
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Sherman
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on the restoration of constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau (S/2014/332)
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(S/2014/333)

14-40287 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1440287*

S/PV.7177

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on the
restoration of constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau (S/2014/332)
Report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (S/2014/333)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Guinea-Bissau and Mozambique to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. José
Ramos-Horta, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, to participate
in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. RamosHorta, who is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Bissau.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, Permanent
Representative of Brazil, in his capacity as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/332, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the restoration of constitutional
order in Guinea-Bissau.
I also wish draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/333, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ramos-Horta.

2/8

19/05/2014

Mr. Ramos-Horta: I should like to inform the
Security Council about who is in the room here
with me, at a very symbolic moment. To my left is
Mr. Gana Fofang, Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) Resident Representative, and to
my right is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of GuineaBissau. I have also invited representatives of our
international partners, including the African Union
(AU), the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP) and the European Union (EU), as
well as Ambassadors resident in Guinea-Bissau and my
colleagues who make up the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office.
It is once again my honour to introduce the
Secretary-General’s reports on the restoration of
constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau (S/2014/332)
and on the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
(S/2014/333).
Since the two reports were issued, the political and
security environment in Guinea-Bissau has remained
largely peaceful and calm. Nevertheless, following
the conduct of the first round of the legislative and
presidential elections on 13 April, national and
international partners enhanced their collective
efforts to create an atmosphere free from intimidation,
coercion and fear, so as to contribute to the restoration
of constitutional order. It was in that context that I
held consultations with the Transitional President,
Mr. Manuel Serifo Nhamadjo, which resulted in his
hosting of a meeting on 30 April with the candidates
in the run-off election — Mr. José Mário Vaz from
the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and
Cape Verde (PAIGC) and Nuno Gores Nabiam, an
independent. Other senior leaders of the PAIGC and the
Social Renewal Party, which is backing Mr. Nabiam,
as well as all international partners, also attended the
meeting. The aim of the meeting was to provide a formal
platform for dialogue. Both presidential candidates and
other leaders pledged to continue to work towards a
peaceful electoral campaign and to accept the outcome
of the election.
The joint command structure trained and established
with the support of UNIOGBIS to help ensure lawful,
coordinated security of the electoral process nationwide
delivered on its tasks as planned, with the national police
assuming the leading role and the military remaining

14-40287

19/05/2014

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

in reserve. The ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau
rendered a most useful service to the activities of the
joint command. I also visited all the regions of GuineaBissau, which are being assisted by the four United
Nations field offices. I went to the most remote areas
and met with local authorities and the population on
matters related to stability, development and the return
to constitutional order through elections. All those
efforts contributed to an environment enabling all steps
of the electoral process, including the recent conduct of
a violence-free campaign by Mr. Nabiam and Mr. Vaz,
supported by their political allies.
Yesterday, Bissau-Guineans went in large numbers
to cast their ballots to elect the President. This morning
I met the heads of all international election observation
missions, who unanimously assessed that the process
took place in an orderly and peaceful manner — hence
providing an opportunity for all Bissau-Guineans to
freely make their choices. They all expressed their hope
and confidence that the results expected soon would be
accepted by all.
In that regard, allow me to congratulate the
transitional authorities, in particular Transitional
President Serifo Nhamadjo and Transitional Prime
Minister Rui Duarte de Barros, as well as the political
parties, candidates, police, military, civil society
organizations and the people of Guinea-Bissau as a
whole, on that remarkable achievement. My sincere
appreciation goes to all international partners,
multilateral and bilateral, that contributed politically,
financially and technically to the holding of the
polls, including the historic success of the electoral
registration. The ECOWAS leaders, in particular,
deserve special gratitude and commendation for their
steady engagement with all parties, including the
military leadership.
The holding of legislative and presidential elections
constituted the most critical step towards the restoration
of constitutional order, as the Council demanded. Within
a few days, the new National People’s Assembly should
be inaugurated, followed by the installation of the newly
elected President. The new Government should be fully
sworn in by the middle of June. I have encouraged the
political leadership to ensure that it is inclusive and
based on merit to best deliver on the priorities of the
country. I have impressed upon all to ensure that in
the post-election phase, the winners and losers of the
election contest enter into a new partnership aimed at
rebuilding the State and relaunching the socioeconomic

S/PV.7177

development of Guinea-Bissau, within an environment
of enduring stability.
Political factionalism, ethnic-based politics,
mutual distrust and the lack of a culture of dialogue
remain major challenges that should be tackled for
the future stability of the country. The acrimonious
civil-military relations, including civilian oversight
issues, are yet to be addressed. Cases of gross human
rights violations and impunity still await redress. The
socioeconomic problems that continue to keep the
country in poverty have been magnified over the past
two years. Deforestation and depletion of the fisheries
resources are endangering the future viability of the
country.
It is clear that the newly elected State institutions
are inheriting a bleak political, social, economic and
security situation. The Government will have to
mobilize all Bissau-Guineans to engage in a serious,
inclusive and constructive dialogue in order to define
a new direction for the country. A consensual national
programme for the country’s political stabilization and
economic development will be the first step, alongside
fast-tracking critical security sector reform (SSR), in
line with resolution 2103 (2013). While the current
political discourse of the main leaders reiterating their
commitment to a focus on dialogue and rebuilding
the State provides a reason for guarded optimism, the
challenges are great and the risks are many.
UNIOGBIS has been supporting the National
Commission for Planning and Strategic Coordination,
which has been consulting with and preparing
programme documents to be presented to the incoming
Government. A series of workshops were also held to
identify proposals for updating the national strategy
document on SSR and the rule of law, which awaits
review and approval by the new Government. I have
also been promoting the notion that, in order to improve
transparency and thereby confidence between GuineaBissau and its partners, the resources mobilized for
stabilizing the country should be co-managed through
a programme to improve governance efficacy. At the
core of the idea is the deployment of international
experts to key revenue-generating institutions or
the strategic management of the key Government
institutions with the assistance of international experts,
if requested by the Government. From my consultations
with many international partners, such a programme is
crucial for ensuring the success of the envisaged donor

14-402873/8

S/PV.7177

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

19/05/2014

pledging conference. Bissau-Guinean partners also
seem enthusiastic about the idea.

every effort to enhance support for the socioeconomic
revitalization of Guinea-Bissau.

In that regard, I would like to reiterate the call of the
Secretary-General for the Council to lend support to the
donor pledging conference, which would contribute to
securing the necessary funds for the implementation of
such an initiative. The new authorities in Guinea-Bissau
need to be urgently assisted so as to move towards a
successful conference. Meanwhile, consideration
may be given to an immediate and specific resource
mobilization effort in support of critical security and
defence reforms, as agreed by national partners.

I believe that, if we fail to immediately provide the
required support to the new Government, the restored
constitutional order runs the risk of collapsing very
soon. Such a collapse of law and order in GuineaBissau, besides the loss of our efforts and investment
thus far, could bring about more disastrous results than
ever before seen in the country.

As for the role of the international community,
the message is clear. The end of the transition is the
beginning of a new phase that will require our continued
engagement and full commitment to assisting the
people of Guinea-Bissau in addressing the country’s
deep-seated political, social and economic problems. In
the immediate post-election period, the newly elected
Government will need emergency budgetary support to
allow it to cover, inter alia, outstanding salaries so that
it can begin the necessary work of rebuilding the State
in an atmosphere of calm and stability. Thereafter, the
international community’s long-term commitment to
providing financial and technical support in order to
ensure the rebuilding of the State and the relaunching
of the economy will be critical. In that regard, I appeal
to the Council to use its influence to contribute to
the mobilization of resources for Guinea-Bissau’s
comprehensive road map for rebuilding the State, in
line with resolution 2048 (2012).
With regard to the United Nations integrated
presence in Guinea-Bissau, UNIOGBIS should,
through the facilitation of a multilayered and
multisectoral national dialogue, including on defenceand security-related issues, continue to support national
peacebuilding and State reconstruction efforts, with
a focus on stability and sustainable development in
Guinea-Bissau. While the Mission should also continue
to provide strategic and policy advice and contribute
to human rights monitoring, promotion and protection,
as well as gender-related matters, the United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes should be supported
in order to enhance their technical assistance to national
stakeholders on issues relating to public administration
reform, the provision of social services and the
revitalization of the economy. For the latter, I call
upon the international financial institutions to make

4/8

Last but not least, I wish to register my sincere
appreciation and commendation for the role played
by the United Nations country team in GuineaBissau, in particular, the United Nations Development
Programme, whose resource mobilization and
coordination role during this critical period, as well as
its professionalism and dedication, contributed to the
holding of the elections.
I have been a privileged witness to the exemplary
performance, selfless professionalism and dedication
of my colleagues within the United Nations country
team and UNIOGBIS, who have been working in an
integrated or coordinated manner. The trust, freedom
and guidance that I and my colleagues have received
from the Secretariat were invaluable. I am deeply
grateful to the Secretary-General and the UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs.
To end my intervention, I would like to reiterate my
deepest appreciation to our partners, notably the African
Union, the CPLP, ECOWAS and the European Union,
for their joint efforts in supporting the implementation
of the critical tasks mandated by the Security Council
and in helping Guinea-Bissau to return to constitutional
order. The continued united effort of the international
community will be essential to ensure the stability and
development of Guinea-Bissau.
The President: I thank Mr. Ramos-Horta for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Patriota.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for inviting me to address the Security Council in my
capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). Allow me
to congratulate the people of Guinea-Bissau on their
peaceful and active participation in the second round of
presidential elections, which was a fundamental step in
the country’s history. I thank once again all of GuineaBissau’s partners who contributed resources, technical

14-40287

19/05/2014

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

S/PV.7177

support and observers. Also, I would convey a very
special word of appreciation for the invaluable work of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General José
Ramos-Horta, whose personal qualities and dedication
have been an asset for the United Nations and a decisive
contribution to the process.

Government is a complex process, and it is all the more
so for a country such as Guinea-Bissau, emerging from
institutional rupture and facing daunting social and
economic challenges. We welcome the initial gestures
of Prime Minister-designate Domingos Simões Pereira
towards inclusion and dialogue.

As we await the proclamation of the results, let
me outline some important discussions that have taken
place in the Guinea-Bissau configuration during the
past few months, with a view to contributing to future
steps.

As we have highlighted time and again, it is
essential that international assistance be present from
day one. Pressing issues such as the payment of salaries,
especially for civil servants in the education and health
sectors, and food security are also key elements for the
consolidation of the democratic transition. Decisive
and swift support is needed. I will remain in contact
with Special Representative Ramos-Horta and other
partners, such as the World Bank, in order to ensure
that the PBC stands ready to help.

First, the configuration has been actively following
the situation throughout the transitional period. By
means of two press statements, it has called on all parties
to respect the electoral outcome as the expression of
the democratic will of the people of Guinea-Bissau. It
has served as a forum to help improve the coordination
among key regional and international partners — one
aspect that is likely to become even more important
as we prepare to resume full international cooperation
with the country.
On the basis of my January visit to Bissau along
with Assistant Secretary-General Judy ChengHopkins, the configuration has also initiated early
planning for the post-electoral engagement. In that
regard, I had proposed to the configuration and to the
Council that we consider three achievable mediumterm peacebuilding objectives as our guidance in that
process: the completion of a full democratic cycle in
Guinea-Bissau, significant strides in food security and
basic social indicators, and enhanced coordination and
understanding to advance on the modernization of the
security and defence sector.
I also believe that the configuration was able to
strengthen its partnership with the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS) and its coordination with Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ramos-Horta.
The synergy with the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) is also
an important dimension, which is translated through the
PBF’s funding of projects ranging from support to the
electoral process and the establishment of the National
Commission for Planning and Strategic Coordination,
to the promotion of women and youth employment.
Secondly, it is important to bear in mind that the
pursuit of our first medium-term strategic objective,
the completion of a full democratic cycle, has just
begun. In all democratic systems, the formation of a

I believe that we find ourselves today better
positioned, from a technical point of view, to
reengage with Guinea-Bissau. The proposal of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
a government efficacy amelioration programme that
is aligned with the priorities identified by the new
Government in order to ensure national ownership and
based on broad consultations with all international
partners can be a key element to enhance capacity and
transparency. We look forward to working with the
elected authorities on the review of the peacebuilding
strategic framework and the possible cooperation with
the PBF on a set of national peacebuilding priorities.
We can already count on improved coordination among
key partners and on encouraging and skilled leadership
in Bissau. A successful transition is likely to mobilize
both traditional and new partners, and that can well
present a unique opportunity.
That leads me to my next consideration. Beyond
the emergency budgetary support to keep a new
Government running, we have welcomed the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General’s proposal
that a donors’ conference be held as early as possible,
so that the willingness to re-engage on the part of the
international community can materialize in muchneeded concrete pledges and disbursements. At the
same time, we understand that conditions need to be
put in place for that support to be effective.
As noted by Assistant Secretary-General Judy
Cheng-Hopkins during our configuration’s most recent
informal meeting, a donor’s conference should not be
seen as business as usual. We must communicate and

14-402875/8

S/PV.7177

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

articulate in an effective way the improved technical
basis for engagement, the concrete impact that can be
achieved with modest amounts in Guinea-Bissau, the
great potential of the country in agriculture, services
and tourism, and, above all the people’s desire to move
past the cycle of poverty and instability.
Fourthly, with regard to the modernization of the
security and defence sector, I believe that we will now
be better positioned to devise a comprehensive and more
effective strategy in support of legitimate authorities.
The Economic Community of West African States has
been playing an important leading role in that regard,
and we should stand ready to continue to support its
efforts — and the engagement of other partners — with
resources and expertise. The PBC stands available to
play a coordinating role and offer strategic advice by
providing a platform that can bring together the main
partners around common objectives.
That engagement can be important to help bring
about the necessary political space for such complex
processes to advance. As we have noted in the past,
security sector reform in Guinea-Bissau cannot be
viewed in isolation, and it should not concentrate solely
on the top-level structures. It is linked to reforms in other
key sectors: economic revitalization, reconciliation and
political dialogue, and the creation of opportunities
and political alternatives with a view to consolidating
democratic stability.
I stress once again that it is key to ensure that no
social group be perceived as being left behind and that
all be granted their due recognition. Our expectations
should also be attuned to such realities so as to help
us devise the most effective strategies to advance
on realistic objectives. In that connection, we look
forward to the upcoming national conference on the
modernization and restructuring of the security sector,
which is scheduled to take place next month, and
welcome the efforts of UNIOGBIS to promote dialogue
and outreach on that issue.
That brings me to a final consideration, on the
upcoming renewal of the UNIOGBIS mandate by the
Council. As noted by Special Representative RamosHorta in our most recent configuration meeting, the
linkage between the PBC, including as a political body,
and UNIOGBIS should remain a key building block of
the Office’s mandate.
Resolution 2103 (2013) refers to the PBC’s readiness
to reengage with Guinea-Bissau once conditions allow

6/8

19/05/2014

and to the need to further realign the United Nations
system’s State-building and peacebuilding activities
and the contribution of the Peacebuilding Fund to peace
consolidation in Guinea-Bissau. It is my view that we
have made some important strides in that direction
already. Building on such strides, the Council could
consider strengthening the elements of the UNIOGBIS
mandate that refer to its partnership with the PBC and
the potential for that partnership to help bring about
enhanced coordination, additional strategic advice
on a key set of core, achievable and nationally led
peacebuilding priorities and greater synergy with the
PBF and other institutional partners.
The President: I thank Ambassador Patriota for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of GuineaBissau.
Mrs. D’Alva (Guinea-Bissau): On behalf on my
Government and the people of Guinea-Bissau, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for allowing my
delegation to participate here in the Council and for
giving me the floor.
I would like to commend the work of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNIOGBIS) during its mandate and thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. José Ramos-Horta, for his tireless and wonderful
work during the most difficult transition process that
Guinea-Bissau has ever faced. The fact that he is from
a brotherly Portuguese-speaking country and has
experience in a transition process and the consolidation
of peace in his own country has been a plus for GuineaBissau and helped lead to the successful presidential
elections held yesterday.
We would also like to thank Ambassador Antonio
de Aguiar Patriota, Permanent Representative of Brazil
and Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission’s
Guinea-Bissau configuration, and Mr. Bernardo Serage,
representative of Mozambique and current Chair of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries.
After so many meetings in this Chamber on
the subject of Guinea-Bissau during the two-year
transition period since the coup d’état of 2012, at
which the progress and prospects for the return of
constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau were reported
on and weighed, the people of my struggling nation
finally exercised once again their rights as citizens to
choose their leaders, with another round of presidential
14-40287

19/05/2014

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

elections held yesterday, 18 May, between the two
candidates, Mr. José Mario Vaz and Mr. Nuno Gomes
Nabiam. On 13 April, the presidential and legislative
elections were held simultaneously, and the African
Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cabo
Verde won the legislature with an absolute majority
of parliamentary seats. With yesterday’s elections, the
Transitional Government met one of the most important
recommendations of resolution 2048 (2012), which calls
for the restoration of constitutional order in the country.
That act is just a first step in the process of enabling the
country to normalize its relations with the international
community and its own people, and give back to the
people their legitimate right to choose their own leaders.
Despite that important step, the country still has a
long process ahead in recovering from its social and
economic problems, and the new authorities will not
be able to deal with them and restore sustainable peace
without the international community’s support. In that
regard, we welcome the initiative taken to organize an
international financial round table for Guinea-Bissau.
The general civic responsibility and calm of the
people of Guinea-Bissau, and the largest turnout in
the country’s history for both rounds of the election
process, have shown the people’s determination to
prove to the world that they want democracy and
are willing to do their part. For those reasons, our
humble people deserve the support and attention of
the international community and the Security Council
in helping them to stay united and alert in this critical
post-election period so that their votes can finally bear
fruit. They have suffered in silence without payment
for months, but have remained hopeful that with the
elections their wait will end and that peace and security
will return, together with our partners, in order to help
us strengthen our democracy and State institutions so
as to achieve a stable society that can make progress
towards sustainable development.
On behalf of my delegation, I would like to take
this opportunity to thank the entire United Nations
system, the African Union, the European Union, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and
every country, especially Timor-Leste, Nigeria and the
other bilateral partners that have supported GuineaBissau financially and technically in organizing and
holding the elections, as well as all the international
observers who participated and made sure that they
were free, transparent and fair.

S/PV.7177

With peace and stability, Guinea-Bissau, a small
country with a population of 1.6 million people, has
enough natural resources to support itself, as long
as our partners are on board to help us protect those
resources and harness them in the work of developing
our country. In these past years of instability, our
resources have been illegally depleted. In this new postelection stage, we will need our partners’ support more
than ever to help build our human resource capacities
and transfer technologies so that we can best exploit
our resources in ways that will sustain them for future
generations, as well as helping us to protect our waters
and islands from illegal drug-trafficking activities. We
are counting on the financial support of all our partners
in order to improve the country’s economic situation
and to implement and complete the security-sector
reform that is so urgently needed in order to maintain
peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mozambique.
Mr. Serage (Mozambique): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the Republic
of Korea’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of May. I would also like to thank
you for inviting my delegation to participate in this
important meeting on behalf of the 18 member States
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP).
We welcome the Secretary-General’s report on
the situation in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (S/2014/333), and we commend
the positive and very encouraging developments
registered so far. We also welcome the statement
of His Excellency Ambassador Antonio Patriota,
Permanent Representative of Brazil and Chair of the
Guinea-Bissau country-specificd configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission. In that regard, we
greatly appreciate the immeasurable support of the
United Nations and other international actors in the
work of restoring the constitutional order in GuineaBissau disrupted by the coup d’état of 12 April 2012.
We would also like to commend the tireless efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. José Ramos-Horta, who has encouraged the people
of Guinea-Bissau and mobilized international efforts to
find a sustainable solution to this crisis.
The Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
has always supported the efforts on the ground aimed

14-402877/8

S/PV.7177

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

at stabilizing Guinea-Bissau, and has assisted in
the electoral process by deploying its own electoral
observers, led by Mr. Leonardo Santos Simão, former
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Mozambique. We therefore commend the Guinean
people for their holding of free, credible and transparent
elections on 13 April. By maintaining an orderly and
peaceful atmosphere during the elections, the people
of Guinea-Bissau have proved to the world that they
wish to rebuild their country in a healthy, sustainable
environment. We share the view of the international
community that all the political actors, and GuineaBissau society as a whole, should respect the results of
the parliamentary and presidential elections as a key
step in establishing legitimate authority and restoring
constitutional order. We encourage them to pursue an
inclusive national dialogue aimed at achieving longterm political, economic and social stability.
The political situation in Guinea-Bissau is
nonetheless still a source of concern. Serious incidents
and continuing impunity for those who perpetrate
them demonstrate that Guinea-Bissau’s rule-of-law
institutions must be strengthened and modernized.
Furthermore, issues such as food shortages, increasing
strikes about unpaid wages in various economic

8/8

19/05/2014

and social sectors, and the irregular functioning
of a significant number of schools demonstrate the
seriousness of the situation. We call on the international
community to support the future legitimate and
democratic authorities of Guinea-Bissau in dealing
with the multiple challenges ahead, including that of
security sector reform. The CPLP also supports the
speedy holding of a donors’ conference in order to
mobilize resouces immediately to deal with the urgent
need for emergency assistance and the longer-term
priorities for reconstructing various socioeconomic
sectors, which will pave the way for the country’s
sustainable development.
In conclusion, we reaffirm the determination of
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries to
work closely with the future legitimate authorities of
Guinea-Bissau, together with the United Nations and
the wider international community, in order to stabilize
the country effectively.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

14-40287
