UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
THIRTY-NINTH YEAR

25581h

MEETING: 9 OCTOBER 1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2558) . . . . . • . . . . . • • . . . . . • • • . . • . . . • . . . • . . . . • •

I

Expression of thanks to the retiring President • • . . • . • . . . . • . • • • . . . . • • . • • • • • •

I

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .

I

Letter dated 3 October 1984 from the Permanent Representative of the Lao
People's Democratic Republic to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/16765) • . • • . . . • • • . • • • • • • • . . • • • • • • • • •

I

S/PV.2558

J

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents
bined with figures. Mention of such a sym are composed of capital lette rs com bol indicates a referem:e to .a Uni ted
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (sym
quarterly Supplements of the Official Rec bol SI • •• ) are normally published in
ords of the Security CouncU. The date
of the document indicates the supplement
in which it app ears or in whi ch
information abo ut it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council
, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published
in
year
Decisions of the Security Council. The new ly volumes of Resolutions and
system, which has bee n app lied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before
I Janu ary 1965, became fully ope rati ve
on that date .

2558th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 9 Octob er 1984, at 3.30 p.m.
accorda nce with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Counci l's provisional rules of procedure.

President: Mr. Basile Laetare GUISS OU
·
(Burkina Faso).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burkina Faso, China, Egypt, France, India, Malta,
Netherl ands, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Norther n Ireland, United States of America, Zimbabwe.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Siprase11th
(Lao People 's Democratic Republic) and Mr. Kasemsri
(Thailand) took places at the Council table.
3. The PRESID ENT (interpretation from French):
The Council is meeting today in respons e to the request
contain ed in a letter dated 3 October 1984 from the
represe ntative of the Lao People' s Democ ratic Republic to the Preside nt of the Council [S/16765).

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2558)
I.

Adoption of the agenda

2.

Letter dated 3 Octobe r 1984 from the Perman ent
Represe ntative of the Lao People' s Democratic
Republic to the United Nations address ed to the
Preside nt of the Security Council (S/16765)

4. I should also like to draw the attentio n of the members of the Council to the following docume nts:
S/16626, S/16684, S/16727, S/16736 and S/16761. containing the text of letters from the Lao People 's Democratic Republic; and S/16641, S/16712, S/16719,
S/16733, S/16747, S/16757 and S/16767, containing the
text of letters from Thailand.

The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.

5. The first speaker is the Deputy Prime Ministe r and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Lao People 's
Democ ratic Republic, Mr. Phoun Siprase uth. I welcome him and invite him to make his stateme nt.

Expression or thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESID ENT (interpretation from French):
I should like at the very outset to pay iribute to
Mr. Mashingaidze, Perman ent Representative of Zimbabwe to the United Nations , for his service as President of the Security Council for the month of September. I am sure I speak for all the members of the Council
in expressing admiration and deep appreciation to Mr.
Mashingaidze for the great diplomatic skill with which
he conduc ted the business of the Council last month.

6. Mr. SIPRA SEUTH (Lao People' s Democratic Republic) [interpretation from French]:• Mr. President,
I should like first of all to express my great satisfaction
at seeing you presiding over the Securit y Council this
month. My pleasur e is the greater because you are the
represe ntative of a country with which my own country
ertjoys excelle nt relations and shares certain affinities.
Our two peoples have shared the same experie nce of a
colonial past and are united by links of solidarity in their
national liberation struggle to build a new progressive
life in accorda nce with their respect ive interest s. Indeed, our two peoples have followed a similar destiny .
if I may so put it. I should also like to congrahl)ate
your predece ssor, Mr. Mashin pidze of Zimbabwe, for
having discharged his functions so admirably during the
month of Septem ber.

Adoption or the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 3 October 1984 from the Permanent Representative of the Lao People's Democratic Republic to
the United Nations addreu ed to the President the
Security Council (S/16765)

.,r

2. The PRESID ENT (interpretation from French):
I should like to inform membe rs of the Council that ·
I have received letters from the representatives of the
Lao People' s Democratic Republic and Thailand in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose , with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in

7. I should also like to take this opportu nity to thank
the Council for permitting me to come here to set forth
the following very grave matters , which have a direct
bearing on my country .
• Mr. Siprascuth spoke in Lao. The Frach ffl'Sion or bis $bllement was supplied by the ddeption .

1

8. On 6 June, several battalions of the Thai Army,
accompanie d by tanks, armoured cars, artillery and
reconnaissa nce aircraft, carried out an act of aggression against Lao territory and occupied three villages,
namely, Bane May, Bane Kang and Bane Savang, in the
Paklay district of the Sayaboury province, which lies
about 200 kilometres to the north-west of Vientiane,
our capital.
9. Immediately after their occupation, the Thai troops
took draconian measures to change the characterist ics
of those three villages. They removed the frontier
markers which had been placed in that area by France
in agreement with Siam; they replaced Lao administrative authority by Thai administrati ve authority; they
forced the villagers to register in the Thai records office; they replaced Lao currency with Thai currency;
they transformed Lao schools into Thai schools; they
replaced the traffic signs written in Lao by those written
in Thai; they removed villagers by force, particularly
young people, to Thailand, with a view to making them
•·Siamese''; and they sent Thai citizens into those villages to become assimilated with the Lao population
there.
' 10. Furthermor e, the Thai occupation troops engaged
in plunder and pillage, repressin~ the villagers and
raping women. They prevented the villagers from engaging in their agricultural work and prevented them
from visiting their relatives in other villages by surrounding the area of the three villages with a network
of mines. Trenches were dug and reinforceme nts and
extra armaments were brought in with a view to carrying out a prolonged occupation.
11. Thai troops have been constantly firing on neighbouring areas, causing considerabl e loss of human life
and material damage.
12. Along with these military activities and acts of
repression, Thailand has organized a campaign of lies
and propaganda and has claimed that the three villages
are located in a sector over which neither Lao nor Thai
sov~reignty has yet been clearly established.

recognized by the Internationa l Court of Justice. as it
was in the Case concerning the Temple of Preah Vihear
in 1962. 1 In the two joint Lao-Thai declarations of 1979.
it was laid down that the two Prime Ministers agreed to
make of the whole frontier-th e river frontier and the
land frontier-be tween Laos and Thailand. a frontier
of peace and friendship on the basis of respect for
the independen ce. sovereignty . territorial integrity. the
legitimate interests of each side and the principle of
the peaceful resolution of disputes between the two
countries. This is a reciprocal commitmen t relating to
respect for the historic frontier clearly set, and traced
by precise boundary markers.
16. For fair-minded people in Thailand and indeed
throughout the world, it is quite clear that the three
villages belong to Laos; this is a matter of history.
oflaw-trea ties, maps, frontier markers--a nd is a consequence of the fact that administrati on has been established long since and has never been challenged. To
justify the idea that these three villages belong to it, the
Thai administrati on has produced the map drawn up
jointly by the cartographi c service of the Thai Army and
the United States Army in 1978. It considers that this is
a map drawn up by means of modem techniques and
consequentl y it is in keeping with reality. in spite of the
footnote at the bottom of the map stating that ··the
frontier lines on this map are not to be considered
official". Now, why does Thailand claim the right to
assert that a map it drew itself is the only valid one and
why does it claim the right to force another country to
recognize this? Why does Thailand not recognize the
map drawn up in 1907 by the Franco-Siam ese Mixed
Commission of Delimitation, which hitherto the two .
parties have considered to be of a validity beyond question? And why does Thailand reject the map drawn by
the Siamese Army in 1909, which is in keeping with the
provisions of the Protocol of 1907?
17. Thailand puts forward arguments such as ·•because of the fact that the frontier is imprecise in this
place ..... the problem can easily be solved by peaceful
means in a spirit of good-neighbourliness ... In fact. if
Thaiiand were sincere, why did it not discuss the matter
beforehand with the Lao People's Democratic Republic? But instead of doing this, it mobilized sizeable
forces to launch a large-scale attack against the three
villages. It is easy to understand, however. that these
arguments put forward by Thailand are nothing but
deceitful words designed to cover up its aggression
against Lao territory and a violation ofits commitmen ts
to Laos under the joint Lao-Thai declarations of 1979
which provide .that the two countries will settle their
disputes by peaceful means. The violation by Thailand
of its commitmen ts is at the same time an infringement
of the Charter of the United Nations. a sabotage of LaoThai relaticns. and the underlying cause ofagravati on
of tension in South-East Asia.

13. In order for the Council to be able to understand
the problem_ more clearly, I should like to make the
following points.
14. There is no question here of a frontier dispute or
conflict of the kind that arises between two countries
with a common frontier, but a clear-cut case of premeditated aggression.

I5. For decades, in fact since the founding of the Lao
People's Democratic Republic. ln the relations between
Laos and Thailand there has never been any frontier
dispute, either in the region of these three villages or
indeed anywhere along the frontier laid down by the
Franco-Siam ese Convention of 13 February 1904, the
Franco-Siam ese Treaty of23 March 1907 and the map
which is annexed thereto. Let us recall that this is a line

18. Furthennor e, Thailand persists in the idea of
establishing a technical commission to survey the terrain. Furthermor e. it is even advocatiDJ the appointing
2

the villagers back to their homes and to indemnify them
for any losses they may have sustained. thus making
possible a return to the normal situation that had
existed before 6 June 1984. Then the Thai side imposed
a condition on the withdrawal of its troops by forbidding the Lao party to send in its own troops. Worse
still, it demanded that the two countries withdraw their
troops 30 kilometres from the sector of the three villages. Then it demanded that the maintenanc e of the
status quo, that is to say, that the occupation of the
three villages by its troops continue. Finally. the Thai
side proposed, according to a pre-establis hed plan, to
break off negotiations unilaterally.

of a neutral country to supervise this action. This Thai
stratagem consists in forcing Laos to re-examine the
frontier in this area. thus creating a precedent for
a wholesale revision of the frontier between the two
countries. In fact, Thailand has already sent its own
technical commission there to undertake unilaterally a
new drawing of a frontier line.
19. The attack and occupation by Thailand of the
three villages, as well as its other acts and false allegations, could not more clearly demonstrat eits intention
to call into question the historic line of the frontier.
These intentions have been unambiguously expressed
in statements from Thai ruling circles. for example the
following one: "If one goes back to the agreement
before 1946, one will see that the Lao provinces of
Sayaboury and Champassa k belong to Thailand and in
accordance with previous treaties the whole of present
Laos was Thai." When the Lao side showed juridically,
with proof and evidence, treaties and relevant maps,
that the three villages were indeed Lao, the Thai party
dismissed the argument with the reply that those
treaties had been signed under pressure from France.

23. The Thai claim that Viet Nam is intervening in
this matter to inflate it is only a manoeuvre designed
to mislead people and divide them. Indeed. everfone
knows that Lao-Vietna mese relations. like those between the three lndo-Chines e countries. are relations
of brotherly friendship and close alliance. They are
brothers-in- arms. and this constitutes a factor ensuring
the victory of the three countries in their struggle for
the last· few decades against the imperialist and colonialist aggressors. At the present stage ofdefending and
building our country, it is more important than ever that
these relations be strengthene d and developed in all
areas. The Treaty of Friendship and Co-operatio n between Laos and Viet Nam signed in 1m and the declaration of. the summit conference of Laos, Kampuchea and Viet Nam in 1983 [see S/15626 o/28 February
19&3] reaffirmed the principles of solidarity. long-term
co-operatio n and mutual assistance in the building and
defence of each country formulated in a spirit of brotherly friendship, free consent. equality and mutual advantage and on the basis of respect for independence.
sovereignty and territorial integrity and the principle of
non-interference in each other's internal affairs; in a
spirit of mutual understandi ng and with respect for the
legitimate interests of each of the countries and the
common interests of the three nations.

20. If we mak~ a brief review of the history of this
matter, we shall see that the Lao and Thai people are
both very well aware that the present north-east of
Thailand before was Lao territory, and its 20 million
inhabitants are Lao; they speak Lao and their traditions
and customs are Lao, and they are bound by ties of
kinship with the present population of Laos. It is true
that this is a painful history for the Lao people. We are
mentioning it here only to demonstrate the expansionism of Thai ruling circles. The just and correct position
of the Lao People's Democratic Republic is based on its
respect for the principle of the inviolability of historical
frontiers, that is to say, its recognition of the present
line of the frontiers as laid down in the international
instruments signed by France and Siam in 1904 and

1907.

24. The principles governing these relations are in
keeping with the Charter of the United Nations and are
a threat to no country. Progressive peoples throughout
the world can only welcome and support these good
relations. Only the reactionary and imperialist forces
strive to oppose these by all possible means. The three
countries of lndo-China have reaffirmed their policy
of peaceful coexistence with neighbouring countries.
They have done everything in their power to encourage
the dialogue between the countries of lndo-China and
the members of the Association of South-East Asian
Nations in an attempt to make of South-East Asia a
zone of peace. stability, friendship and co-operatio n.

21. At the present time, the Thai side is continuing to
make much of friendly brotherly relations, ethnic affinities between the Lao and the Thai peoples and the
possibility of resolving the matter peacefully through
negotiations. This is just misleading language designed
to assuage the anger of the Lao people and the discontent of the Thai people with regard to Thai aggression.
In fact, the acts of the Thai side contradict these words.
22. In spite of the occupation of its territory by Thai
troops, the Lao side, demonstrating great patience,
sent a delegation to Bangkok to negotiate with the Thai
side. It made it clear that it was absolutely determined
to resolve the problem peacefully. It put forward reasonable and just proposals and presented exhaustive
and relevant proof of the age-old sovereignty of Laos
over these three villages. Unfortunately, in the course
of these negotiations, the Thai side had recourse to all
kinds of manoeuvres and stratagems to avoid the just
solution of the problem. •Initially. the Thai side agreed
to withdraw its troops from the three villages, to send

25. The act of aggression against the three Lao villages forms part of the annexationi st designs of the
reactionary forces of the Thai extreme right apinst
Lao territory. It is the result of renascent pan-Thaiism.
Their annexationi st thirst will not be slaked by the
occupation ofjust three villages. 'Ibey still dream nostalgically of a past history of aggression and crime and
3

w".nt to revive it. History shows that from the sixteenth
century to the twentieth century the reactionary leaders
of Siam committed aggression and annexation against
the bulk of Lao territory, and that for 115 years, from
1778 to 1893, they subjugated Laos and made it a vassal
of Siam. During the Second World War, from 1941 to
1946, Thailand relied on fascism and militarism to compel France to cede to it the two Lao provinces on the
right bank of the Mekong, that is,. Sayaboury and
Champassak. In the course of the most recent imperialist war of aggression against the countries of IndoChina, Thailand became a military base and sent its
own troops to fight alongside the aggressors. They
made of Thai territory a sanctuary for the Pol Pot gangs
and their accomplices, who were guilty of genocide,
and a refuge for Indo-Chinese reactionaries in exile,
who were engaging in activities hostile to the peoples of
Laos, Viet Nam and Kampuchea.
26. The aggression committed against the three villages is a further step towards the implementation of the
policy of hostility to the Lao People's Democratic Republic followed for the past nine years. This policy has
been marked by subversive activities of many kinds:
acts of armed provocation; military pressure; the creation of tension that jeopardizes the security of Laos; an
economic blockade; collusion with the expansionists
and hegemonists in order to maintain, train, organize
and direct Lao reactionaries in exile, who are able to
use Thai territory as a base for the preparation of acts of
sabotage against Laos and from which to carry out
psychological warfare and foment attempts at destabilization. Furthermore, Thai propaganda sows discord
among the multi-ethnic Lao people and division between Laos and Viet Nam and weakens the solidarity of
the three peoples of Indo-China.

firm once again my country's unswerving policy of
developing friendly and good-neighbourly relations
with the Kingdom of Thailand. Laos and Thailand are
two independent. sovereign countries that maintain
diplomatic relations of equality. The Lao and Thai peoples are linked by ethnic affinities and maintain fraternal relations. Their two Governments signed two joint
declarations in 1979 defining relations i.; ~tween them on
the following bases: mutual respect for each other's
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity; respect for each country's right to choose its own way of
life. free of interference or threat from outside; noninterference in the internal affairs of others and refraining from direct or indirect hostile acts against
each other; settlement of disputes by peaceful means in
accordance with the Charter and on an equal footing;
refraining from the use or threat of force in their relations and the prohibition of other countries from using
their territory as a base for intervening in. threatening
or attacking other countries in any way whatsoever.
31. This is the fortunate result of the history of the
establishment and strengthening of relations between
the two countries. The Government of the Lao People•s
Democratic Republic will stri ,·e to defend and respect
scrupulously the spirit and the letter of those two joint
declarations. However, we demand that the Thai Government follow suit. The Thai side must forthwith withdraw its troops and administrative personnel from the
three Lao villages totally and unconditionally, send
home the villagers who were forcibly taken to Thailand,
compensate the villagers for the losses in human life
and property and restore the normal situation that prevailed in the region before 6 June 1984.
32. Just recently. the Thai delegation _stated before
the General Assembly that .. the Royal Thai Government has decided to remove the Thai military presence
from the three villages".~ We are both interested and
puzzled by that statement. What reasons and motives
led that Government to take such a decision at this time
and despite the failure of the two rounds of negotiation
at Bangkok? In this connection. my delegation would
like to make the following points.

27. The historical facts I have mentioned prove that
the fundamental, unchanged policy of the reactionary
Thai leaders against Laos is an expansionist one and
that, in order to further that policy, its adherents consistently rely upon imperialist and reactionary forces.
28. The aggression against the three Lao villages
form~ part of the overall global designs of the extremeright Thai reactionaries, who are in collusion with the
expansionists and hegemonists against Laos and IndoChina. This is illustrated by their diplomatic activities
undertaken prior to these incidents and in the course of
negotiations.

33. First. the statement on the withdrawal of the Thai
troops is insincere. as it contains no guarantee and gives
no precise hour, date, month or year for the total withdrawal. On 3 October. one day after that statement. the
spokesman for the Thai Ministry of foreign Affairs, Mr.
Savanith Khongsiri, told Associated Press ..that it is
not a withdrawal, but a rotation". On 4 October, in the
magazine Far Eastern Economic Re,•iell', in an article
entitled .. Face on the line", it was stated:

29. The Lao people cherishes its independence and
freedom, won at the cost of a heroic struggle that lasted
more than 30 years and entailed heavy sacrifices.
Therefore the Lao people is determined to safeguard its
independence. sovereignty and territorial integrity; at
the same time, it always respects the independence.
sovereignty and territorial integrity of other countries.
Self-defence is for any country a right enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.

..Thai Foreign Ministry officials say that the recent
border clash between Thai and Lao troops at Uttaradit resulted from the Thai army relying on inaccurate survey maps prepared by the United States
Army in 1978 which erroneously locate Lao villages
on the Thai side of the frontier. According to these
sources, the Foreign Ministry urged caution. but the

30. Before this body, on behalf of the Government of
the Lao People's Democratic Republic. I wish to reaf.

4

army proceeded to fortify the three contested villages. on the conviction that they were within Thai
territory-an act taken as a provocation by Lao
authorities. Although the Thai army has now accepted that the US maps may be in error. officials
say considerable 'face' is involved and the army is
resisting suggestions that it should quietly withdraw
from the contested positions."
34. Secondly, Thailand stated it would withdraw its
troops without, however, renouncing the maintenance
of its administration, police force, para-military forces
and administrative personnel in that part of our territory.
35. Thirdly, the withdrawal statement makes no mention of Lao sovereignty over those three villages.

42. I should also like to felicitate Mr. Masbingaidze of
Zimbabwe, President of the Council for the month of
September, for his invaluable contribution to the fulfilment of the primary functions of the Council m the
maintenance of international peace and security.
43. My delegation is grateful to you. Mr. President,
and to the other members of the Council for the opportunity of coming before this body to present our stand
on the issue of the three villages near the Thai-Lao
border. Our gratitude is in no way diminished by the
fact that, in the considered view of the Thai delegation.
there exists no crisis. no situation, and indeed no issue
deserving of attention by the representatives m this
Chamber, who are already so much preoccupied with
other business.
44. Allow me to extend my delegation's gn:etings to
the Minister for Foreign Affairs ofLaos, in our common
language: Sawasdi. Pana-Than.

36. Fourthly, the withdrawal statement says nothing
about the return home of the villagers captured by the
Thai troops, or about compensation for the human and
material losses suffered by the population.

45. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Lao People's Democratic Republic has made very many polemical statements of late, attempting to justify the
obviously well-organized and co-ordinated campaign
on his side on three counts. First, he attempts to justify his campaign by alleging that Thailand violated
Lao sovereignty, particularly by sending troops to
occupy the three villages. Secondly, he alleges that,
in so doing. Thailand had designs on the whole border.
In the statement he made before the General Assembly ,3 in support of this argument he cited something
called "pan-Thaiism". Thirdly, he alludes to lbailand's candidature for a non-permanent seat in the
Council, thereby establishing a linkage between the
issue of the t~e villages and that candidature.

37. It is therefore clear that the statement on the withdrawal of the Thai troops does not go to the heart of the
matter, that is, recognition of Lao sovereignty over the
three villages and the normalization of the situation that
existed in the region before 6 June 1984. Its aim, in fact,
is to mislead international and Thai public opinion,
which vigorously condemns the Thai extreme-right
reactionaries for their aggression against part of Lao
territory, and also to win the confidence of the international community in the Thai desire for peace in order
to seek support for Thailand's candidacy for membership of the Security Council.
38. I wish to take this opportunity to make an urgent
appeal to the Council to urge Thailand to respond
quickly to the legitimate aforementioned demands of
the Lao side and to abide by the Charter of the United
Nations in its international relations.

46. I shall now proceed to deal with those points one
by one.
47. With regard to the first point, we should realize
that the three villages cover only an area of 18 to
19 square kilometres, with a population numbering
l, 100. These people are located in a remote and isolated
part, deep in an area of mountains and dense vegetation, like small islands in the middle of an ocean. It
has been and cogtinues to be difficult to maintain access
to them. The people are very poor, leading a mea,r·
existence by subsistence fanning on the hillside. ~- are of ethnic Thai-Lao origin, like most people ,~...
inhabit that vast comer of mainland South-East Asia.
Indeed. people from this racial stock are scatteml
throughout southern China, northern Burma, northwestern Viet Nam, and of course Laos and lbailand.
They have a common linguistic tie and similar cultural
traits and traditions.

39. We believe that in this way it will be possible to
normalize the situation on the Lao-Thai frontier and the
relations between the two countries in order to meet the
aspirations and interests of both peoples and contribute
to the maintenance of peace and stability in South-East
Asia.
40. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Thailand.
I now call on him.
41. Mr. KASEMSRI (Thailand): I should like, on behalf of my delegation, to 1,:;xtend to you, Sir, our sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the responsibilities of the high office of President of the Security
Council for this month. The fact that the Council has
deemed it fitting that you should assume the presidency
so soon after your presidency in August is a tribute to
your recognized qualities and diplomatic skill, as.well
as a sign of the high esteem in which your country.
Burkina Faso, is held by the international community.

48. I shall now enumerate the events that led to the
recent incidents.
49. In the development plans, the Thai Government
always gives a high priority to road-construction pro-

s

•

jects, not only to improve communications between
different parts of the Kingdom, but also to provide
access to rural areas. In our current five-year plan,
there is a road-building project linking Nan and Uttaradit provinces in northern Thailand. Construction began about two years ago, and the projected road runs
well inside our border.

50. In March 198~this is actually when the recent
incidents occurred-the road engineers and workers
were harassed by armed Lao soldiers. As a result, some
lightly armed volunteers were sent to perform guard
duty at the construction site. On 15 April-and, again,
this event occurred even before the magic date of 6 June
mentioned by the Minister-Lao troops attacked these
volunteers and some members of the border police well
inside our territory. Between 24 and 25 May, there was
again a clash between Lao troops and the Thai guardsmen 4 kilometres inside Thailand. On 28 May, the
Royal Thai Government sent a note to the Government
of the Lao People's Democratic Republic requesting an
inquiry into the above-mentioned incidents and calling
for immediate consultations between the two sides at
the local level.
51. Here I should explain that there exists long-established machinery between Thailand and Laos for consultations and settlement of such problems. Apart from
normal diplomatic channels, there is a Joint Border
Committee, set up for the express purpose of solving
problems of this nature at the Gov:.:mment and local
levels. Provincial governors and officials on both sides
also hold periodic meetings to cement ties in cultural
and technical fields. Apart from trade links, there are
several economic assistance projects extended by Thailand to Laos, including the agreement to purchase electric current from Nam Ngum dam, which is a significant source of foreign exchange .for Laos. This latter
agreement stems from the ongoing co-operation between the riparian States in the lower Mekong basin to
harness the mighty river for economic development.
52. The Lao response to the Thai note of 28 May was
that instructions were not forthcoming from Vientiane
to proceed with such consultations. Meanwhile, a study
of available maps gave the Thai authorities reasonable
grounds to believe that the three villages were indeed,
either wholly or partly, inside Thai territory. By that
time Lao harassment and intimidation had become incessant, so much so that road construction came to a
standstill. On 6 and 7 June, Thai regular troops were
dispatched to provide protection and security for the
work crew and to ensure continuation of the project.
During this period, Thailand sought to clear up the issue
through the Lao Embassy at· Bangkok and the Royal
Thai Embassy at Vientiane.

three small villages. Simultaneously. Hanoi joined in
with its slanderous campaign in support of the Lao side.
Thailand refrained from making any public statement
which might aggravate the· situation. being convinced
all the while that the issue could be resolved peacefully through normal diplomatic channels or through
the existing bilateral mechanisms. Laos, however, increased the level of polemics, necessitating a clarification of the issue by Thailand. This was done on 21 June
in a letter to the Secretary-General [S//664/). That was
followed by the invitation to the Lao side at the beginning of July to send representatives to Bangkok
for bilateral talks in order to resolve the problem in a
peaceful manner.

54. The first round of talks was held at Bangkok between 21 and 23 July. It might perhaps be categorized as .
exploratory and no agreement was reached except that
the next round of talks would also take place at Bangkok. Despite the tremendous expenses for the Royal
Thai Government. and the complaint of the Budget
Bureau. Thailand agreed to continue as host. as it is our
tradition not to withhold hospitality, especially towards
the Lao people. It was not possible to reach agreement
on the various proposals. However. both parties publicly announced their concurrence on the need to adhere to the watershed principle on this issue.
55. The positions of the two sides at those talks can be
summarized as follows:
-First, while both sides agreed to cease military
confrontation, Laos demanded unilateral withdrawal of
Thai troops. Thailand proposed to withdraw troops if
Laos would agree not to reintroduce forces into the
area, pending verification by both sides of the exact
location of the watershed. Laos rejected the Thai proposal.
-Secondly. Thailand proposed that a Joint Technical Team be set up to undertake verification of the
boundary line and that both sides agree to be bound by
the team's findings. The Thai proposal was rejected by
Laos.
-Thirdly, Laos demanded that Thailand compensate it for damage caused to the villagers. Thailand
denied that any damage had been caused. but nevertheless proposed that both sides agree jointly to assess the
damages which might have been suffered by the villagers and jointly to consider measures of assistance to
those victims.
-Fourthly, Laos demanded that Thailand return the
villagers to their homes. Thailand reassured Laos that
no villagers were taken away or held by Thai authorities.

53. On 9 June, the Government of the Lao People's
Democratic Republic launched a campaign of acrimonious slander against Thailand. There were, indeed, demonstrations in so many parts of the world, in Paris and

56. In a letter dated 23 August from the representative
of Thailand to the Secretary-General (S//67/2). it was
further made clear that. after an impasse was reached in
the talks. the Thai side still feh that. ways and means

in various other capitals, all stemming from this issue of
6

should be found to resolve the issue urgently in order to
promote brotherly and friendly relations between Laos
and Thailand, particularly between the peoples of the
two countries.

60. This peaceful initiative by the Royal Thai Government has led to the repositioning of Thai troops away
from the three villages. Needless to say. without military protection it is no longer possible for Thai civilian
personnel to remain in the area. because of possible
harassment by Lao forces. The crisis has. therefore.
become a non-crisis. and the first pretext by .Laos bas
been deflated.

57. The Royal Thai Government, therefore, sent its
own technical team to undertake a survey in the area, in
order to determine the exact location of the boundary.
Should there be any doubt as to its findings. Thailand
announced its readiness to have impartial experts conduct an independent survey on the terrain to verify Thai
findings. At the same time, Thailand appealed to Laos
not to engage in any military actions while the technical team was in the process of carrying out its peaceful mission. Unfortunately, the Thai appeal was not
heeded. On the contrary, the Lao side mounted acts of
provocation and harassment, thereby making it impossible for the Thai technical team to perform its task.

61. The crux of the matter boils down to the basic
disagreement over the exact location of the boundary
line in this small, remote. mountainous and forested
area. The problem may be termed a technical one.
because of the need for a joint survey to determine
where the watershed line is actually located.
62. Regarding the second point raised by the Lao
Minister. namely. that Thailand had designs on the
whole length of the border. permit me to make the

58. These Lao acts of provocation and harassment
have been reported to the Secretary-General and subsequently to the Council in documents S/16719,
S/16733, S/16747 and, more recently, by my letter
dated 26 September [S/16757]. These incidents caused
several Thai casualties, resulting in six deaths, and
much damage to property.

following observations.
63. The Royal Thai Government firmly adheres to the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations. as well as the rules ofintemational law and the
generally accepted norms of conduct between States.
64. The Franco-Siamese Treaty mentioned by Laos
was concluded at the time when the Siamese Government was in no position to resist certain encroachments
by the French colonial administration in lndo-China.
As a consequence. the Treaty imposed undue disadvantages on Thailand to the benefit of Laos. which was
then under French rule. Despite the natural desire of
Thailand to renegotiate the unequal and inequitable ·

On 2 October, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Thailand made the following statement in the General
Assembly:
59.

"With reference to the incidents near the Thai-Lao
border, my Government regards them as minor border incidents which can unfortunately occur in any
part of the world. The issue itself concerns only three
small, remote villages covering an area of 19 square
kilometres and with a population of 1,100 people. The
matter arose when Lao troops began harassing a Thai
work crew building a road some distance from those
villages and well inside our border. Once military
actions had taken place, it became difficult for either
side to yield for fear of giving advantage to the other
side.

provisions of the Treaty. successive Thai Governments
have endeavoured to uphold the larger interest of goodneighbourliness with Laos.
65. I should also point out that the map distributed by
the Lao side was made by French cartographers during
the same period as the Treaty. It uses a scale so small
that it is not suitable for the purpose of verification of
the boundary line in the area in question. However.
both the Thai and Lao sides are clear on the principle to
be used to delineate this pan of the Thai-Lao border.
They concur in the watershed principle. in conformity
with the Treaty.

•'This bilateral issue was further complicated by an
undue interference from a third country, which has
seized upon the opportunity to divert world attention
from its military occupation of Kampuchea and to
introduce an extraneous factor in the form oflinkage
to the Kampuchean problem.

66. In light of the foregoing, Thailand's effort to set up
a joint technical team should be appreciated. Considering the remoteness of the three villages .and the rugged terrain. mere possession or occupation cannot. per
se. be proof of ownership.

"It has long been the policy of the Royal Thai
Government to maintain good-neighbourly relations
with Laos. The issue of the three villages should not
be permitted to stand in the way of improved relations between the two peoples, who speak the same
language and have relatives on both sides of the
border. Therefore, despite efforts of the other side to
impede progress towards a peaceful settlement, the
Royal Thai Government has decided to remove Thai
military presence from the three villages in order to
defuse the situation and bring about a peaceful solution to the problem.•••

67. Now that Thai troops have been redeployed away
from the three villages thanks to the constructive initiative of the Royal Thai Government and its armed
forces. there should be no obstacle to Laos• aarecina to
establish a joint technical team with the Thai side.
However. if Laos should now decide to rencac on its
stand in this repnl. my cleleption is ready to request
the Secretary-General to dispatch to the area a fact-

7

finding mission for an on-site survey with the assistance of both Lao and Thai technical experts.

-First, Thailand is desirous of maintaining and improving its relations with neighbouring Laos.

68. Meanwhile, both sides should refrain from any
actions which might create a crisis of the present noncrisis. Such mutual restraint should extend to polemical
debates and attacks on each other. The issue, which is a
bilateral one, should not be subject to any third-party
interference or exploitation whatsoever.

-Secondly, Thailand is desirous of seeing an independent. sovereign, neutral and non-aligned Laos.
-Thirdly. Thailand does not harbour any desire for
even an inch of Lao territory or a single Lao national. Indeed, Thailand is already burdened with over
70,000 refugees from Laos, and it would be helpful if
Laos were to agree to accept them safely back.

69. Finally, it is not entirely surprising that the issue
of the three villages has been linked by the Lao Minister
for Foreign Affairs to Thailand's candidature for membership on the Security Council, both in his statement
before the General Assembly and in his statement in the
meeting of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, as
well as his statement here today. This linkage may
indeed be the·capstone of the whole Lao effort to malign and vilify Thailand's good name. Despite all the
acrimonious rhetoric, the issue of the three vmage~ m:~y
not be regarded by Laos as a big issue at all-but
Thailand's candidature certainly is. This, for instance,
would explain the fact that, in his statement before the
General Assembly. the Lao Minister for Foreign Affairs took no note of the peaceful initiative of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Thailand. Instead, he proceeded to cast aspersions and vituperance on Thailand.
This would explain the Lao effort to have the meeting of
countries members of the Non-Aligned Movement condemn Thailand. This would explain the Lao request for
the present meeting of the Council. This would, of
course, explain the ignoble linkage itself.

-Fourthly. Thailand is mindful of the plight of landlocked and least developed countries. including Laos.
-Fifthly. to defuse the situation Thailand has removed the Thai military presence from the three
villages. If Laos should .resume military actions or
harassment of Thai work~rs. then the full onus of responsibility would be on tf\e Lao side.
-Sixthly. both sides should refrain from polemical
or propaganda attacks on each other and should prevent any third-party interference in what is a bilateral
issue.
--Seventhly. Thailand is prepared to accept the
establishment of a joint technical team or of a factfinding mission of the Secretary-Gen eral. with assistance from Lao and Thai technical experts.
-Eighthly. Thailand is prepared to accept the result
of the findings of the joint technical team or mission,
provided Laos agrees to the same.

70. Indeed, it became obvious to my delegation that
the original scheme, hatched in darker recesses than the
Lao Mission, was to obstruct Thailand's candidature
by ensuring that the elections would take place concurrently with a Council debate on Thai-Lao border
incidents. The master plan was to make use of the
obvious advantages that Laos has in the meeting of the
Non-Aligned Movement to create an artificial controversy and then to follow with a Security Council debate
at the same time that the elections were taking place in
the .General Assembly. The plot thickened as the election day approached. Then came Thailand's peaceful
initiative to defuse the situation. The conspirators
were caught in an awkward position and had to move up
their timetable with an earlier request for the Council's
meeting. Now that the members of the Non-Aligned
Movement have refused to be parties to the scheme it
remains to be seen what further steps in this wellorchestrated master plan will be taken by Laos to serve
the interests of others.

-Ninthly. if the findings are not conclusive Thailand
is prepared to resort to an impartial. independent technical expert or group of technical experts acceptable to
both sides.
-Tenthly. Thailand would be prepared to resume
negotiations with Laos on the basis of such findings in
order to resolve the issue in a peaceful and constructive
manner.
73. Having listened to the disparaging and acrimonious statements from the Lao side, from the Lao Minister for Foreign Affairs on down, it is hardly surprising
that earlier negotiations have broken down. It is now
time for the Lao delegation to heed its own counsel and
to reflect on its own national character, of which the
most attractive qualities are the dignity and gentleness
which have won for it so many friends.
74. It is the earnest hope of my delegation that. despite occasional problems between two neighbours.
both countries-Tha iland and the Lao People's
Democratic Republic-will look forward to a future of
peaceful and constructive relations as befits two peoples who share a common language and age-old culture.
The issue of the three villages should not be like the
small pea in the fable about the princess with insomnia.

71. I do not intend to dwell on our candidature, as this
is not the appropriate time or place, and since my
delegation is not the one that links the two matters
together.
72. Permit me instead to summarize the stand of the
Royal Thai Government on the issue of the three villages. That stand is as follows:
8

81. After the Thai delegation unilaterall y took the
initiative of proposing the second round of negotiations. the spokesma n of the Thai delegation stated to
Agence France Presse on 15 August 1984: ""The dispute
regarding the three villages cannot be settled around the
negotiating table ...

nor should it become a pretext for extraneou s causes
espoused by others or a wedge driven· by others to
divide the fraternal peoples of Laos and Thailand.
75. My delegation also hopes, Sir, that under your
inspired presidenc y this Council will help create an
appropria te atmospher e conducive to enhancing its role
in accordanc e with the purposes and principles and
provisions of the Charter, particular ly to assist the parties in their effort to solve this bilateral problem peacefully and justly.

82. In the face of such a statement . men of good will
may wonder where it is that the delegation of Thailand
would like to solve this dispute. Before replying to that
question, let us ask a second question. the response to
which will give members the key to the first question:
Why is it that the Thai side persevere s in this error to
the detriment of the legitimate interests of the Thai
people and of the Lao people?

76. The PRESIDE NT (interpretation from French):
The representa tive of the Lao People's Democrat ic
Republic has asked to speak in exercise of the right of
reply, and I now call upon him.

83. For those of us who have followed the developments in South-Eas t Asia. the chronolog y of the trips
of the Thai leaders is revealing. Two days before the
skirmishe s against the local militia which defended the
three villages. and the occupatio n of the villages by
the first Thai cavalry division. the Command er~in-Chi ef
of the Thai Army. General Arthit Kamlang- Ek. badjust
returned from a trip abroad, including in his programm e
a fact-finding mission on the events in the south of
China. It must be noted also that between the two
rounds of Thai-Lao negotiatio ns on the occupatio n of
the territory of Laos. the Thai Minister for Foreign
Affairs, accompan ied by the head of the Thai delegation
to those negotiatio ns, went abroad. That is an unfortunate chronolog y for Thailand and for the Thai-Lao bilateral relations.

77. Mr. SRITHIR ATH (Lao People's Democrat ic
Republic) [interpretationfrom French]: I think that the
statement of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Thailand on the withdrawa l of troops in itself constitute s
recognitio n of the aggression of his country against my
country. It is unnecessa ry to say any more. But what
I should like to emphasize here is the question whether
bad faith rests with the Lao side or with the Thai side.
78. There is a saying that happy people have no history. That is true provid 2d that certain leading circles in
other countries do not create too many problems for
them and do not consider relations between States as if
they were taking place in a jungle. Thus it is with
complete sincerity that the delegation of the Lao People's Democrat ic Republic regrets that a portion of its
territory is occupied by Thai troops and that this problem has to come before this body. We regret this fact
not because the problem does not deserve such consideration ; on the contrary, but because after two series
of negotiatio ns, which the Lao Governm ent delegation
undertook at Bangkok from 21 July to 15 August, no
positive outcome was arrived at in those efforts. which
were carried out in good faith.

84. Let us say in passing that visits ofindividu als from
other countries to Bangkok have led to the same results. The cause of this is the same. It is always the
collusion of the Thais with the expansion ists acting
against our country.
85. Let us now refer to the facts which show that the
Thai side has never been willing to settle the problem of
the three villages. Acting as annexatio nists and hegemonists, Thailand has committed aggressio n and occupied the territory of Laos. It will strive to maintain
and perpetuat e its illegal occupatio n in order to begin
the first stage in the chain of the rebirth of pan-Thaii sm.
hoping little by little to swallow Laos. to do what it did
not succeed in doing in the past in its alliance with
fascism and imperialis m during its aggression against
Laos, thus questionin g once again a hi.:;toric boundary
defined from 1904 to 1907, conductin g military adventurism as part of their foreign policy and creating new
hotbeds of tension and instability in the region.

79. Possessin g the relevant title to sovereign ty and
the effective exercise of sovereign ty for several centuries until 6 June 1984, the date of the occupatio n of
that portion of Lao territory by Thailand, the Lao People 's Democrat ic Republic displayed its sincerity and
its desire peacefully and expeditiou sly to settle this
problem, by going to Bangkok. the capital of the army
occupying Lao territory, to negotiate for more than one
month with representa tives of a country which committed premedita ted armed aggression against us.
80. That attempt to settle the question clearly shows
that our side truly displayed good faith, sincerity and
goodwill to settle this matter by peaceful means. Let
us remind the representa tive of Thailand, who as usual
has engaged in a long and misplaced discourse against
Laos, of the words of the head of the Thai d~legation.
who stated at the end of the first round of negotiations:
"The Lao delegation deserves to be commend ed for its
efforts to solve the conflict by peaceful means.••

86. The Thai side has never been willing to setde the
problem of the three villages. It is significant that on
26 July 1984. the date when the head of the Lao deleption returned to Vientiane for consultati ons. waiting
for the Thai Governme nt delegation to return from its
visit abroad. the strongman of Bangkok. General Anhit
Kamlang- Ek. brought together all the hip officials of
the three branches of the armed forces and of the police
9

al an ultra-secret meeting-according to the official
reports of the police department-something which is
very rare in Thailand, because we know that the army
and the police do not get along well at all.
87. The content of that meeting was revealed quite by
chance only on 20 August 1984, by the daily Siam Rath,
managed by the Social Action Party, of which General
Siddhi Savetsila, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Thailand, is the Vice-President. It stated:
··According to highly placed sources, during that
meeting General Arthit Kamlang-Ek has, in the name
of national security, asked for the co-operation of the
police so that it might replace the army in the occupation of the three Lao villages in the event of a possible
future agreement at which the two sides may arrive
concerning the problem of the sovereignty over the
areas.
•"The police-operations centre proposed sending
units of the border police to replace the military
forces on the ground. For psychological reasons they
will have to change their green uniform for the khaki
uniform of the municipal police . .,
The units of the border police, established for purposes
of social and political repression inside the country and
provocation against neighbouring countries, are known
for their cruelty and pillaging.

people. That psychological operation was to be conducted in conformity with the guidelines established .
at the meeting held on 20 June 1984 and attended by
the heads of the three branches of the armed forces
and the police and representatives of the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs:·
9L This is in no way a cartographic error or a ""minor
incident" but rather a systematic plan ofaggression and
occupation of a portion of Lao territory and this plan
has several aspects. We have looked at the military.
political and international aspects. which are very
closely interrelated in this plan. The progressive unveiling of this plan by the press and the Bangkok leaders
meant the dropping of the last shield which was still
camouflaging the annexationist and hegemonistic
policy of pan-Thaiism.
92. On 5 August 1984, on the eve of the second round
of the negotiations between Thailand and Laos. the
newspaper of the party of the Thai Minister for Foreign
Affairs advocated the organization of a plebiscite in the
three villages occupied by the Thai Army since 6 June.
The best intentions of Laos therefore were unsuccessful in the face of this desire for annexation and hegemony on the part of the Thai leaders. As far as Bangkok
is concerned. problems are not supposed to be solved;
they are supposed to linger on and be further exacerbated for the benefit of pan-Thaiism.
93. My country. the Lao People's Democratic Republic, known for its desire for peace. equity and justice, has done and will do everything it can in order
peacefully and expeditiously to solve the problem on
the basis of the principles stipulated in the two joint
declarations signed in 1979 by the Prime Ministers of
the two countries. While defending our legitimate interests in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations. we have attempted to
safeguard the interests of Thailand and help it to save
face, which explains the two rounds of negotiations
held at Bangkok itself by the Lao Government delegation. Despite the unilateral break-off'ofthe negotiations
proposed by the Thai side, we are ready to resume the
negotiations any time and anywhere. Although the Lao
position is legitimate, since the matter is one of settling
a dispute with Thailand. the Lao People's Democratic
Republic knows that the best defence strategy is still
diplomacy. In this connection, it scrupulously respects
the provisions of the Charter.

88. On 25 July 1984, the newspaper The Nation,
which has good sources among the ruling circles in
Thailand, revealed that the Thai officials had clearly
stated that despite a possible. withdrawal by the Thai
troops from the three villages, the latter would remain
under Thai authority.
89. According to The Bangkok Post of 25 September 1984, the first contingent of the inhabitants of the
three villages was taken to Bangkok to receive paramilitary training and relieve the Thai troops, paramilitary
training which was enlivened by visits to the flesh-pots
of Bangkok and Pattaya and from the Commander-inChief of the Thai Army, General Arthit Kamlang-Ek
himself.
90. This long-standing desire of Thailand to occupy
Lao territory in one way or another is reflected in the
thinking out loud which is ertjoyed so much by the Thai
leaders. Publishing an interview with the SecretaryGeneral of the Thai Security National Council, the
newspaper Siam Rath, dated 30July 1984, reported that

94. As regards the issue raised by the representative
of Thailand, namely, the manipulation of Laos by a
foreign country, I should like to express my views as
follows: we have here a country, Thailand, which has
committed aggression and then has occupied Lao territory and which is now accusing the Lao people of
having been manipulated in an underhanded way by
Viet Nam! This is funny-actually it is sad-because it
only reveals the military mentality of the extreme riaht·
ist reactionary leaders of Thailand. To set the record
straight, let us quote a passage from the newspaper
Bangkok World of 25 June 1984, which states:

"The Secretary-General of the National Security
Council, Colonel Prasong Soonsiri, requested the
Director-General of the Police, Kenom Seng Mitrong, to conduct psychological action in connection
with the three villages. The targets of the psychol-

ogical operatjon were to be the Lao population, those
who supported the Lao people, the non-aligned countries, the inhabitants of the three villages and the Thai
10

"Supreme Command spokesman, Lieutenant
General Samphao Sikhacha, has dismissed as a
'rumour', reports of a Vietnamese troop buildup
near three disputed villages on the Thai-Lao
border."*
We believe that the issue of the three villages is
serious because it involves aggression and occupation
of Laos. What is more serious is that Thailand is attempting to shirk its responsibilities and is not facing up
to reality. The representative of Thailand's statement
here is just polite words because he knows full well that
the three villages belong to Laos. He knows that General Siddhi Savetsila, his Minister, publicly expressed
regret in front of the Australian parliamentary delegation at the fact that he was absent from Bangkok when
the matter arose. He knows that these three villages
must be given back to Laos because they are Lao
villages, because the Siam Rath of24 September 1984,
the journal of the Social Action Party, of which General Siddhi Savetsila is Vice-President, concluded its
editorial with these words: "It is recommended that
the three villages be returned once and for all to
Laos". He knows that the Far Eastern Economic
Review of 4 October 1984 stated in this connection:

95.

"Thai Foreign Ministry officials say that the recent
border clash between Thai and Lao troops in Uttaradit resulted from the Thai army relying on inaccurate survey maps prepared by the United States
Army in 1978 which erroneously located Lao villages
on the Thai side of the frontier. According to these
sources, the Foreign Ministry urged caution. but the
army proceeded to fortify the three contested villages
. . . Although the Thai army has now accepted that
the US map may be in error, officials say considerable 'face' is involved and the army is resisting suggestions that it should quietly withdraw from the
contested positions."*
96. To err is human; it is unpardonable, however, to
persevere in the error. But this is not really the point.
Thailand is secretly carrying out a long-premeditated
plan to pursue a policy of annexationist pan-Thaiism.
That attempt having been discovered, it is now talking
about the problem of face-saving, as reported in The
Bangkok Po ... t of I October 1984, according to which
''General Kamlang-Ek states that the unilateral withdrawal of troops from three villages will mean a loss of
face for Thailand". ls this really a problem of loss of
"face", or simply an expression of the fury of the
supporters of the expansionist policy of pan-Thaiism
caught in the very act? All these facts are very dis-·
tressing for Thailand-they show who is manipulating
whom.
97. I should like next to deal with the third point
raised by the Thai side, concerning the maP,, I think
that we must choose between what is true and what is
false. We know full well that Thailand is the country of
• Quoted in English by the speaker.

Sisanonsay, that is, of the professional braggart made
into a national hero by Thailand. What we do not know
so well is bow far the Thai side will push this dirtytrick.. mentality, for that is what it is. as we have seen
on several occasions in connection with the ocaapatioD
of Lao territory. To distort reality in order to fool others
is to degrade oneself and, which is even more unpleasant, at the same time degrade others. The maptbat
we produced is there. It is the only relevant map for
it is the outcome of the work of the Franco-Siamese
Mixed Commission of Delimitation of the frontiers.
That is the title of the Commission provided for in
article 3 of the Convention of 13 February 1904. With
regard to the Case concerning the Temple of Preab.
Vihear, 1 the International Court of Justice ruled on
ts June 1962 on this map established by the commission
on the delimitation of borders between Indo-Cbina and
Siam as follows: ..The Court considers that the acceptance of the Annex I map by the Parties caused the map
to enter the treaty settlement and to become an integral
part of it... Thailand, through the Anny High Command, published an identical map on 18 February 1909
in the Siamese language. All the maps were distnl>uted
to the members of the Council.
0

98. It is astonishing that Thailand. which has requested and obtained funds from the United Nations Educational. Scientific and Cultural Organization for the
preservation of the Sukbotbai and other archaeological
sites as part of the heritage of mankind, should get
involved in a sham quarrel about the old and new and
set itself up as the champion of flashy modernism.

9'J. Thailand says that the so-called Thai map is more
specific because of the kind of technology and the scale
that were used. What biased lies there are in that short
sentence! The map which we have submitted was called
a French map by Thailand for its own purposes and to
try to get it disqualified. It is not a French map. but a
map drawn by the Franco-Siamese Mixed Commission
of Delimitation of the frontiers between Indo-Oaina
and Siam, and it was annexed to the Treaty of23 March
1907. This map of the Franco-Siamese Commission is
the relevant one with regard to the three villages to the
exclusion of any other maps which may have been
drawn up ~atcrally. such as the one in 1978.

100. This 1978 map. of which the 1bai side has
boasted. is not even a 1bai map. It is an American
map on which Bangkok. well known for its flourisbing
copying industry. has stuck certain names in Thai and
which it has then photocopied. That is the trick. That is
indeed the case because. two weeks after the aarasion against and occupation of this portion of our ter•
ritory by the Thai army. the Thai daily TM Nation. of
21 June 1984. revealed that Thai jurists had met on
several occasions in an attempt to find legal arpments
to prove Thailand's rights over this portion of LIO
territory.
101. Let us render unto Caesar the thinas that an:
Caesar's. This 1978 map. drawn up by the United

can show no valid deed, title or right and therefore no
sovereignty over these three villages, except by virtue
of its occupation resulting from the armed aggression
committed after 6 June 1984.

States Army, has a footnote which reads as follows:
... Delimitation of international boundary must not be
considered authoritative."* This was a useful precaution because in each new edition of the map-in 1962,
1965, 1972 and finally in 1978-the United States Army
changed the boundary showing the area of the three
villages. This change by the United States Army proves
several things. First, it proves that so-called advanced
technology is not trustworthy-this is the least critical
hypothesis. On the other hand, according to experts
in the geodesic triangulation method utilized by the
Franco-Siamese Mixed Commission of Delimitation
from 1904 to 1907, with a map on the scale of 1:200,000,
the error, if there were one, would be of some 40 metres
to 50 metres and therefore negligible. Secondly, the
American services do engage in cartographic manipulation and we are therefore used to such things, which
they do for psychological reasons, if only because most
of these maps were drawn up during the period of their
imperialist war of aggression in Indo-China.

104. If we accepted the Thai proposal to carry out a
joint or unilateral inspection of the area around the
three villages this would amount to: first, failing to
recognize the agreements signed between France and
Siam and therefore failing to recognize the inviolability
of the border recognized in the past; secpndly. enabling
Thai reactionaries and expansionists to destabilize not
only Laos but also Cambodia on the pretext of false
boundaries, particularly since the reactionaries in
Bangkok are attempting to create a sort of buffer State
between Thailand and the People's Republic of Kampuchea and thus establishing a dangerous precedent in the
conduct of Thai policy towards its neighbours; and,
thirdly, giving up our sovereignty over these villages
and legalizing their occupation by Thai troops.

105. The fact that the Thai side unilaterally sent its
own technical team to the area of the occupied Lao
territory in no ,·:ay proves its willingness to settle the
problem by peaceful means. Rather, it is an attempt to
distract world public opinion from the essence of the
problem. which is Thai aggression against Laos and
Lao sovereignty over the three villages. Unilateral inspection is designed only to justify Thai retention of
these three villages.

l02. I shall now take up the fourth of the issues raised
by the Thai side. I wish to explain the view of my
Government on the so-called technical on-site inspection team established by Thailand to attest to the veracity of the boundaries drawn up by France and Siam in
accordance with the 1904 and 1907 agreements and the
relative protocols.
103. Since these agreements were signed, neither of
the two countries concerned-France , and later the
Lao People's Democratic Republic, on the one hand
and Thailand on the other-has challenged the position
of the border. At the time of the visit of the Thai Prime
Minister, General Kriengsak Chomanan, to Vientiane
in 1979 and the visit of our Prime Minister, Mr. Kaysone Phomuihane, to Bangkok in the same year, the
two sides had at no time expressed any doubts concerning the boundaries; rather, they reaffirmed the will
of their respective Governments to ensure that the common border between the two countries should become a
border of lasting peace and freindship. It was only
in l'l84, immediately following the visit of the Commander-in-Chief of the Thai Army, General Arthit
Kamlang-Ek, that the question of the three villages
became the subject of a challenge by Thailand. During
the two rounds of negotiations in Bangkok, the Thai
side constantly called for a joint technical team to be
sent to the site. Of course we refused to go along with
the proposal, no matter what the composition of the
team-one-party, joint or tripartit~cause we had
already submitted to the Thai side conclusive evidence
based on the map that was drawn. up by the FrancoSiamese Commission with regard to the legal aspects of
the problem, the administration and the population. In a
word, Lao sovereignty over these three villages has
been established in absolute terms. The exercise of
territorial jurisdiction by Laos over these three villages cannot be disputed. On the other hand, Thailand

106. This is the truth about Thailand's conduct in this
matte.-. This border question is a crucial problem which
demands circumspection and caution on the part of
Thailand, a spirit of good-neighbourliness, a desire to
stabilize relations between the two countries-qualitie s
which Thailr~d has in no way demonstrated in this
case. On the contrary, Thailand has acted am,gandy.
The border markings exist; the Thai Army removes or
destroys them. The Lao administration, which has been
in that territory for centuries. is expelled from it by the
Thai Army. That is the real manoeuvre carried out by
Thailand and these are the views of the Lao Government concerning so-called on-site inspection.

107. I shall now move on to the last part ofmy statement, which concerns the withdrawal of the Thai ·
troops.
108. A country that is the victim of agression and
occupation wants the aggressor and occupier to leave
that country. Laos wants Thai troops to leave Lao
territory; it wants Thailand to respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Laos.
Unfortunately, a quite different situation has been
created by Thailand. It is leading the relations between
the two countries in a direction quitt: opposite to that
whole-heartedly desired by the Lao and Thai peoples.

100. The logic of an army carrying oui: occupation and
aggression is to install itself, in one form or another,
on territory that has been taken by force. Even while

• Quoted in English by the speaker.

12

What a rich language Thai is: in one week we have
gone from a ..remova1·· to an ••adjustment.. to a .. redeployment".

Thailand was negotiating with Laos at Bangkok, it
planned and put into effect various measures to perpetuate its occupation of Lao territory, replace the
army by border-police units wearing the uniform of the
municipal police, replace the Thai military presence
by paramilitary units wearing civilian clothes, and so
forth. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Thailand said
the following on 2 October before the General Assembly: "the Royal Thai Government has decided to remove the Thai military presence from the three villages''. 2 That innocuous phrase is replete with mental
reservations and ulterior motives. The Thai Minister
speaks simply of removing the military presence, but
he maintains a modest but eloquent silence about the
Thai police, paramilitary and administrative presence
in the three Lao villages. So we have subtlety in the
Thai statements and perfidy in the Thai intentions and
·
actions.

113. In fact, this linguistic subtlety has the sole purpose of hiding the facts. facts that are incontestable on
the spot. And what is happening on the spot? In the
three villages, Thailand has started bringing in reinforcements. both in manpower and in equipment, conscripting young persons by force, violating Lao airspace with its reconnaissance aircraft. indiscriminately
firing 75-mm, 105-mm and 155-mm cannon at neighbouring villages, and causing thereby loss of life and
property. Furthermore, the Thai Army has continued
its provocative operations in other border regions
adjoining Laos, and has amalgamated Thai troops with
Lao reactionaries in exile, for the purpose of carrying
out acts of sabotage in southern Sayaboury province.
This army has threatened and held to ransom the people
living on the banks of the Mekong, as well as commercial shipping.

110. Unfortunately, this much-heralded removal of
the Thai military presence has not taken place so far.
Thailand talks about it a lot; its friends talk about it a lot;
but nothing is happening. It is a non-event. What we are
really faced with is a campaign of publicity and, as such,
of lies, rather than real political will. Otherwise, why
did not the Thai Ministry for Foreign Affairs notify the
Lao Embassy in Bangkok, or why did not its embassy at
Vientiane discuss appropriate measures with the Lao
Ministry of Foreign Affairs? Thailand makes endless
pronouncements about its good faith, its sincerity. its
good-neighbourliness, its love of peace and peaceful
settlements of problems, but it is very reticent about its
real intentions and very miserly about taking concrete,
consistent action. It could not be otherwise, since this
announcement is nothing but a diversionary tactic.

114. According to information recently received from
Laos and confirmed in the 9 October issue of The
Bangkok Post, on Friday, 5 October, the Thai Army
shelled three Lao villages, killing two persons and
wounding five others; on Sunday, 7 October-that is,
the day before yesterday-at about S p.m., at least 500
persons, including more than 100 families, were arrested and deported to Thailand. Now, according to still
incomplete statistics, there had already been a first
wave of arrests and deportations by Thailand of inhabitants of these three villages between I and 5 July.
involving 438 persons. With those two figures, the
number of victims taken to Thailand amounts to 938 of
the 1,240 inhabitants of the three villages. Their houses.
their gardens were burned and destroyed; their cattle
were killed or taken away from them; their belongings
were confiscated. This vandalism by Thai soldiers curiously reminds one of the policy of depopulating the
neighbouring countries always pursued by Thailand;
this policy is summed up in the curt order issued in 1828
by the Thai King Rama Ill to his general, Phaya Bodin.
to raze Laos to the ground and make it a desert. He said:
.. Let nothing but water and land remain! ..

111. Two days after the announcement made by the
Thai Minister-with such solemnity-to the General
Assembly, General Thiab Kromsouriyachak, Commander of the third military region and responsible
for the operations against the three Lao villages, was
interviewed by the Bangkok newspaper Matouphoum
and stated that he had received no instructions about
any removal from the three villages and knew nothing
about the statement by the Minister. Perhaps New
York is too far from Bangkok and Uttaradit, where the
General lives.

115. Soon we shall see Thailand holding out its hat.
begging for international assistance for the so-called
refugees in this country. Once again we are going to
witness a travesty undertaken by Thailand. turning its
cruelty into a kind of self-interested philanthropy. The
Thai leaders are growing fat and rich on the misfortunes
of thousands upon thousands of people whose misfortunes they themselves have caused.

112. But no, it is not a problem of communications.
The Thai Army has been stationed in the three Lao
villages since 6 June, and it intends to stay there,
purely and simply. The "".aY in which this is done has
little importance, as we learn from a dispatch by
Agence France Presse from Bangkok dated 8 October:
"Thailand has begun to redeploy its troops stationed in the t~ree occupied Lao villages . . . a
spokesman of the Thai Ministry for Foreign Affairs
announced Monday in Bangkok . . . Sources close
to the Thai General Staff and Ministry for Foreign Affairs emphasized, however, that the redeployment announced on Monday did not amount to a
removal".

116. What can. what must Laos do in such circumstances? Should it tum the other cheek?
117. The Lao People's Democratic Republic has always chosen the policy of the peaceful settlement of
disputes between the two countries by means of negotiation. on the basis of the principles laid down in the

13

troops constitutes an admission of aggression against
Laos. If such a conciliatory initiative or effort is to be
interpreted as an admission of aggression. then the
converse must also be true, namely. that whichever
party or whichever side continues confrontation would
have title to the land in question. would it not? Where
would this interpretation lead us? Let us look at a
concrete example. In the southern part of Africa we
know that South Africa adamantly refuses to remove its
military presence from Namibia. Does that mean, then.
that South Africa has a just title to Nanlibia? It is a
position which my delegation regards as completely
untenable. I could cite other examples. but that would
take time. I think this one single example is illustrative
of the kind of subtlety engaged in by the representative
of Laos.

two joint declarations of 1979. Nevertheless. it is determined to exercise its legitimate right of self-defence to
preserve its independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity, a right which hitherto it has not chosen to
resort to.

J 18. Perhaps it might be worthwhile and it would not
be superfluous to read Article 51 of the Charter of the
United Nations just to refresh the memory of those
who tend to forget it. I quote: "Nothing in the present
Charter shall impair the inherent right of individual or
collective self-defence if an armed attack occurs against
a Member of the United Nations.••
119. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The representative of Thailand has asked to speak in
exercise of his right of reply.

124. He also mentioned the visits made by our Supreme Commander. implying of course that there must
have been some kind of premeditated action in relation
to the three villages. It so happens that the Supreme
Commander had planned those visits well in advance.
as is most often the case. He receives invitations from
many quarters. In fact. he is invited right now by the
Soviet Government to visit the Soveit Union. If he
should accept such an invitation or invitations, would
that automatically mean that he is in collusion with his
good hosts? It is this kind of .talk that explains the
reason why earlier negotiations have not brought any
fruitful result.

120. Mr. KASEMSRI (Thailand): Having listened
very carefully to the statement by the representative
of Laos, I must say that it could perhaps be divided
into two parts, one being concerned with technical
matters regarding the boundary line that might more
appropriately be raised in bilateral discussions between
Laos and Thailand. The second part was highly polemical and I must say that the Lao representative has
exceeded his quota of poison and polemics. This may
derive from a figment of his own imagination or of his
paranoia. Be that as it may, I think he has given Thailand more credit for subtlety than it deserves, either
linguistically or otherwise, linguistically since we share
the same language and we do not have the gift of inventing long words like "reactionaries" and "military
cliques" and so on. This we have to borrow from our
Lao colleague.

125. For its part. the Royal Thai Government wishes
to conduct constructive negotiations. but we certainly
will not permit the negotiations to become a propaganda forum. because that will not lead to any fruitful
outcome. On the contrary. it will exacerbate tension. it
will encourage third-party interference and it will not
bring a peaceful solution any closer.

121. What is more important about his statement is
that he takes the approach: "Let's have the cake and
eat it too". For instance, with regard to our conciliatory initiative and effort to remove the Thai military
presence from the three villages, he said that we did
not remove our troops or, even if we did, then we did
not remove the civilian administrative officials or the
lightly armed paramilitary forces. I am not a military
man, but it would seem that under such difficult circumstances as harassment from the Lao soldiers, and
in view of the rather difficult terrain, logically the most
vulnerable elements should be removed first rather
than left behind without military protection to become
easy targets for Lao guns. This should seem quite logical, I think, to most of us in this Chamber.

126. As I have said. the issues are minor border incidents which could occur in any country in any part of
the world. and there is no reason why these incidents.
happening in such a remote region. should become an
obstacle to improved relations between two brotherly
peoples who speak the same language.
127. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from FrenchJ:
The representative of the Lao Peopte•s Democratic
Republic has asked to speak in exercise of the right of
reply. and I call upon him.
128. Mr. SRITHIRATH (Lao People's Democratic
Republic) [ interpretation from French]: I should just
like to say a few words about the last statement by the
representative of Thailand. I would be happy were
Thailand to respect the principle of the inviolability of
borders. to which the representative of Thailand referredjust now with regard to South Africa. He knows
this very well because Thailand is comparing itself with
South. Africa.

122. We take a different approach. Our approach is
that, when in doubt, let's go and take a look together,
and it boils down to what I have referred to as the
technical point at issue, namely, where is the watershed
line located, and that is all.
123. The Lao representative also mentioned two
things which I feel compelled to say need some clarification. He started off by saying that the statement by
my Minister for Foreign Affairs on the withdrawal of

129. I do not wish to dwell on this point: rather.
I should like to say a few words by way of concluding
my statement here in the Council.
14

130. It is a great pleasure, Sir, for the delegation of the
Lao Peopl'e •s Democratic Republic to express to you
our profound gratitude for the way in which you have
considered our request to convene an urgent meeting of
the Council to examine the situation on the Lao-Thai
frontier, a situation created by the occupation of a part
of Lao territory on 6 June 1984 by Thai troops. The way
in which you have conducted these proceedings, your
actions and your words, demonstrate your Jove for
peace and your concern at anything that may threaten
it. We should also like to extend our sincere gratitude to
all the members of the Council who agreed to the urgent
convening of this meeting.

ture. ofhabits . traditions and religion. and enable them
to live together in peace and good-neigbbowfiness oo
the basis of the joint declarations made by the two
countries in January and April of 1979. In facing the
future resolutely. the Government of the Lao People's
Democratic Republic will do all in its power to achieve
that goal.

The meeting rose at 6.JO p.m.

Non:s

131. Since it is quite unlikely that Thailand will really
cease its occupati on of part of Lao territory. we should
like to request that the Council remain seized of this
matter until it is brought to a successful conclusion. In
so doing, the Council would be rendering a service to
the Royal Thai Government and to the peoples of the
two countries who are united by ties of blood, of cul-

' Case concerning the Ten,ple of Pnah Villear (Cambodia v.
Thailand). Merits. Judgment of lJ June 1962: l.C./. Reports 1962.
p. 6.

: Official Records of the Geneml Assembly. 11riny-,unllr Seuion.
Plenary Meetings, 17th meeam,. para. 61.
3
ibid., 17th meeting.
• ibid., 17th mccling, paras. 59-61.

15
