S/2014/537

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 July 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2155
(2014), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) until 30 November 2014 and requested me to report
every 60 days on the implementation of the Mission’s mandate. The present report
provides an update on developments since the issuance of my report of 6 March
2014 (S/2014/158), including the reconfiguration of UNMISS and the personnel
review.

II. Political developments
2.
The Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), with the support of
the United Nations and other international partners, has continued its efforts to
facilitate a political solution to the conflict. The third session of the peace process
opened on 28 April, culminating on 5 May in the signing by the Government and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A) in Opposition of an
agreement by which the parties recommitted themselves to the cessation of
hostilities agreement of 23 January and its provisions on humanitarian access. The
parties also agreed to consider what was termed a “month of tranquility” from
7 May to 7 June to allow for humanitarian resupply and the planting of crops.
Unfortunately, this did not materialize on the ground. On 6 May, the parties adopted
an agenda for the political dialogue, which included discussions on a permanent
ceasefire, transitional governance and interim arrangements and a permanent
constitution. On 9 May, the President of South Sudan, Salva Kiir, and the former
Vice-President, Riek Machar, met in Addis Ababa for the first time since December
2013 and signed an agreement to resolve the crisis in South Sudan, under which
they pledged to fully implement the cessation of hostilities agreement and facilitate
the deployment of the IGAD monitoring and verification mechanism.
3.
On 19 May, the talks adjourned without agreement on the matrix prepared by
the IGAD mediation team outlining the steps required for the implementation of the
cessation of hostilities agreement or a framework for discussions on transitional
arrangements. The Government refused to commit itself to the specifics of
transitional arrangements, while SPLM/A in Opposition would not sign the
implementation matrix unless an agreement were reached on the transitional
arrangements.
14-57963 (E)

280714

*1457963*

S/2014/537

4.
Concurrent to the political dialogue between the two parties, on 5 April the
IGAD mediation team launched a Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM)
intra-party dialogue forum, with a view to addressing the party leadership dispute
and creating an environment conducive to political talks. During a preparatory
meeting held from 23 to 26 April that was facilitated by senior officials of the
African National Congress and the Ethiopian People’s Revolutionary Democratic
Front, the parties reached an agreement on the objectives of the forum, its agenda
and the rules of engagement. They could not agree, however, on the terms “interim
arrangements” and “interim period” in the draft document. The absence of Politburo
members from SPLM/A in Opposition at the forum undermined efforts to reach
consensus on those issues. The forum has yet to be reconvened.
5.
To help to break the deadlock in the political process, on 6 and 7 June IGAD
organized a symposium bringing together the two parties and four other
stakeholders (political parties, formerly detained SPLM officials, civil society
members and leaders of faith-based organizations), marking the first opportunity for
representatives of all political constituencies in South Sudan to discuss the
requirements for sustainable peace.
6.
On 10 June, the IGAD Heads of State held a summit to discuss the situation in
South Sudan, among other things. The President and Riek Machar met on the
margins of the summit and agreed to expedite and complete dialogue on the
formation of a transitional government of national unity within 60 days.
Nevertheless, SPLM/A in Opposition refused to attend multi-stakeholder roundtable negotiations when they were reconvened on 20 June. It cited objections to the
presence of stakeholders other than those from the Government in direct political
negotiations and raised issues over the selection of representatives of civil society
organizations, political parties and faith institutions. The negotiations were
thereafter adjourned indefinitely and the mediation team is now consulting the
parties on the way forward.
7.
Early in May, Pagan Amum, Oyai Deng Ajak, Ezekiel Lol Gatkuoth and Majak
D’Agoot were released from detention following an order of the Minister of Justice
of 25 April staying criminal proceedings against 11 of the political figures who had
been arrested in late December 2013 for treason. All four subsequently left the
country and participated in the opening of the round-table negotiations in Addis
Ababa. The stay of criminal proceedings specifically excluded three additional
political figures accused of the same charges: Riek Machar, Alfred Lado Gore and
Taban Deng Gai.
8.
Speaking in Juba on 11 May, the President outlined his road map for the peace
process, stating that it should begin with a cessation of hostilities, the full
deployment of the IGAD monitoring and verification mechanism, including its
protection force, and the opening of humanitarian access. Thereafter, and pending
the implementation of a comprehensive ceasefire, the Government would consider
an amnesty for the crimes committed during the crisis and a transitional government
of national unity would be formed. That transitional government would then
organize an all-inclusive national reconciliation conference in Juba, which would
address the key political and security reforms necessary for the stability of the
country, thereby setting the stage for a constitutional review process and the holding
of general elections in 2017 or 2018. In an address to the parliament on 19 June, the
President stressed that, as a red line for the Government, a transitional government

2/18

14-57963

S/2014/537

could be formed only under his leadership, although additional posts might be
created in the Government and the parliament for SPLM/A in Opposition, and that
no elected leader would be removed from his or her post.
9.
SPLM/A in Opposition has maintained that the future system of governance
and democratic transformation should be agreed before the establishment of a
transitional government, which would implement the agreed reforms. During a
consultative conference held in Nasser, Upper Nile State, from 15 to 18 April,
SPLM/A in Opposition announced the launch of a resistance movement and
recommended the immediate establishment of a federal system of government under
a new leadership, following the signature of a comprehensive peace agreement. On
28 June, Riek Machar appointed heads of national committees to fill the structure of
SPLM/A in Opposition. The former Minister of Environment, Alfred Lado Gore,
from Central Equatoria State, was appointed Deputy Chair of SPLM/A in
Opposition.
Other political developments
10. On 6 May, the Government of the United States of America announced
bilateral sanctions, notably a travel ban and an asset freeze, against a defected SPLA
major general who now commands Riek Machar’s troops in Unity State, Peter
Gadet, and the head of the presidential guard, Major General Marial Chanuong, for,
among other things, targeting civilians and fomenting ethnic violence. On 10 July,
the European Union also announced a travel ban and asset freeze against Peter
Gadet and the commander of the SPLA Third Division, Major General Santino Deng
Wol, for obstructing the peace process and committing atrocities. On 10 June, the
IGAD Heads of State announced, among other things, their intention to consider
punitive measures against those continuing to undermine the peace process.
11. On 17 March, the President announced the expansion of the Cabinet from
21 to 27 ministers and the split of most of the government ministries merged in July
2013. While the new ministries were re-established, the new Cabinet positions have
yet to be filled. On 23 April, the President replaced the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army (SPLA) Chief of General Staff, General James Hoth Mai, with the Governor
of Northern Bahr el Ghazal State, General Paul Malong Awan.
12. On 5 April, the Government announced the establishment of a national
platform for peace and reconciliation, intended to serve as an umbrella organization
for three national peace and reconciliation institutions (the South Sudan Peace and
Reconciliation Commission, the Specialized Parliamentary Committee on Peace and
Reconciliation and the Committee for National Healing, Peace and Reconciliation)
under the leadership of the Chair of the last-mentioned institution, Archbishop
Daniel Deng. It has begun consultation with South Sudanese stakeholders towards
the holding of a national dialogue and reconciliation conference.
13. On 9 May, separate talks in Addis Ababa, between the Government of South
Sudan and the South Sudan Democratic Movement/Army Cobra Faction, led by
David Yau Yau, concluded with the signing of an agreement on the resolution of the
conflict. The agreement establishes a Greater Pibor administrative area as an
autonomous area within Jonglei State. It also stipulates that the forces of the Cobra
Faction are to be peacefully integrated into the ranks of the army, the national police
and other security forces. Delays in the implementation of the agreement, in
particular the integration process, are creating tensions between the Cobra Faction

14-57963

3/18

S/2014/537

forces and SPLA troops in the town of Pibor and other areas of Pibor county. On
20 May, David Yau Yau arrived in Juba to meet the President and other government
officials. He also attended independence anniversary celebrations in Juba on 9 July.
UNMISS has provided logistical and technical support for the peace process
between the Government and the Cobra Faction.

III. Security situation
A.

Security developments
14. Between March and early May, heavy fighting continued between SPLA and
SPLM/A in Opposition and other armed groups affiliated with both sides, mainly
over control of state capitals and the oilfields in Upper Nile and Unity States.
Further to the agreement to resolve the crisis in South Sudan of 9 May, fighting
subsided somewhat, with continued small-scale skirmishes and mobilization but no
major engagements.
Unity State
15. The state capital, Bentiu, and the Unity oilfields changed hands at least three
times between March and May. SPLM/A in Opposition took control of Bentiu from
SPLA on 15 April. As indicated in the human rights section of the present report,
hundreds of civilians were targeted and killed, based on their ethnic identity, during
the fighting. In the second half of April, SPLA attempted to retake the oilfields and
Bentiu through attacks launched from Pariang county. The town of Mayom changed
hands several times between 25 and 27 April. SPLA regained control of Bentiu and
Rubkona on 8 May. Repeated fighting during May and early June was reported in
Mayom, Rubkona and Guit counties and on the outskirts of Bentiu and Rubkona. At
the time of preparation of the present report, SPLA maintains control of Bentiu and
Rubkona, but SPLM/A in Opposition forces remain in close proximity. The areas are
heavily militarized, with very few civilians present.
16. Anti-tank land mines have been used in the fighting in Unity State. Three
anti-tank mines were detonated by vehicles, on 20 May and 6 and 18 June,
reportedly resulting in five deaths and nine injuries. Two of the detonations were
along the main road between Bentiu and Mayom, the other along the road between
Bentiu and Leer. One of the blasts affected a truck contracted by the World Food
Programme, without casualties.
Upper Nile State
17. From March until early May, fighting between SPLA and SPLM/A in
Opposition was concentrated around Melut, Renk, Nasser and the state capital,
Malakal. On 19 March, SPLA retook control of Malakal and subsequently dislodged
Riek Machar and his forces from their main headquarters and base at Nasser on
4 May.
18. On 24 April, a convoy of four UNMISS barges carrying a large amount of
critical fuel and other supplies on the White Nile river from Juba to the UNMISS
base in Malakal was attacked by suspected SPLA elements from the northern bank
of the river, some 15 km west of the town of Tonga in western Upper Nile State.

4/18

14-57963

S/2014/537

One barge was struck by three rocket-propelled grenades. The UNMISS troops
escorting the barges fought off the attackers. Two civilian crew members sustained
minor injuries. By 29 April, the barges had reached Malakal.
19. Small-scale skirmishes continue to take place in the vicinity of Nasser and Abu
Khadra near Renk, with SPLA retaining control of both locations. The hospital in
Nasser and nearby sites have been extensively looted.
20. In late June, UNMISS received reports that SPLM/A in Opposition was
mobilizing and training young people in Nasser and Maiwut counties, apparently in
preparation for military operations to retake the town of Nasser. Some 60 to
80 heavily armed SPLA soldiers reportedly abandoned their posts in Nasser in June,
allegedly as a result of delays in payment of their salaries.
21. On 20 July, SPLM/A in Opposition forces, predominantly consisting of Nuer
White Army young people, launched an attack on the town of Nasser. Since then,
heavy fighting has continued, in particular over control of the main SPLA base in
the town. As at 21 July, 37 SPLA soldiers, six of whom were wounded, had taken
shelter in the UNMISS base in Nasser after abandoning their weapons and uniforms.
The attack was the first major violation of the cessation of hostilities agreement
since the agreement of 10 June.
Jonglei State
22. SPLA, supported by the Ugandan army, has remained in control of the state
capital, Bor. Other areas of the state remain tense, with unconfirmed reports of
clashes between SPLA and SPLM/A in Opposition in Twic East, Ayod and Duk
counties early in May and civilian displacement towards Awerial county in Lakes
State. In Duk and Ayod counties, between 1,000 and 1,500 SPLA soldiers reportedly
abandoned their posts because their salaries had not been paid. While some soldiers
have since been paid in Bor, around 1,000 returned to their home communities in the
Bahr el Ghazal states, reportedly to seek payment.
23. On 17 April, an armed mob of between 200 and 300 young people, under the
guise of peaceful protesters seeking to present a petition to UNMISS, attacked the
UNMISS site for the protection of civilians in Bor. The mob, having breached the
base perimeter with machetes and guns, attacked internally displaced persons
sheltering there. With the attackers inside the base, UNMISS troops used lethal
force, firing at the attackers to repel them. Forty-eight internally displaced persons
and three attackers were killed during the attack. Many more, including women and
children, sustained machete and gunshot wounds. The Government condemned the
attack and ordered an investigation into it, but is yet to hold the perpetrators to
account.
Western and Northern Bahr el Ghazal
24. Tensions also began to rise in the Bahr el Ghazal region during the reporting
period. In Western Bahr el Ghazal State, fighting broke out between Dinka young
people and Nuer soldiers on 25 April at the Mapel SPLA barracks, resulting in an
unknown number of deaths and the displacement of between 100 and 200 Nuers
(including Nuer soldiers and their families) mainly to the state capital, Wau.
Between 26 and 28 April, following defections by Nuer soldiers, there were
additional clashes between rival SPLA factions in Wau. Insecurity continues, with

14-57963

5/18

S/2014/537

defectors resorting to banditry along major roads in the state. In Northern Bahr
el Gazal State, several defections were also reported.
Central Equatoria State
25. The situation in the capital, Juba, remained tense during the reporting period.
Multiple shooting incidents inside and near the SPLA barracks involving SPLA
soldiers on 5 March, reportedly relating to a dispute over salary payments, led to
civilian casualties. Tensions rose between members of the Dinka and Equatorian
communities over the federalism debate and reportedly sparked gunfire in parts of
Juba on the nights of 28 and 29 June. On 2 July, hundreds of SPLA troops were
deployed to Terekeka, north of Juba, reportedly in relation to the rumoured
mobilization of local ethnic Mundari forces by the state Governor, a rumour that he
denied.

B.

Regional dimensions of the conflict
26. Multiple external armed elements continued to be involved in the conflict in
support of both sides. Sudanese Justice and Equality Movement elements reportedly
fought alongside SPLA, while Sudanese Misseriya elements reportedly supported
SPLM/A in Opposition during battles for key towns and oilfields in Unity State.
Early in May, SPLA and Justice and Equality Movement elements looted the
hospital in Bentiu and occupied international non-governmental organization and
United Nations contractor premises in Bentiu and near the airstrip. On 13 May, a
Sudan Liberation Army vehicle from Darfur was observed at the hospital in Bentiu.
Ugandan soldiers remain deployed in Juba and Bor in support of the Government.

IV. Humanitarian situation
27. Some 3.7 million people remain at crisis and emergency levels of food
insecurity. This number is projected to increase to 4 million by the end of July. More
than 1.5 million people have been forced from their homes. Of those people, the
more than 1.1 million displaced within South Sudan are scattered over
186 locations. An estimated 400,000 people have fled across borders to
neighbouring countries, while 500,000 conflict-displaced people have settled in
flood-prone areas and are at risk of multiple displacement. At the time of
preparation of the present report, some 97,000 internally displaced persons were
seeking refuge at UNMISS bases.
28. The significant population movements caused by fighting in Jonglei, Unity and
Upper Nile States continued to jeopardize the main planting season, which runs
from April to June, further exacerbating the humanitarian situation. In the Greater
Upper Nile area, more than 50 per cent of the population is already at crisis or
emergency levels of food insecurity. Severe acute malnutrition among children
under 5 years of age has doubled since January. An estimated 223,000 children will
suffer from severe acute malnutrition and up to 50,000 may die if detection and
treatment services are not promptly scaled up. Millions of South Sudanese are also
at risk of communicable diseases, including watery diarrhoea, hepatitis E and
malaria, owing to poor sanitation and hygiene conditions and the destruction of
clinics and other vital health infrastructure. As at 15 July, 4,278 cholera cases,

6/18

14-57963

S/2014/537

including 98 related deaths, had been reported throughout South Sudan, with most
in Juba.
29. The agreement of 5 May between the Government and SPLM/A in Opposition
on humanitarian access notwithstanding, fighting, in addition to violence against
humanitarian aid workers and assets and restrictions on road and air movement by
both parties, affected the ability of humanitarian partners to reach people most in
need. At least five aid workers have been killed since the conflict began. National
staff members of the United Nations and international non-governmental
organizations continue to be targeted based on their ethnicity. March and April saw
a spike in bureaucratic impediments, specifically relating to tax exemptions, delayed
transportation of humanitarian relief items owing to illegal roadblocks set up by
both parties and immigration issues at the airport in Juba.
30. The severe funding constraints and continued access obstructions to some
locations notwithstanding, the humanitarian aid operation has been scaled up.
Humanitarian aid agencies continued to accord priority to both life-saving assistance
and the prepositioning of supplies as the rains render 60 per cent of the country
inaccessible by road. A rapid response mechanism, which includes airdrops of
humanitarian aid supplies, was implemented to deliver critical relief to communities
in hard-to-reach areas. By mid-June, humanitarian partners had reached at least
1.49 million of the 4 million people targeted for assistance by December 2014 with
shelter, food, health care, water and sanitation, protection and emergency education
services. People affected by the conflict in a number of key areas also received
HIV/AIDS treatment and palliative services through the technical and financial
support of the United Nations joint team on AIDS.
31. To continue to scale up to meet the overwhelming levels of need, the
humanitarian community released a crisis response plan on 14 June, revised for the
period July-December 2014 to reflect updated assumptions and prioritizations. The
most likely scenario suggests that, by the end of 2014, up to 1.5 million people will
be internally displaced by conflict, many of whom will also be affected by floods.
Up to 863,000 South Sudanese are projected to seek refuge in neighbouring
countries. In addition, up to 120,000 are projected to seek refuge in UNMISS bases.
The humanitarian aid operation is estimated at $1.8 billion, of which $1 billion is
yet to be secured. A major humanitarian donor meeting was held in Oslo on 20 May,
at which donors pledged more than $500 million for the response inside South
Sudan.

A.

Implementation of the Mission’s reprioritized mandated tasks
Realignment of the Mission
32. Following the adoption of Security Council resolution 2155 (2014), UNMISS
realigned its organizational structure and activities with the reprioritized mandated
tasks. Accordingly, the Mission, in coordination with the United Nations country
team, revised its protection of civilians strategy and developed a new human rights
strategy and a strategy for the creation of conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. It also developed a concept paper setting out arrangements
for supporting the implementation of the cessation of hostilities agreement. The
overarching Mission concept is also being revised, while the Department of

14-57963

7/18

S/2014/537

Peacekeeping Operations and UNMISS are jointly revising the military and police
concepts of operations.
Protection of civilians
33. Under the first tier of the Mission’s protection of civilians strategy, protection
through political processes, UNMISS and United Nations officials have continued
active political engagement with all parties to stress their obligation to protect
civilians and to respect international humanitarian and human rights law. Those and
other messages on the impartiality of UNMISS were also delivered publicly at sites
for the protection of civilians. The Mission has implemented conflict-management
measures, including promoting dialogue between communities to, among other
things, encourage internally displaced persons to refrain from joining the fighting.
34. UNMISS continued to engage State and non-State actors on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and related resolutions
on women and peace and security, in particular in the sites for the protection of
civilians, focusing attention on responses to conflict-related sexual and genderbased violence and the protection of the human rights of women and girls. The
Mission also initiated activities to strengthen the involvement of women in conflict
management and peace processes, including by supporting the Ministry of Gender.
35. Under the second tier of its protection strategy, protection from physical
violence, UNMISS continued to physically protect some 100,000 internally
displaced persons in its bases in Bor (Jonglei), Malakal (Upper Nile), Juba (Central
Equatoria), Bentiu and Pariang (Unity), Wau (Western Bahr el Ghazal), Rumbek
(Lakes) and Melut, Renk and Nasser (Upper Nile). Sustaining the presence of such
numbers of civilians in UNMISS premises continued to place a huge strain on
Mission resources, given that significant military, police and engineering assets are
required to protect civilians on UNMISS bases from external and internal security
threats. UNMISS converted some 1.7 million m2 of land into sites for the protection
of civilians, requiring the construction of 13 km of ditch and perimeter protection
and lighting and the construction of roads for patrolling. Humanitarian partners
worked closely with the Mission to ensure that assistance was provided for those
displaced inside the sites.
36. A combined patrol strategy, including UNMISS individual police officers and
formed police units inside the sites, has also proved vital in maintaining safety and
security.
37. The UNMISS military component enhanced its patrolling of urban centres,
with an average of 30 patrols per day, including night patrols, in Bor, Malakal,
Bentiu and Juba. UNMISS has extracted civilians from vulnerable locations such as
churches, hospitals and abandoned houses, in addition to establishing safe corridors
for the movement of civilians from areas of risk to protection sites, saving the lives
of hundreds, and in some instances more than 1,000 people, including in Bentiu
(where UNMISS troops rescued more than 600 civilians from vulnerable locations)
and areas just outside Malakal.
38. Under the third tier of its protection strategy, establishing a protective
environment, UNMISS expanded its early warning system into an Organizationwide early warning and response mechanism that includes the Mission and the
United Nations country team. Emphasis has been placed on the development of

8/18

14-57963

S/2014/537

appropriate early response recommendations to mitigate identified threats. In
accordance with Security Council resolution 2155 (2014), the UNMISS police
component continues to review specific opportunities for operational coordination
with the national police as part of the national police confidence- and trust-building
policing initiative launched jointly with international partners. The initiative is
aimed at establishing an improved security environment in Juba. It builds
confidence among the communities and internally displaced persons in the national
police, focusing on neighbourhoods of potential return. UNMISS operational
coordination with the national police is based on strengthening the protective
environment and carried out in strict compliance with the United Nations human
rights due diligence policy.
39. Given the increasing levels of explosive remnants of war in conflict areas, the
United Nations Mine Action Service cleared some 6 million m2 of land of
unexploded ordnance. A total of 32,877 items of unexploded ordnance have been
located and destroyed from UNMISS bases, key access roads and airstrips, areas of
humanitarian operations and in identified areas outside of UNMISS bases. After the
fighting in Malakal and Bentiu, the Service conducted clearance activities at both
airports to remove explosive remnants of war and allow UNMISS to resume air
operations. It also conducted surveys and clearance activities at humanitarian
agency compounds and warehouses to remove explosive remnants of war.

B.

Human rights monitoring and reporting
40. On 8 May, UNMISS released its comprehensive public report on grave
violations of human rights and international humanitarian law committed by both
sides since mid-December 2013. The report documents the widespread negative
consequences of the conflict on the human rights situation in many parts of the
country, including the deliberate targeting of civilians — both nationals and
foreigners — in extrajudicial and other unlawful killings, arbitrary arrest and
detention, gender-based violence, enforced disappearances and ill-treatment and
torture. Armed groups from both sides also vandalized, looted, burned and otherwise
destroyed private homes, public buildings, markets and shops. UNMISS
investigations into those and new allegations continue.
41. During the recapture of Bentiu, Unity State, by opposition forces on 15 April,
multiple grave violations of human rights and international humanitarian law
occurred. UNMISS found reliable information of extrajudicial killings and attacks
on civilians at the hospital and the Kali-balek mosque, in addition to the looting of
the towns of Bentiu and Rubkona. The capture of Bentiu by SPLM/A in Opposition
led to celebrations in the UNMISS site for the protection of civilians in Bor in
neighbouring Jonglei State, where almost 5,000 internally displaced persons (mostly
Nuers) had sought protection. Reportedly in reaction to those celebrations, armed
young people forcibly entered the site on 17 April, where they opened fire, leaving
51 people dead.
42. In the wake of the events in Bentiu and Bor, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights joined my Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide on a visit to South Sudan from 28 to 30 April. They engaged in advocacy
with the Government and SPLM/A in Opposition for active measures to protect
civilians, including by preventing hate speech and incitement to commit sexual

14-57963

9/18

S/2014/537

violence. They highlighted the need for accountability measures, with an emphasis
on command responsibility for violations of international humanitarian and criminal
law.
43. In Juba, UNMISS received several reports of targeted attacks, arbitrary arrests
and extrajudicial killings against Nuer civilians by members of the security forces.
Random stop-and-search activities and unannounced house-to-house searches for
weapons (that reportedly involved the harassment and intimidation of civilians)
were regularly conducted. Reports of the occupation, including by members of the
security forces, of houses and other property vacated by fleeing civilians continued
to weigh against the return of internally displaced persons. UNMISS has also
continued to observe persistent restrictions on the freedom of expression, in
particular with regard to the press and civil society, notably in Juba, including the
seizure of print newspapers by the National Security Service on 2 and 7 July.
44. The movement of internally displaced persons from Unity, Jonglei and Upper
Nile States across state lines, inter-ethnic and intra-ethnic clashes and seasonal
cattle-raiding contributed to a precarious human rights situation in other states. In
Western Bahr el Ghazal State, UNMISS received reports of human rights violations,
including alleged harassment and displacement of civilians by SPLA, in connection
with the fighting between Dinka and Nuer elements in Wau in late April.
45. The challenges notwithstanding, UNMISS continued to carry out human rights
programmes in parts of South Sudan. For example, it provided human rights training
for students, women’s groups, members of legislative assemblies, police officers,
journalists and human rights defenders for International Women’s Day on 8 March.
Human rights awareness-raising was also conducted within UNMISS sites for the
protection of civilians, both for community leaders and for UNMISS personnel.
46. On 7 March, the African Union appointed the five members of the commission
of inquiry that it established to investigate the immediate and remote causes of the
conflict, human rights violations and abuses and to recommend mechanisms to
ensure accountability, reconciliation and healing. In a meeting in Juba on 25 April
with the Commission, led by the former President of Nigeria, Olusegun Obasanjo,
the President of South Sudan pledged his Government’s full support for the
Commission’s work. UNMISS subsequently facilitated visits of the Commission to
Malakal, Bor and Bentiu on 28, 29 and 30 May, where it received briefings from
UNMISS, met state government officials, SPLA commanders, police commissioners,
community members (including victims and witnesses) and religious and traditional
leaders and visited conflict-affected areas. On 27 June, the Commission issued an
interim report and received an extension of its mandate for three months.
47. UNMISS has received reports that an investigative committee on human rights
abuses established by the President on 24 January is now considering all allegations
of human rights abuses by government soldiers, police officers and security agents,
in addition to groups loyal to Riek Machar. Headed by a former chief justice, the
committee reportedly has no judicial authority and is mandated to report its findings
and recommendations to the President. It has therefore been reported that all
military investigations have been placed on hold.
48. During the reporting period, 138 incidents affecting 5,741 children (2,406 boys,
115 girls and 3,220 of unknown sex) were recorded. In total, 112 of those incidents,
affecting 2,685 children, were verified. Two incidents of torture during interrogation

10/18

14-57963

S/2014/537

of children in Juba were also reported to UNMISS during interviews with the
affected children. As at the end of June, 20 schools in the States of Central
Equatoria, Lakes, Unity, Upper Nile and Western Bahr el Ghazal were reportedly
still being used by the parties to the conflict. A total of 38,498 children (16,942 boys
and 21,556 girls) affected by conflict have been reached with child protection
services and 303 of 4,580 registered unaccompanied and separated children have
been reunited with their families.
49. On 10 May, my Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict
successfully obtained a commitment from Riek Machar to end grave violations
against children by his forces. Her subsequent visit to South Sudan from 22 to
27 June also secured commitments from the President to issuing a presidential
decree to criminalize the recruitment and use of children, which would also apply to
armed groups, ordering SPLA immediately to vacate all schools used by the armed
forces for military purposes and expediting the accession by South Sudan to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. On 24 June, she witnessed a signing
ceremony between the Minister of Defence, on behalf of the Government, and the
United Nations of a recommitment agreement for the implementation of the SPLAUnited Nations revised action plan to end the recruitment and use of children and
other grave violations against children.
50. The Mission has received credible information on conflict-related sexual
violence and other forms of sexual and gender-based violence, including against
civilians seeking protection in UNMISS sites, in addition to other areas in which
internally displaced persons are located. Incidents have occurred inside and in close
proximity to UNMISS sites, including targeting internally displaced women who
leave the sites to gather food, firewood and other necessities, allegedly perpetrated
by all the parties to the conflict and by civilians. The absence of civilian justice
institutions in Jonglei, Unity and Upper Nile States to process the cases of criminal
acts that threaten the safety and security of civilians within UNMISS sites has
resulted in longer periods of detention in UNMISS holding facilities pending the
handover of suspects to the national criminal justice system.

C.

Creating the conditions for delivery of humanitarian assistance
51. The Mission has been working closely with humanitarian partners to create
conditions conducive to the provision of humanitarian assistance to civilians
affected by the crisis. Mission assets and personnel are used to support humanitarian
agencies to deliver assistance safely and to provide force protection to humanitarian
convoys upon request. The significant scaling up of humanitarian operations has
increased the number of requests for force protection for humanitarian convoys and
United Nations facilities and assets in all affected states. This has proved a major
challenge, necessitating difficult decisions on prioritization of force protection
tasks. In exercise of its good offices, the UNMISS leadership has also intervened, at
the request of the United Nations Humanitarian Coordinator, to raise with both
parties issues of obstruction of delivery of humanitarian assistance by security
forces. Concurrently, humanitarian actors are pursuing alternatives to security
management so as to diminish the reliance on armed escorts and force protection.
52. In recognition of the dire conditions in the sites for the protection of civilians,
UNMISS has worked with partners to prepare new sites in Juba, Bor, Bentiu and

14-57963

11/18

S/2014/537

Malakal. Relocation efforts have been initiated in all new sites to tackle the growing
concerns regarding health and living conditions. As at 17 July, more than 15,000
internally displaced persons had been relocated. Their best efforts notwithstanding,
the Mission’s engineering and logistical support services are overstretched and have
struggled to improve the existing congested sites further before the rainy season
reaches its peak. Without additional resources, in particular heavy-lift aviation and
engineering, military and police personnel, UNMISS will be unable to cope with a
major new influx of internally displaced persons.

D.

Supporting the implementation of the cessation of
hostilities agreement
53. With the adoption of Security Council resolution 2155 (2014), UNMISS has
been mandated to provide mobile and dedicated fixed site security to the IGAD
monitoring and verification mechanism and to support the work of the mechanism
as described in the cessation of hostilities agreement. Force protection availability
will remain within the parameters of the UNMISS mandate, with protection of
civilians remaining the clear priority. UNMISS troops from States members of
IGAD will operate entirely within the UNMISS command and control architecture.
The UNMISS rules of engagement are being reviewed to ensure that they remain
appropriate under the revised mandate.
54. UNMISS has been working closely with the IGAD joint technical commission
in Juba and provided logistical support for the deployment of IGAD monitoring and
verification teams on the ground. With UNMISS logistical support, the priority
teams have been successfully deployed to six locations: Bor (Jonglei State) on
1 April, Bentiu (Unity State) on 5 April, Malakal (Upper Nile State) on 15 April,
Nasser (Upper Nile State) on 3 June, Melut (Upper Nile State) on 17 June and
Pariang (Unity State) on 14 July. Support is being provided on a cost-reimbursable,
resource-capacity and priority basis, the modalities for which are being finalized in
a memorandum of understanding between UNMISS and IGAD.
55. At the headquarters level, a joint coordination mechanism has been established
to assist in the deployment of and provision of logistical support to the monitoring
and verification teams. At the state level, the teams coordinate their activities with
the state operations centres and senior military liaison officers to ensure synergies of
force protection and patrolling. Joint field visits by teams and UNMISS are also
under way. Sharing of information is also coordinated through UNMISS in Juba and
at the state level.

V. Mission staffing and status of deployment of surge capacity
56. UNMISS has an authorized civilian staffing level of 1,018 international staff,
1,750 national staff and 570 United Nations Volunteers. The Mission’s leadership is
currently conducting a civilian staffing review, which consists of an assessment of
tasks performed and staffing levels authorized under the previous mandate, the
impact of the crisis on planned activities and the tasks required under the new
reprioritized mandate. The review is being extended to include state offices and
county support bases. Consideration is being given to an integrated assessment to
identify those bases that are critical to the Mission’s footprint for mandate

12/18

14-57963

S/2014/537

implementation and are sustainable in terms of resources. The review will produce
recommendations on staffing levels, including structural adjustments required to
deliver on the new mandate effectively. The final results of the review will be
presented in my next regular report to the Security Council.
57. By its resolution 2155 (2014), the Security Council established the military
component of UNMISS at 12,500 troops of all ranks and the police component,
including appropriate formed police units, at 1,323 personnel. As at 18 July,
UNMISS strength stood at 10,398 uniformed personnel, consisting of 9,395 military
personnel and 1,003 police officers from 67 contributing countries.
58. Of the surge military personnel, a total of 2,439 of the authorized additional
troops had been deployed as at 18 July, including 300 Ghanaians from the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, 586 Ethiopians, 800 personnel of the main body
of the Rwandan battalion from the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur and 350 personnel of the Nepalese battalion from the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti. The second battalion of Ethiopians (625 troops)
began deployment on 18 July. The remaining elements of the Nepalese battalion are
projected to arrive in late July. The remaining 310 members of the Kenyan battalion
are expected to arrive in late September. The timing of the main body of the
Ghanaian battalion is being finalized.
59. The second phase of the troop surge is expected to be completed by October.
By then, 23 UNMISS infantry battalions will have been deployed. The third phase
of the troop reinforcement is scheduled to deliver an additional infantry battalion
(from China), a force riverine unit and a tactical (armed) helicopter unit (up to three
helicopters). In addition, UNMISS is assessing the possibility of strengthening the
protective surveillance capability of the Mission.
60. Three additional Rwandan military utility helicopters are expected to be fully
operational by the end of August. The Bangladeshi military utility helicopter unit
that was on loan to UNMISS from the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has now left South Sudan. The
Sri Lankan level II hospital is now fully established in Bor, Jonglei State, and a
Sri Lankan military utility helicopter unit (three helicopters) is expected to be
deployed by mid-September. The Bangladeshi construction engineering company,
which was due to leave South Sudan in September, is now integral to the increased
force level.
61. While every effort is being made to accommodate and deploy surge troops,
there have been some delays in facilitating deployment and operational readiness. In
addition to movement restrictions stemming from seasonal access challenges and
fighting in parts of the country, the engineering focus on constructing sites for the
protection of civilians has limited infrastructure development in UNMISS bases, to
the detriment of living conditions for all personnel. The severe engineering capacity
constraints are compounded by the lack of reliable engineering contractors, most of
whom have fled from the affected areas. UNMISS is at the limit of its logistical
capacity when it comes to receiving more contingents in the short term and has had
to compromise standards to facilitate the early deployment.
62. With regard to the police component, 1,003 officers have been deployed,
consisting of 653 individual officers and 350 officers in three formed police units.

14-57963

13/18

S/2014/537

A fourth formed police unit is being generated, with a focus on the deployment of
female personnel.
63. The revised police concept of operations will involve a major shift in tasks,
including new roles and responsibilities in maintaining public order and security
within sites for the protection of civilians, and specific operational coordination
with the national police. It will also reflect the reconfiguration and reorganization of
the police structure in view of the introduction of formed police units and the
revised mandate.
64. The policy of zero tolerance towards sexual exploitation and abuse and other
misconduct by personnel is strictly enforced by UNMISS. More than 2,900
UNMISS/United Nations personnel, along with contractors, humanitarian workers
and non-United Nations partners, were trained during the reporting period. Training
will be stepped up in the coming months and complemented with risk assessments
and outreach activities. UNMISS, in collaboration with the Government, United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes and civil society, is preparing to conduct
outreach activities to combat sexual exploitation and abuse at all sites for the
protection of civilians during July and August.

VI. Violations of the status-of-forces agreement, international
humanitarian law and security of United Nations staff
65. On several occasions, senior-level government officials, including the
President during his Easter message and in subsequent public statements, expressed
their commitment to improving relations with UNMISS. While the President
pledged to punish those who blocked the free movement of United Nations and
humanitarian personnel, incidents of obstruction of United Nations work, in addition
to serious anti-United Nations sentiments, have continued in some areas, having a
negative impact on the safety and security of personnel. While serious individual
incidents continue, there was a noticeable downward trend in the number of
incidents following my meeting with the President on 6 May and his recent public
statements.
66. A total of 101 violations of the status-of-forces agreement involving UNMISS
personnel, property and goods were recorded during the reporting period. They
included restriction and obstruction of movement for United Nations land, water and
air operations, illegal entry into UNMISS premises, commandeering of UNMISS
assets, arrests and detention and assaults, harassment and threats of violence
towards UNMISS personnel. Other restrictions included denial of entry of United
Nations personnel into South Sudan, hindrance to United Nations entities delivering
humanitarian services and interference with movements of United Nations local
staff on the basis of their ethnic affiliation. There was a spike in incendiary rhetoric
against the United Nations and related incidents in the immediate aftermath of the
incident of 3 March in Rumbek, Lakes State, when representatives of the
Government stopped an UNMISS convoy and discovered ammunition intended for
the Ghanaian surge troops omitted from the cargo container manifest.
67. United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and UNMISS experienced
obstruction in the freedom of movement of assets and personnel on the part of
armed forces and elements on both sides, in particular in relation to helicopter

14/18

14-57963

S/2014/537

flights and mobile patrols. With regard to UNMISS personnel, property and goods,
SPLM/A in Opposition forces were responsible for seven incidents (restriction of
movement, attacks against UNMISS compounds, personnel and property and
harassment and threats of violence towards UNMISS personnel). Unknown
perpetrators were responsible for 19 incidents against UNMISS (assault and
harassment of personnel, theft and seizure of United Nations property and attacks on
United Nations property directed against UNMISS). Government agents were
responsible for 75 incidents.
68. UNMISS and United Nations officials continued to engage government
officials at all levels with a view to ensuring respect for the status-of-forces
agreement. On several occasions, UNMISS protested against and provided the
Government with detailed lists of specific violations, requesting the Government to
investigate them and take appropriate action to ensure accountability. To date, the
Government has responded to such requests in only a small number of cases, and no
outcome of any investigations has been shared with UNMISS.

VII. Financial aspects
69. The General Assembly, by its resolution 68/293, authorized the SecretaryGeneral to enter into commitments for the Mission in a total amount not exceeding
$580,830,400 for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015. As at 22 July, unpaid
assessed contributions to the UNMISS special account amounted to $486.1 million.
Total outstanding assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at the
same date amounted to $3,143.2 million. As at 22 July, reimbursement of troopcontributing Governments for troop- and contingent-owned equipment costs had
been made for the period to 30 April 2014 and 31 March 2014, respectively, in
accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

VIII. Observations
70. In April and early May, South Sudan witnessed a surge in large-scale fighting
between SPLA and SPLM/A in Opposition over control of the capital of Unity State,
Bentiu, and the state’s oilfields and the related targeted killing of hundreds of
civilians from particular communities, in addition to an attack on civilians sheltering
in the UNMISS site for the protection of civilians in Bor, Jonglei State. That surge
in violence, the deteriorating humanitarian situation in the country and the lack of
genuine commitment to peace displayed by both parties placed South Sudan on the
edge of a precipice.
71. Intense international engagement, including by IGAD Heads of State, the
United States, the United Nations and other partners convinced the parties to step
back from the brink. I thank all Member States concerned for their efforts. I also
travelled to South Sudan to personally impress upon the Government and Riek
Machar the consequences of their actions. Thereafter, the President and Riek
Machar met in Addis Ababa on 9 May for the first time since the outbreak of the
conflict and recommitted themselves to upholding the cessation of hostilities
agreement signed on 23 January.

14-57963

15/18

S/2014/537

72. Notwithstanding their subsequent official commitment to engaging in inclusive
political negotiations under the auspices of IGAD, the President and Riek Machar
continue to backtrack on their agreements and question the modalities of the peace
process. This has cast serious doubt on their political will to seek a political
resolution to the conflict.
73. The lull in large-scale hostilities notwithstanding, the Government and
SPLM/A in Opposition are endeavouring to consolidate their respective power bases
and reach out to the political and security constituencies of their opponents. They
also continue to mobilize forces, amass weapons and undermine the conditions
necessary for the protection of civilians and the life-saving work of humanitarian
agencies and UNMISS. On 20 July, SPLM/A in Opposition attacked Nasser. There
are also alarming signs of preparation by SPLM/A in Opposition for attacks on
Bentiu and Bor. With tensions spreading in the greater Bahr el Gazal region and the
Equatorias, in addition to deliberate misinformation campaigns aimed at dividing
communities, the risk of a nationwide conflict looms dangerously over the country.
74. I have impressed upon the President and Riek Machar the need to cease all
hostilities immediately and engage in negotiations in Addis Ababa in good faith.
They must provide their complete and unconditional support to the IGAD mediation
team, which has the full backing of the African Union, the United Nations and the
international community. They must stop all mobilization, arms purchases and
political activities aimed at strengthening one side against the other.
75. As South Sudan enters its fourth year of independence, I recall the hopes and
expectations of the people when their country was established on 9 July 2011. They
expected the political elite to lead the new country from the challenges of decades
of war to a period of peace, prosperity and the rule of law. Those leaders have failed
the people of South Sudan. They have failed to make the anticipated progress in
State-building, nation-building and economic development. They have brought the
country back to the worst violence and human rights abuses of its history.
76. The ethnic dimensions of the conflict have engendered not only tremendous
tragedy, but also anger between communities and the urge for revenge. I will do my
utmost to ensure that those responsible for the atrocities committed in South Sudan,
including alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity, are brought to justice.
I welcome the continuing work of the African Union commission of inquiry in this
regard. South Sudan, with the assistance of the international community, must put
into place effective accountability and reconciliation measures that meet
international standards.
77. The South Sudanese people are bearing the brunt of their leaders’ failure to
stop the fighting. They are living in squalor, their livelihoods have been lost and
they are plagued by hunger, disease and insecurity. More than 1.5 million people
have been driven from their homes. I urge the international community to meet the
humanitarian funding requirements for assistance to the people of South Sudan.
78. While I welcome the fact that the Government and the SPLM/A in Opposition
leadership have recommitted themselves to not disrupting UNMISS, United Nations
country team and humanitarian operations, I have noted, with deep concern, both
parties’ continued failure to respect the status-of-forces agreement and provide
humanitarian access. More than words are required. Violent attacks against United
Nations and humanitarian personnel and premises, restrictions on freedom of

16/18

14-57963

S/2014/537

movement and harassment must cease. UNMISS must be allowed by all parties to
impartially implement its newly mandated tasks, in particular its heightened
responsibilities to protect civilians, without impediments.
79. As mandated by the Security Council in its resolution 2155 (2014), UNMISS
will continue to dedicate all its efforts to protecting civilians, in particular those
facing the greatest threats, promoting human rights, including through public
reporting of violations and abuses, creating conditions conducive to the provision of
humanitarian assistance and supporting inter-communal and national dialogue
processes. As the Mission receives additional troops, and based on its early warning
system, it will continue to widen the scope of its physical protection activities,
including beyond its protection sites.
80. I am, however, concerned that, even with the additional authorization of
5,500 troops and enablers, in addition to formed police units, UNMISS has reached
the limits of its resources. My request in March for those additional resources was
based on displacement figures in the high hundreds of thousands, and on a total of
70,000 civilians seeking shelter inside UNMISS bases. Today, the situation is far
bleaker. Some 4 million South Sudanese are at crisis or emergency levels of food
insecurity. The risk of famine is high and increasing. More than 1.5 million people
have been displaced, nearly 100,000 of whom are seeking protection inside
UNMISS bases, including a staggering 43,000 alone in the UNMISS base in Bentiu,
Unity State. Moreover, the levels of insecurity and crime and the severe health
concerns — together with the growing political influence over elements in the
camps — have placed significant strain on management capability.
81. This will not be a short-term crisis. It is likely that we will not see significant
returns until as early as 2015. Sites for the protection of civilians in UNMISS bases
are not a sustainable solution for the internally displaced persons who are being
protected there. Without additional resources to improve living conditions, the sites,
which were a solution designed for an emergency situation, will soon reach a
tipping point. It is therefore imperative that sustainable immediate, medium-term
and long-term solutions and resources be found to assist the internally displaced.
82. Additional support from Member States is required, including on a bilateral
basis, for the expeditious and rapid deployment of military reinforcements. There is
also a need for in-kind contributions of military engineering capacity from Member
States and additional formed police units, including female officers. The Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support are reaching out to
Member States in this regard.
83. Such capacity would help UNMISS to extend its protection capacity and create
conditions conducive to the provision of humanitarian assistance. In the
environment of South Sudan, with few roads and torrential rains, and the reliance on
air transportation, this will be an expensive and difficult undertaking. Even then, the
United Nations and its partners will be able to reach only a limited number of
people. I am, nevertheless, committed to ensuring that the most vulnerable are
protected. UNMISS, the United Nations agencies and partners have helped to save
tens of thousands of lives and will continue to do so. I call upon international donors
and bilateral partners to step up their support to meet the financial, logistical and
human resource requirements of UNMISS and humanitarian agencies.

14-57963

17/18

S/2014/537

84. In closing, I wish to express my deep gratitude to all the military, police and
civilian personnel of UNMISS, who, under the able leadership of my Special
Representative, Hilde F. Johnson, and the Force Commander, Major-General Delali
Johnson Sakyi, have worked diligently and courageously to help to protect and
assist the people of South Sudan, in often perilous circumstances. I take this
opportunity to reiterate my thanks to the Member States that have contributed
personnel and assets to the Mission. I am also most grateful to the personnel of the
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and the non-governmental
organizations that have provided much-needed humanitarian and emergency
assistance in extremely challenging and risky conditions. I pay tribute to those who
have lost their lives in the performance of their duties.

18/18

14-57963
