United Nations

A/RES/71/253

General Assembly

Distr.: General
26 January 2017

Seventy-first session
Agenda item 72

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2016
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/71/L.49 and Add.1)]

71/253. Report of the International Criminal Court
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 70/264 of 13 May 2016 and all its previous relevant
resolutions,
Recalling also that the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court 1
reaffirms the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recognizing the International Criminal Court as an independent permanent
judicial institution and, in this regard, that the United Nations and the Court respect
each other’s status and mandate,
Reiterating the historic significance of the adoption of the Rome Statute,
Emphasizing that justice, especially transitional justice in conflict and post conflict societies, is a fundamental building block of sustainable peace,
Convinced that ending impunity is essential for coming to terms with any past
crimes committed and preventing such crimes in the future,
Acknowledging the fact that the International Criminal Court has achieved
considerable progress in its investigations and judicial proceedings in various
situations and cases which were referred to it by States parties to the Rome Statute
and by the Security Council, and which the Prosecutor of the Court has initiated
proprio motu, in accordance with the Rome Statute,
Recalling that effective and comprehensive cooperation and assistance in all
aspects of its mandate by States, the United Nations and other international and
regional organizations remain essential for the International Criminal Court to carry
out its activities,
Expressing its appreciation to the Secretary-General for providing effective
and efficient assistance to the International Criminal Court in accordance with the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations and the International Criminal
Court, 2
_______________
1
2

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544.
A/58/874 and Add.1.

16-23017 (E)

*1623017*

Please recycle

A/RES/71/253

Acknowledging the Relationship Agreement as approved by the General
Assembly in its resolution 58/318 of 13 September 2004, including paragraph 3 of
the resolution, with respect to the payment in full of expenses a ccruing to the United
Nations as a result of the implementation of the Relationship Agreement, 3 which
provides a framework for continued cooperation between the International Criminal
Court and the United Nations, which enables, inter alia, facilitation by the United
Nations of the Court’s field activities, and encouraging the conclusion of
supplementary arrangements and agreements, as necessary,
Noting the need for funding of expenses related to investigations or
prosecutions of the International Criminal Court, including in connection with
situations referred to the Court by the Security Council,
Welcoming the continuous support given by civil society to the International
Criminal Court,
Stressing the importance that the Rome Statute accords to the rights and needs
of victims, in particular their right to participate in judicial proceedings and to claim
reparations, and emphasizing the importance of informing and involving victims and
affected communities in order to give effect to the mandate of the International
Criminal Court towards victims,
1.

Welcomes the report of the International Criminal Court for 2015/16; 4

2.
Also welcomes the States that have become parties to the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court, 1 and calls upon all States in all regions of the
world that are not yet parties to the Rome Statute to consider ratifying, accepting,
approving or acceding to it without delay;
3.
Further welcomes the States parties as well as States not parties to the
Rome Statute that are parties to the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of
the International Criminal Court, 5 and calls upon all States that have not yet done so
to consider becoming parties to that Agreement;
4.
Notes the recent ratifications and acceptances of the amendments adopted
at the Review Conference of the Rome Statute, held in Kampala from
31 May to 11 June 2010;
5.
Underlines, bearing in mind that in accordance with the Rome Statute the
International Criminal Court is complementary to national criminal jurisdictions,
that States need to adopt appropriate measures within their national legal systems
for those crimes for which they are required under international law to exercise their
responsibility to investigate and prosecute;
6.
Encourages further efforts by the United Nations, other international and
regional organizations and States, as well as civil society, to appropriately assist
States, upon their request, in strengthening their domestic capacity to investigate
and prosecute crimes, and in this regard underlines the importance of national
ownership;
7.
Emphasizes the importance of international cooperation and judicial
assistance in conducting effective investigations and prosecutions;
_______________
3

Articles 10 and 13 of the Relationship Agreement.
A/71/342.
5
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2271, No. 40446.
4

2/5

A/RES/71/253

8.
Acknowledges the role of the International Criminal Court in a
multilateral system that aims to end impunity, promote the rule of law, promote and
encourage respect for human rights, achieve sustainable peace and further the
development of nations, in accordance with international law and the purpo ses and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations;
9.
Calls upon States parties to the Rome Statute that have not yet done so to
adopt national legislation to implement obligations emanating from the Rome Statute
and to cooperate with the International Criminal Court in the exercise of its functions,
and recalls the provision of technical assistance by States parties in this respect;
10. Welcomes the cooperation and assistance provided thus far to the
International Criminal Court by States parties as well as States not parties, the
United Nations and other international and regional organizations, and calls upon
those States that are under an obligation to cooperate to provide such cooperation
and assistance in the future, in particular with regard to arrest and surrender, the
provision of evidence, the protection and relocation of victims and witnesses and the
enforcement of sentences;
11. Notes the efforts of the Secretary-General in promoting cooperation
between the United Nations and the International Criminal Court in accordance with
the Relationship Agreement between the United Nations and the International
Criminal Court, 2 and also notes in this regard that the Office of Legal Affairs of the
Secretariat has a specific role within the United Nations;
12. Recalls article 3 of the Relationship Agreement, according to which, with
a view to facilitating the effective discharge of their respective responsibilities, the
United Nations and the International Criminal Court shall cooperate closely,
whenever appropriate, with each other and consult each other on matters of mutual
interest pursuant to the provisions of the Relationship Agreement and in conformity
with the respective provisions of the Charter and the Rome Statute, and shall respect
each other’s status and mandate, 6 and requests the Secretary-General to continue to
include information relevant to the implementation of article 3 of the Relationship
Agreement in a report to be submitted to the General Assembly at its seventy -second
session;
13. Recalls the guidance issued by the Secretary-General on contacts with
persons who are the subject of arrest warrants or summonses issued by the
International Criminal Court, 7 and in this regard takes note of the information
included in the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of article 3 of
the Relationship Agreement; 8
14. Recalls the Relationship Agreement, and notes that expenses related to
investigations or prosecutions incurred by the International Criminal Court in
connection with situations referred by the Security Council or otherwise continue to
be borne exclusively by States parties to the Rome Statute;
15. Emphasizes the importance of cooperation with States that are not parties
to the Rome Statute;

_______________
6

Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Relationship Agreement.
A/67/828-S/2013/210, annex.
8
A/71/346.
7

3/5

A/RES/71/253

16. Invites regional organizations to consider concluding cooperation
agreements with the International Criminal Court;
17. Recalls that, by virtue of article 12, paragraph 3, of the Rome Statute, if
the acceptance of a State which is not a party to the Rome Statute is required under
article 12, paragraph 2, of the Rome Statute, that State may, by declaration lodged
with the Registrar of the International Criminal Court, accept the exercise of
jurisdiction by the Court with respect to the crime in question;
18. Urges all States parties to take the interests, needs for assistance and
mandate of the International Criminal Court into account when relevant matters are
being discussed in the United Nations, and invites all other States to consider doing
the same, as appropriate;
19. Emphasizes the importance of the full implementation of all aspects of
the Relationship Agreement, which forms a framework for close cooperation
between the two organizations and for consultation on matters of mutual interest
pursuant to the provisions of that Agreement and in conformity with the respective
provisions of the Charter and the Rome Statute, as well as the need for the
Secretary-General to continue to inform the General Assembly at its seventy -second
session of the expenses incurred and reimbursements received by the United Nations
in connection with assistance provided to the International Criminal Court;
20. Encourages further dialogue between the United Nations and the
International Criminal Court, and welcomes in this regard the increased interaction
of the Security Council with the Court under various formats, including the holding
of open debates on peace and justice and working methods, with a special focus on
the role of the Court;
21. Continues to welcome the statement by the President of the Security
Council of 12 February 2013, 9 in which the Council reiterated its previous call
regarding the importance of State cooperation with the International Criminal Court,
in accordance with the respective obligations of States, and expressed its
commitment to effective follow-up of Council decisions in this regard;
22. Expresses its appreciation for the work undertaken by the International
Criminal Court liaison office to United Nations Headquarters, and encourages the
Secretary-General to continue to work closely with that office;
23. Encourages States to contribute to the Trust Fund established for the
benefit of victims of crimes within the jurisdiction of the International Criminal
Court and the families of such victims, and acknowledges with appreciation
contributions made to that Trust Fund thus far;
24. Recalls that, at the Review Conference of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, which was convened and opened by the Secretary General, States parties reaffirmed their commitment to the Rome Statute and its full
implementation, as well as its universality and integrity, and that the Review
Conference undertook a stocktaking exercise of international criminal justice,
considering the impact of the Rome Statute on victims and affected communitie s,
peace and justice, complementarity and cooperation, called for the strengthening of
the enforcement of sentences, adopted amendments to the Rome Statute to expand
the jurisdiction of the Court to cover three additional war crimes when committed in
_______________
9

S/PRST/2013/2; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2012–31 July 2013
(S/INF/68).

4/5

A/RES/71/253

armed conflicts not of an international character, and adopted amendments to the
Rome Statute to define the crime of aggression and to establish conditions under
which the Court could exercise jurisdiction with respect to that crime;
25. Acknowledges the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the
Organization; 10
26. Takes note of the decision of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court at its fifteenth session, while recalling
that, according to article 112, paragraph 6, of the Rome Statute, the Assembly of
States Parties shall meet at the seat of the Court or at United Nations Headquarters,
to hold its sixteenth session in New York, looks forward to the sixteenth session,
which is to be held from 4 to 14 December 2017, and requests the Secretary-General
to provide the necessary services and facilities in accordance with the Relationship
Agreement and resolution 58/318;
27. Encourages the widest possible participation of States in the Assembly of
States Parties, invites States to contribute to the Trust Fund for the participation of
the least developed countries, and acknowledges with appreciation contributions
made to that Trust Fund thus far;
28. Invites the International Criminal Court to submit, if it deems it
appropriate, in accordance with article 6 of the Relationship Agreement, a report on
its activities for 2016/17, for consideration by the General Assembly at its seventy second session.
68th plenary meeting
23 December 2016

_______________
10

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 1 (A/71/1).

5/5
