UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3190
31 March 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
ONE HUNDRED AND NINETIETH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Wednesday, 31 March 1993, at 4 p . m .
President;: Mr
Members:

. 0' BRIEN

Brazil
Cape Verde
China
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland
United States of America
Venezuela

(New Zealand)
Mr
Mr
Mr
Mr
Mr
Mr
Mr
Mr
Mr
Mr
Mr

. SARDENBERG

. BARBOSA
. CHEN Jian
. OLHAYE
. MERIMEE
. ERDOS

SBIGEIE
.. BENJELLOUN-TOUIMI
.. MARKER
VORONTSOV

. PEDAUYE

Sir David HA"AY
Mr WALKER
Mr ARRIA

.

.

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English
and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will
be printed in the Official Records of the Securitv Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should
be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within
one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.

93-85557

3968V (E)

S/PV . 3 190

The meetina was called to order at 4 . 3 0 P.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The aaenda was adoDted.
AN

AGENDA FOR PEACE:

PREVENTIVE DIPLObfACP, PEACEMAKING AND PEACE-KEEPING

The PRESIDENT:

The Security Council will now begin its

consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.
Following consultations among members of the Security Council, 1 have
been authorized to make the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has continued its examination of the
Secretary-General's report entitled 'An Agenda for Peace' (S/24111),
including the problem identified in paragraphs 66-68 - the safety of
United Nations forces and personnel deployed in conditions of strife.
The Council has considered this question with regard to persons deployed
in connection with a Security Council mandate.
"The Security Council commends the Secretary-General for drawing
attention to this problem, including the unconscionable increase in the
number of fatalities and incidents of violence involving United Nations
forces and personnel.

The Council shares fully the Secretary-General's

concerns.
"The Security Council recognizes that increasingly it has found it
necessary, in discharging its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, to deploy United Nations forces and

S/PV. 3 19 0
3
(The President)
personnel in situations of real danger.

The Council greatly appreciates

the courage and commitment of these dedicated people who accept
considerable personal risk in order to imp1,ement the mandates of this
Organization.
"The Security Council recalls that it has been necessary on a number
of occasions to condemn incidents directed against United Nations forces
and personnel.

It deplores the f a c t that, despite its repeated calls,

incidents of violence continue.
"The Council considers that attacks and other acts of violence,
whether actual or threatened, including obstruction or detention of
persons, against United Nations forces and personnel are wholly
unacceptable and may require the Council to take further measures to
ensure the safety and security of such forces and personnel.
"The Security Council reiterates its demand that States and other
parties to various conflicts take all possible steps to ensure the safety
and security of United Nations forces and personnel.

It further demands

that States act promptly and effectively to deter, prosecute and punish
all those responsible for attacks and other acts of violence against such
forces and personnel.
"The Security Council notes the particular difficulties and dangers
that can arise where United Nations forces and personnel are deployed in
situations where the State or States concerned are unable to exercise
jurisdiction in order to ensure the safety and security oE such forces
and personnel, or where a State is unwilling to discharge its

S/PV . 3 19 0
4

(The President)
responsibilites in this regard,

In such an eventuality, the Council may

consider measures appropriate to the particular circumstances to ensure
that persons responsible for attacks and other acts of violence against
United Nations forces and personnel are held to account for their actions,
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to report as

soon as possible on the existing arrangements for the protection of
United Nations forces and personnel, and the adequacy thereof, taking
into account, inter alia, relevant multilateral instruments and
status-of-forces agreements concluded between the United Nations and host
countries, as well as comments he may receive from Member States, and to
make such recommendations as he considers appropriate for enhancing the
safety and security of United Nations forces and personnel.
"The Security Council will consider the matter further in the light

of the Secretary-General's report and of work done in the General
Assembly and its subsidiary bodies, including, in particular, the Special
Committee o n Peace-keeping Operations established pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 2006 (XIX). In that regard, the Council recognizes
the need for all relevant bodies of the Organization to take concerted
action to enhance the safety and security of United Nations forces and
per sonne 1.
"The Security Council intends to continue its consideration of the
Secretary-General ' s report entitled 'An Agenda for Peace I ,
in the President's statement of 29 October 1 9 9 2 ( S / 2 4 7 2 8 ) . "

as indicated

S/PV. 3190

5
(The President)
e issued as a documen

This statement will

of the Security Council under

the symbol Sl25493.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its

consideration of the item on the agenda.

$

T

t 4 40

.m.
