A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/91
29 January 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 35
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/53/L.21/Rev.1)]
53/91.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization of African Unity,1
Recalling the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations on regional
arrangements or agencies, which set forth the basic principles governing their activities and establishing
the legal framework for cooperation with the United Nations in the area of the maintenance of
international peace and security, as well as resolution 49/57 of 9 December 1994, the annex to which
contains the Declaration on the Enhancement of Cooperation between the United Nations and Regional
Arrangements or Agencies in the Maintenance of International Peace and Security,
Recalling also the agreement of 15 November 1965 on cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of African Unity2 as updated and signed on 9 October 1990 by the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity,3

1

A/53/419.

2

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 548, No. 614 (Part II).

3

Ibid., vol. 1580, No. 1044 (Part II).

99-76453

/...

A/RES/53/91
Page 2

Recalling further its resolutions on the enhancement of cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of African Unity, in particular resolutions 43/12 of 25 October 1988, 43/27 of
18 November 1988, 44/17 of 1 November 1989, 45/13 of 7 November 1990, 46/20 of 26 November 1991,
47/148 of 18 December 1992, 48/25 of 29 November 1993, 49/64 of 15 December 1994, 50/158 of
21 December 1995, 51/151 of 13 December 1996 and 52/20 of 24 November 1997,
Recalling that, in its resolutions 46/20, 47/148 and 48/25, it, inter alia, urged the Secretary-General
and the relevant agencies of the United Nations system to extend their support for the establishment of
the African Economic Community,
Recalling also its resolution 48/214 of 23 December 1993 on the implementation of the United
Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s,4
Taking note of the resolutions, decisions and declarations adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its thirty-fourth ordinary session, held at
Ouagadougou from 8 to 10 June 1998,5
Noting the holding of the ministerial meeting of the Security Council on the situation in Africa on
24 September 1998 and the recognition of the symbiotic relationship between peace and development,
Mindful of the need for continued and closer cooperation between the United Nations and its
specialized agencies and the Organization of African Unity, in particular in the political, economic, social,
technical, cultural and administrative fields,
Noting that the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution of the Organization
of African Unity is developing its capacity in preventive diplomacy,
Noting also the efforts of the Organization of African Unity, and the assistance of the United Nations,
to promote the peaceful settlement of disputes and conflicts in Africa and the harmonious continuation
of the process of democratization,
Deeply concerned that, despite the policies of reform being implemented by most African countries,
their economic situation remains critical and African recovery and development continue to be severely
hindered by the persistence of lower-level commodity prices, the heavy debt burden and the paucity of
investment financing,
Aware of the efforts being made by the Organization of African Unity and its member States in the
area of economic integration and of the need to accelerate the process of implementation of the Treaty
Establishing the African Economic Community,6
Acknowledging the assistance already rendered by the international community, in particular to
refugees, displaced persons and African countries of asylum,

4

Resolution 46/151, annex.

5

A/53/179, annex II.

6

A/46/651.
/...

A/RES/53/91
Page 3

Deeply concerned about the gravity of the situation of refugees and internally displaced persons in
Africa and the urgent need for increased international assistance to help refugees and African countries
of asylum,
Recognizing the importance of developing and maintaining a culture of peace, tolerance and
harmonious relationships based on good governance, social justice and international cooperation in order
to contribute to the prevention of conflicts and wars in Africa,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of African Unity1 and of his efforts to strengthen that cooperation and to implement the
relevant resolutions;
2. Welcomes the recent decision of the Secretary-General to establish a liaison office with the
Organization of African Unity in Addis Ababa;
3. Notes with appreciation the continued and increasing participation of the Organization of African
Unity in the work of the United Nations and the specialized agencies and its constructive contribution to
that work;
4. Calls upon the United Nations organs, in particular the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council, to continue to involve the Organization of African Unity closely in all their activities
concerning Africa;
5. Welcomes the initiative of the ministerial meeting of the Security Council on the situation in
Africa, which took place on 24 September 1998, expresses its appreciation for the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in
Africa of 13 April 1998,7 and encourages the early implementation of the recommendations contained in
the report by the United Nations and its organs and specialized agencies, each in its respective area of
competence;
6. Calls upon the United Nations to cooperate and coordinate its efforts with those of the
Organization of African Unity, inter alia, in the following areas:
(a) Peaceful settlement of disputes and maintenance of international peace and security in Africa,
as provided for under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations;
(b) Prevention of conflict through the promotion of a culture of peace, tolerance and harmonious
relations in Africa and enhancement of the existing pattern of exchange of information and consultation;
7. Invites the United Nations to continue to assist the Organization of African Unity in
strengthening the institutional and operational capacity of its Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution in Africa, in particular in the following areas:
(a) Establishment of an early-warning system;

7

A/52/871–S/1998/318; see Official Records of the Security Council, Fifty-third Year, Supplement for
April, May and June 1998, document S/1998/318.
/...

A/RES/53/91
Page 4

(b) Technical assistance and training of personnel, including a staff exchange programme;
(c) Exchange and coordination of information between their respective early-warning systems;
(d) Logistical support;
(e) Mobilization of financial support;
8. Notes with appreciation the assistance provided by the United Nations and its agencies to African
countries in the context of the democratization process, and urges the United Nations to encourage donor
countries, in consultation with the Organization of African Unity, to provide adequate funding and training
for African countries in their efforts to enhance their peacekeeping capabilities, with a view to enabling
those countries to participate actively in peacekeeping operations within the framework of the United
Nations;
9. Urges the United Nations to continue to support the Organization of African Unity in its efforts
to manage the expansion of the democratic experience in Africa, in particular in the areas of education
for democracy, election observation, human rights and freedom, including technical support to the African
Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights;
10. Calls upon all Member States and regional and international organizations, in particular those
of the United Nations system, as well as non-governmental organizations, to provide appropriate assistance
to refugees and displaced persons, as well as to the African countries of asylum, taking into account recent
disquieting developments in this respect;
11. Stresses that the economic, technical and development assistance provided to Africa by the
United Nations system must continue, and emphasizes the urgent need for those organizations to accord
priority to Africa in this field;
12. Urges the Secretary-General, Member States, regional and international organizations, in
particular those of the United Nations system, and non-governmental organizations to extend their support
to the operations of the African Economic Community, its popularization and the strengthening of its
institutional support;
13. Requests the agencies of the United Nations system working in Africa to include in their
programmes at the national and regional levels activities that will enhance regional cooperation in their
respective areas and to facilitate the realization of the objectives of the Treaty Establishing the African
Economic Community;
14. Calls upon the United Nations agencies to intensify the coordination of their regional
programmes in Africa in order to create linkages among them and to ensure the harmonization of their
programmes with those of the African regional and subregional economic organizations;
15. Emphasizes the urgency of the need to adopt appropriate measures to ensure the effective
implementation of the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s4, in
particular regarding (a) economic reforms, including the effective mobilization and efficient utilization of
domestic resources, (b) promotion of the private sector and foreign direct investment, (c) expansion of the
democratic experience and the strengthening of civil society, (d) environment and development,
/...

A/RES/53/91
Page 5

(e) resource flows, (f) solution of Africa’s debt problem, (g) trade facilitation and market access,
(h) diversification of African economies, (i) improvement of physical and institutional infrastructure and
social and human resource development and (j) women in development;
16. Urges all States and international subregional organizations actively to implement the
recommendations of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the General Assembly for the Mid-term
Review of the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s, as adopted by
the General Assembly at its fifty-first session;
17. Invites the Secretary-General to associate closely the Organization of African Unity with the
implementation, follow-up and evaluation of the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of
Africa in the 1990s and beyond, including the conduct of the final review of the implementation in the
year 2002;
18. Calls upon the Secretary-General to develop new and effective strategies for the implementation
of the recommendations of the meeting of the secretariats of the Organization of African Unity and the
United Nations held from 6 to 8 May 1998;
19. Calls upon the relevant organs of the United Nations system to ensure the effective, fair and
equitable representation of Africans at senior and policy levels at their respective headquarters and in their
regional field operations;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session on
the implementation of the present resolution and on the development of cooperation between the
Organization of African Unity and the organizations of the United Nations system.
81st plenary meeting
7 December 1998
