UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2383)

YEAR

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .

1

Adoption of the agenda ................................................

I

The situation between Iran and Iraq .....................................

1

SIPV.2383

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such ‘a symbol indicates a reference to a United
‘
Nations document.
Documents of the .Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the ‘OflickS Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement
in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of rhe Security CowvAl. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 196.5, became fully operative
on that date.

2383rd MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,
Prrsid~~r:

Mr. Noel G. SINCLAIR

(Guym~a).

PI’L~s~~I~~:The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional agenda (SIAgendat2383)

1, Adoption

of the agenda

2, The situation

b

between Iran and Iraq

Adoption of the agenda

The situation between Iran and Iraq

I, The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Iraq in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
lhat representative
to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

2. The PRESIDENT:
As was agreed in the course
of the Security Council’s consultations held earlier
today, the Council is meeting in connection with the
situation between Iran and Iraq.
3. Members
of the Council have before them
document S/15285, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to the following other documents: S/l5219
and S/15266, which contain the text of two letters,
dated 11 and 30 June respectively, from the representative of Belgium addressed to the President of the
Council; S/15270, which contains the text of a letter
dated 1 July, from the representative of Iran addressed
to the President of the Council: and 5115279, which

12 July 1982, at 5.30 p.m.
contains the text of a letter dated 8 July from the representative of Iraq addressed to the President of the
Council,
4. It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to a vote on the draft resolution contained
in document S/l5285. Unless I hear any objection,
I shall put the draft resolution to the vote.
5. I shall now call upon those representatives
wish to speak before the voting.

who

6. Mr. de La BARRE de NANTEUIL
(France)
(intc~rprrfution frotn Frc1nc.h): This is the first opportunity 1 have had, Sir, to congratulate you officially
on your accession to the presidency of the Council.
I am extremely gratified to see the representative of a
country and a continent with which my country has
ancient and friendly relations occupying the presidential chair today. Last month I was able to appreciate the onerous responsibilities
your post represents
for whoever holds it. Under the guidance ofa diplomat
of your standing and a man as cultivated and refined
as you are, I am convinced that the Council will contribute to restoring peace wherever it is threatened in
the world.
7. It is indeed the burning need to restore peace
that must guide the Council in its work today. For
two years now, in a part of the world that has already
been sorely tried by warfare, a particularly lethal
conflict is under way. Tens of thousands of persons
have lost their lives in the battle that has pitted Iran
against Iraq. These confrontations have furthermore
caused the exodus of hundreds of thousands of refugees. Considerable damage, which will take years to
repair, has been caused to the infrastructures of both
countries. As it continues, this war, which is a constant cause of instability in that part of the world,
may well take a turn for the worse if the bilateral conflict becomes a confrontation
between two cultures
and two religions.
8. That prospect has been a constant concern of
the French Government, which has always stated its
willingness to contribute to any effort designed to bring
about a peaceful outcome.
9. In fact, at the meetings of the Council of Europe
in Brussels on 28 and 29 June last, France and its nine
partners in the European Community
recalled the
concerns of which I have just spoken [S/15266, NYIIZCXI.

-

10. It must be possible to settle the bilateral conflict under consideration through negotiations. If that
is to be done, the legitimate rights of both parties must
be recognized. in order in particular to guarantee
within a recognized international
framework theit
integrity and sovereignty against any form of external
interference. In this connection, a frontier was traced
between the two countries by the Algiers Agreement
of 1975.’ That frontier should be respected, and the
negotiations to be initiated should have precisely that
objective.

18. The present text [ihid.) meets that test, It isa
balanced draft resolution and calls for a comprehsb
sive, just and honourable settlement. It seeks nee*
tiation of all outstanding issues between the two counq
tries. and it does not prejudge. In supporting it. ths
United States hopes that both sides wilt agree 08
mutually acceptable means for working towards %
settlement and will co-operate fully with the tea%.
fire and withdrawal arrangements to be established
and the continuing mediation efforts to be co-ordinated
through the Secretary-General in accordance with (hit
draft resolution.

I I. France would like to welcome the efforts at
negotiation that have boen initiated by the Organization of the Islamic Conference and by the Movement
of Non-Aligned
Countries. In particular, we express
the hope that the Council and the Secretary-General
will play a role in co-ordinating these efforts and will
contribute to making them more fruitful.

19. The PRESIDENT:
The Council
will nON
proceed to vote on the draft resolution in document
Sl I 5285.

12. The draft resolution before us [S//.5285] is one
that the Council must consider as part and parcel of
its main responsibility.
which is the maintenance of
international peace and security.

20. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call upon those
representatives who have asked to be allowed to make
statements after the voting.

13. It explicitly lays down the political foundations
for a settlement. and everyone should be aware that
this is essential for stability in the region and international equilibrium.
It gives concrete expression to
the idea of co-ordinating
ongoing mediation efforts
by entrusting this task to the Secretary-General,
This
initiative can create the necessary dynamic movement
towards peace. which is today more necessary than
ever. It clearly stales the responsibility of each party,

21. Mr. WHYTE
(United
Kingdom):
Mr. Presi.
dent, allow me to join those others who have already
expressed to you their felicitations on your assumption
of your office. My country and your country do
occasionally nowadays do battle on the cricket field,
but manage, I think, most effectively and closely to
co-operate over everything else. I assure you that
our co-operation in the very difficult problems which
face you this month will not be lacking.

14. For those various reasons France will vote in
favour of the draft resolution.

22. I wish also to extend to the representative
of
France our appreciation for the distinction with which
he conducted the presidency last month. :He did this
with such vigour and dynamism that. the Permanent
Representative of my delegation, who finally left his
assignment on his retirement on 2 July, was kept fully
stretched to the very end of his term,

15. Mr. SHERMAN
(United States of America):
Since this is the first time the United States has
spoken during the month of July. I should like to
express the recognition and gratitude of the United
States for the work of the representative of France
during his term as President of the Council during the
month of June.

23. My delegation voted in favour of the resolution
just adopted. We did this because we share the concern that the Council should take action in the grave
and threatening situation which now exists between
Iraq and Iran. That conflict has already lasted too
long. has cost too many lives and has caused too much
material damage. We earnestly entreat all those concerned to implement the resolutionjust adopted, as well
as resolution 479 (1980), in order to bring the conflict
to an end and bring about a return to th’e paths of
peaceful negotiation.

16. I should also like to make special note of the
contribution
now being made by you, Sir, and the
delegation of Guyana, as President of the Council fol
this difficult month of July. We count on your skill,
your experience and your wisdom to guide our deliberations.
17. Since the beginning of this unhappy conflict
with which the Council is now dealing, the United
States has held the position that a solution must be
found which preserves the independence and territorial integrity of both Iraq and Iran. We have therefore been prepared to support any constructive and
equitable action by the Council which works towards
that end.

24. At the same time, my delegation,
while supporting the resolution, does have some doubts about
its likely efficacy at the present time. We b#elieve that
an important prerequisite for effective peace-making
by the Council is that its proposals shoulcl have the
support of all the parties to a dispute. There: is reason
7

to believe in the present case that one of the parties
will be reluctant to accept the resolution just adapted.
MY delegation applauds the efforts that you, Mr. President. have made to persuade that party to accept the
need to co-operate with the Council. It is a matter of
regret to my delegation that in spite of the efforts you
have made, that co-operation is not yet forthcoming,
for without such co-operation it will be difficult for
the United Nations to achieve a settlement of the
dispute,
i-hwever, it would be wrong to despair.
As is
recognized in the resolution that we have adopted,
the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative
have already been playing an important part in efforts
to settle the dispute. My delegation is sure that they
Will continue to do so, and we hope that they will be
able to obtain the co-operation of both parties so that
progress can be made, taking into account the positions
of both parties and, of course, the requirements of the
Charter of the United Nations. We hope in particular
that the Secretary-General
will consider urgently the
possibility of sending a representative to Teheran and
to Baghdad so that he can report to the Council very
soon as to what further action it might take.

25.

26. Mr. LING Qing (China) (interpwtntion
from
Chirrc~.sc~: First of all, allow me in the name of the
Chinese delegation to extend our warmest congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
for this month. I am deeply convinced that your
wisdom. diplomatic experience and competence will
provide positive guidance to the Council to enable it
to exercise its responsibilities effectively. At the same
time, I should like to express my gratitude to your
predecessor, the representative of France, for the
efforts he made and the competence and patience he
showed while presiding over the proceedings of the
Council in the extraordinary month of June.
27. The war between Iraq and Iran has lasted for
almost two years. This protracted war has not only
cost many lives, incurred serious financial losses and
brought untold sufferings to the two peoples; it is also
directly threatening the peace and security of the
Gulf area and the Middle East region. The Chinese
Government has also noted that, in order to end this
war between two brotherly Muslim countries, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the non-aligned countries, particularly the Islamic
countries, have undertaken mediation efforts on many
occasions to seek a comprehensive and just settlement
of the conflict through peaceful means. Both Iraq and
Iran belong to the third world. We have consistently
held that no fundamental conflict of interest exists
between third-world
countries. Conflicts between
them should and can be peacefully settled through
consultation or negotiations.
28. It is our sincere hope that Iran and Iraq will
bear in mind the maintenance of peace in the Middle
East region and exercise restraint SO as to seek an

early cease-fire through negotiation and peaceful resolution of the dispute that conforms to the fundamental
interests of the two peoples.

29. In View of those considerations, the Chinese
delegation voted in favour of resolution 479 (1980).
Based on the same considerations, the Chinese de]egation has now voted in favour of resolution 514
(1982). We hope that the adoption of that resolution
will contribute to the just and reasonable resolutjon
of the conflict between the two countries through
peaceful means.
30. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (inteupretntion jkom Russiun): First,
Sir, I should like to welcome you to the post of President of the Council for this month and to wish you
success in discharging the complex and responsible
duties which YOU have thus assumed. At the same
time, 1 should like to express my satisfaction that this
post is occupied by a representative of a friendly and
non-aligned country.
3 I. I should also like to express my delegation’s
gratitude to the representative of France, Mr. Luc
de La Barre de Nanteuil, for the skilful and energetic
way in which he guided the work of the Council in
June.
32. Today’s meeting of the Security Council reflects
the deep alarm and concern felt by the overwhelming
majority of States Members of the Organization in the
light of the ongoing armed conflict between Iran and
Iraq. That alarm and concern are fully shared by the
Soviet Union, which cannot fail to be interested in the
removal of the sources of considerable tension in
areas in the immediate vicinity of its own borders as
well as in all other parts of the world.
33. It is for this reason that since the armed conflict
broke out between Iran and Iraq, two developing
countries which maintain friendly relations with our
own and share a great many of our historical and
cultural values, the Soviet Union has taken a clear-cut
position
in favour of putting an end as soon as possible
to the military action and resolving the conflict by
means of negotiations.
34. As the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, President of the Presidium of the
Supreme Soviet, Leonid Brezhnev, has frequently
stated: “The Soviet Union decisively favours a peaceful settlement of this conflict and would condemn any
attempt to prolong it or to pour oil on the flames of
war.” This fundamental position, this sincere desire
to promote
efforts to put an end to this tragic war, has
motivated every act of the Soviet Union in connection
with the Iran-Iraq conflict.
35.

Our country has supported the mediating
of the Special Representative of the SecreFry-

missjon

General and other constructive international
efforts
aimed at setting the parties to the conflict on the path
towards a peaceful settlement.

42. Nearly two years have elapsed since the adoption of resolution 479 (1980). during which time c)ur
people have been fighting valiantly to defend their
legitimate right to sovereignty. security and wellbeing and the future of generations to come, The factc
have already been placed on the record of the Council
and that of numerous other forums, This is indeed not
the occasion for a repetition of those facts.

36. The Soviet Union speaks out decisively against
rhc attempts of the imperialist farces to warm their
hands at the Iran-Iraq conflagration.
to use it to
increase their own military infiltration in the Near and
Middle East and to C~LISC further destabilization
in
that part of the world. These facts arc all widely
known.

43. Despite Iranian allegations to the contrary. Iraq
welcomed the establishment of the new regime in hart.
We have tried to establish normal relations with the
lranian rdgime. Notwithstanding
numerous acts of
Iranian hostility, which culminated in the imposition
of an armed conflict. we have continued ‘to pursue
peace in the form of a just and honourable settlement.

37. The senseless and tragic conflict between Iran
and Iraq. which has been going on now for 22 months,
has led to tremendous losses and destruction. Thousands of lives have been consumed by the flames of
war, and there has been costly material damage, The
attention of the leaders and peoples of those countries
has been diverted from the solution of the most vital
problems of economic and social development.
the
need to combat the ongoing aggression of Israel and the
plans being hatched in imperialist circles to establish
their own domination in that part of the world. It is
our conviction that an end to this conflict would serve
the deep-rooted and long-term interests of both the
Iranian and the Iraqi peoples.

44. I should like to recall that we offered Iran
peace on 28 September 1980 [.SIJOS//420.3] and declared
that what we seek is to regain our legitimate nationul
rights in our lands and waters. We have also declared
our full readiness to withdraw from Iranian territories
and to establish normal relations with Iran on the
basis of respect for sovereignty and non-interference
in internal affairs. Iran has rejected those efforts.

38. The delegation of the Soviet Union today voted
in favour of resolution 5 14 ( 1982) since we believe that
this hody. which in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations hears the principal responsibility
fat
maintaining
international
peace and security. could
play an important part in promoting a settlement of
the Iranian-Iraqi
conflict. Naturally,
the specific
aspects of such a settlement can and should be agreed
upon in the course of negotiations between those
immediately involved in the conflict. on the basis ofthe
fundamental principles of the Charter and the generally recognizrd norms of international law. and taking
due account of the legitimate interests of both parties.

45. We accepted Security Council resolution
479
( 1980), adopted unanimously on 28 September 1980.
We also welcomed and accepted the mission of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
itnd
co-operated with him fully. The resolution, as members know, was rejected by Iran.
46. We unilaterally
declared a cease-fire frc:,m
5 to 8 October 1980 in response to a request from the
President of Pakistan, who was undertaking
a good
offices mission in his capacity as Chairman at the
time of the Organization of the Islamic Conference
].!3//420S, prrrrr. 41. Iran rejected that offer.

39. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
Minister For Foreign Affairs of Iraq. Mr, Sadoon
Hammndi. I welcome him and invite him to make his
statement,

47. We welcomed the efforts of President
Ficlel
Castro of Cuba, in his capacity as Chairman of the
Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries. and actively
sought an early settlement, Those efforts also Bert’
frustrated by Iran,

40. Mr.
HAMMADl
(Iraq):
Mr.
President,
I should like to extend to you and to the other mem..
hers of the Council my profound gratitude for the
opportunity to speak on this occasion.

48. Unlike Iran, we participated in the Third I~lamid
Summit Conference of the Organization of the Istarnic
Conference, held in Saudi Arabia in January 1981.
accepted its decision and worked actively with the
Islamic Mission to achieve an honourable settlement.
Iran has obstructed those efforts.

41. The Council has acted in full conformity
with
its competence
under the Charter of the United
Nations. The decision just adopted is a timely one. It
will have a constructive impact on generating a new
momentum for peace. It will also reflect positively on
the image of the Council as the main organ under the
Charter responsible for the maintenance
of international peace and security, We have no doubt that
the full implications of the decision of the Council will
be understood by Member States and world public
opinion as an important step forward on the path
to wards peace.

49. At the Conference of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Non-Aligned Countries held at New Delhi
in February 1981, Iraq promptly accepted the letter
and spirit of the decision of the Conference on the
modalities
for settling the conflict. Howe,ver.
the
representative of Iran intervened to reject the substance of the decision, which had been worked ULI~
through intensive consultations.
4

50. Last March. President Saddam Hussein suggested that the Islamic PeaceCommittee ofthe OppnjZiltiOn
of the Islamic Conference should set up a
commission of inquiry to investigate the question of
which side started the war, It is worth noting that
this suggestion was put to us by President
Sekou
Tourti during 11 visit with the Committee last yeal-,
It wx
accepted by Iraq in a letter dated 22 April 1981.
51. On 9 June Inst. the Islamic Peace Committee,
in view of the Zionist aggression against Lebanon,
called upon 11sand Iran to cease fighting immediately
and to fact the Zionist enemy. On IO June, the Iraqi
Revolutionary
Command Council issued a statement
containing the following points. First, it expressed
Iraq’s immediate readiness to cease fire and to put
an end to all hostilities as soon as Iran accepts to do
the same. Secondly, it expressed Iraq’s immediate
readiness to withdraw within two weeks to the international frontiers all of its military forces from all
Iranian territories and cities occupied in defence of
Iraqi territory and towns. Thirdly, it said that. in case
;I direct agreement with Iran on the issues pertaining
to the conflict is not possible through the organizations mediating between the two countries, Iraq is
ready to accept an arbitration decision to be rendered
by an extraordinary session of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference. and. should Iran refuse such
arbitration.
Iraq will accept any arbitration decision
of the Non-Aligned
Movement
or of the Security
Council [SVOS//S IY6, ~//mo.\‘].

the border within a maximum period of 10 days. The
withdrawal operation was completed on the target
date.’ The Iranians. however, announced that the
withdrawal was a lie and part of an imperialist plot.
orchestrated in conjunction with the Israeli invasion of
Lebanon.
53. In addition to all these initiatives for peace.
countless bilateral endeavours with other countries
were pursued.
54. Unfortunately.
Iran’s attitude towards these
efforts for peace has been negative, It still is.
55. We shall never lose our faith in the principles of
the Charter and the role of the United Nations in the
peaceful settlement of disputes. We sincerely hope
that the Iranians will soon respond favourably to the
call of reason and put an end to their policies of prolonging the war. We should all strive for the faithful
implementation
of the resolution adopted by the
Council today. All of us should work closely together
and co-ordinate our actions through the United Nations to outline the framework for negotiations to
achieve the much-desired comprehensive. just and
honourable settlement of the outstanding issues of the
conflict. It is only in this way that a fair and lasting
settlement can be achieved. in the interest of the
peace and security of our region.

52. On 20 June. President Saddam Hussein announced a further decision of the Revolutionary
Command Council which. despite the negative reaction of the Iranian rCgime to the foregoing statement,
went further and called for the commencement and
the completion
of the withdrawal of Iraqi forces to

NWIS
of 6 March
1975.
Communique
1 Joint Iranian-Iraqi
Nations. Twrl/y S~~ric~,~.vol. 1017. NO. 14903. px 196.
: See A/37/323.

5

United

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier.
Informez-vous
aupris
des ventrs.
New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

DES NATIONS

sent en vente dans les librairies
de votl’e libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

publications
ma! be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations.
Sales Section,
New

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
e&n
en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

00300

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

et Ies agences
I : Nations

depositaires
du
Unies. Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Seccibn
de Ventas.

88-60989-October

I9XY--3.WJ
