A /70/PV.94

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

94

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 27 April 2016 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Zinsou (Benin),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda items 31 and 110 (continued)
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission (A/70/714)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
Peacebuilding Fund (A/70/715)

leadership of the Organization on the need to deal with
the diffuse efforts among the various United Nations
departments, agencies and programmes. In that regard,
the Egyptian delegation affirms that the situation
requires an effective, genuine change in the approach
of the Organization and its organs in dealing with
international crises and conflicts. Such a change should
involve the dedication of political, human and financial
resources to address the root causes of conflicts.

Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Resolution 70/262, adopted this morning, on the review
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture,
constitutes a new chapter in the efforts to promote
peacebuilding as a major target and goal of the
United Nations in terms of maintaining, promoting
and sustaining international peace and security. That
resolution, which corresponds to Security Council
resolution 2282 (2016), on post-conflict peacebuilding,
also adopted today, takes into account the development,
nature and scope of international crises and conflicts.

We feel that the most important aspect of resolution
70/262 is its reference to partnerships with regional
organizations and the need for effective frameworks for
the promotion of international and regional ownership
of peacebuilding efforts. Partnerships with the African
Union and African subregional organizations take on
special importance in terms of enabling a better and
more effective United Nations response to the region’s
conflicts and emerging issues, such as terrorism,
piracy and illegal immigration, the prevention of which
requires comprehensive strategies using a variety of
tools.

The report of the Peacebuilding Commission
(A/70/714) affirms the responsibility of all United
Nations organs to contribute to the elaboration of
an integrated vision of sustaining peace, based on
the interconnectedness of security, political and
development factors. That vision should enable a
reduction in the number of armed conflicts and make
it possible to find solutions thereto. One of the most
important results of the comprehensive review of the
peacebuilding architecture (A/69/968), therefore,
is its effort to focus of the attention of the coming

The basic guarantee for the success of the United
Nations and regional peacebuilding efforts is their
anchoring in national and objective priorities. That has
become known, in the literature on peacebuilding, as
the principle of national leadership and ownership. The
commitment to the implementation of that principle is
the linchpin of sustaining peace. We therefore feel that
it is important to focus United Nations and regional
efforts on investing in and contributing to programmes
that build national capacity, thereby ensuring that the
efforts concerned are more successful and effective.

16-12007 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1612007*

A/70/PV.94

Such a transformation in the nature of international
efforts requires ongoing, predictable and sustainable
sources of financing. In that regard, Egypt considers it
important to enable the Peacebuilding Fund to continue
its constructive role in the financing of programmes
and initiatives based on the national priorities of
the receiving State. Egypt therefore calls for the
establishment of mechanisms to provide predictable and
sustainable financing. Such financing would promote
the capacity of the Fund to bridge the financing gap
that usually accompanies the lessening of donor State
interest, once hostilities have come to an end and there
has been a decrease in violence.
I would also like to indicate that resolution
70/262 contains provisions and recommendations
aimed at providing an impetus to and promoting the
Peacebuilding Commission as a consultative organ.
The unique membership enjoyed by the Commission
distinguishes it from all other United Nations
intergovernmental organs, as it allows the Commission
to bridge peacebuilding efforts, which also contributes
to the development and promotion of human rights.
Egypt feels that the necessary political will on the
part of Member States would make it an effective
instrument for mobilizing political interest in States
that have overcome crisis situations and for generating
genuine will to build the institutions of those States and
continue on the path towards sustainable socioeconomic
development. The report of the Peacebuilding
Commission on its ninth session (A/70/714) provides
proof of the Commission’s potential and its growing
interest in such vital causes as the promotion of the role
of women in peacebuilding efforts, in addition to the
growing focus on regional peacebuilding measures and
partnerships with the interregional groupings.
We should also view the consensus achieved
on the resolutions adopted today by the General
Assembly and the Security Council in the light of the
more comprehensive framework of efforts to reform
and develop the United Nations peacebuilding and
security architecture. The review of the peacebuilding
architecture and the review on progress made in
implementing Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security, provide two
complementary frameworks to view the peacebuilding
architecture. In that regard, the delegation of Egypt
affirms the need for a united political message
affirming that sustaining peace is the ultimate objective
of the work of the Organization, and that it is time to
2/21

27/04/2016

reconsider and objectively evaluate the capacity and
structure needed to achieve that objective.
Egypt looks forward to cooperating with Member
States in the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Peace and Security Council of the African Union
during the coming months to translate the provisions
of resolution 70/262 into action without delay, and to
develop the policies and structures and pinpoint the
resources that would promote the Organization’s efforts
to sustain peace.
Egypt, as a current member of the Security
Council, accords the utmost importance and care
to peacebuilding — especially in the context of the
partnership with the African Union. We intend to
submit a developed vision in that regard that embraces
a more comprehensive perspective during the open
debate of the Security Council to be held on 24 May
on cooperation between the African Union and the
United Nations.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank Angola and Australia for their
leadership during the second stage of the review of
the peacebuilding architecture, during which they
facilitated the intergovernmental consultations that
led to today’s adoption of resolution 70/262 by the
General Assembly and resolution 2282 (2016) by the
Security Council.
My delegation is pleased that today’s review
coincides with the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, the review of all United
Nations peacekeeping operations and the review of the
implementation of Security Council resolution 2122
(2013), on women and peace and security. We dare
hope that our Organization will take full advantage of
the unique opportunity offered by this series of closely
related review processes with a view to redirecting
our actions and strategies so as to build an integrated,
strategic and coherent peacebuilding approach, bearing
in mind that security, development and human rights
are closely linked and mutually reinforcing. Clearly,
the resolutions adopted this morning illustrate our
determination to make a break by developing an
approach to peacebuilding that is more consistent
and better able to establish a genuine foundation for a
lasting peace.
With regard to the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission on its ninth session (A/70/714), my
delegation welcomes the continued collaboration
16-12007

27/04/2016

A/70/PV.94

between the Commission and regional and subregional
actors concerning the general guidelines and activities
to be carried out at the country level. Indeed, during
several discussions held by the Commission on specific
countries, the role of neighbouring countries and
regional and subregional organizations was described
as essential to the success of the political process and
to the prevention of any risk of instability.

With regard to the Republic of Guinea, we
welcome the efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa in support of the electoral process
and post-Ebola recovery. With regard to the political
process in the country, Senegal welcomes the successful
presidential elections held last October, which resulted
in the re-election of President Alpha Condé.

In that regard, it is important to strengthen
cooperation among regional partners. It is against
that backdrop that we reiterate our request for the
establishment of an institutional partnership among
the Commission, the African Union and African
subregional organizations.

On the issue of greater consistency in our
efforts, we need more dynamic interaction among the
Peacebuilding Commission and the principal organs of
the United Nations and its funds and programmes, as
well as international, regional and local partners. Only
in that way will we manage to strengthen the necessary
synergies and ensure that our initiatives have greater
impact on the ground. On that point, my delegation
would like to emphasize in particular the importance
of boosting interaction between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission. We believe
that the Council should improve the Commission’s
ability to play its role as a consultative body through
more frequent use of its services, in particular
in connection with providing advice, awarenessraising and resource-mobilization. Moreover, such
a comprehensive approach should also be used when
considering questions relating to peacebuilding through
the development of an integrated strategy in several
areas, including security, development and human
rights, as well as gender equality and the rule of law.

The repeated cycles of violence in Africa, despite
the considerable efforts of regional actors and the
United Nations, are the result of a lack of critical
analysis of the underlying causes and triggers of
conflicts on the continent. As such, it is necessary to
adopt more effective conflict-prevention strategies that
take into due account the needs in terms of economic
and social developments in all peacebuilding activities.
As pointed out in the report, that necessarily requires
cooperation with regional actors such as the African
Development Bank and the Economic Commission for
Africa in order to respond more coherently to urgent
peacebuilding needs.
With regard to the Commission’s activities under
the Guinea-Bissau country-specific configuration, we
welcome the active role it has played in promoting
coherent regional support for the efforts undertaken by
the Guinea-Bissau authorities in accordance with the
most pressing national priorities. Those priorities were
set out by the Government of Guinea-Bissau in March
2015 at Brussels in the context of the international
donors conference. They include a 10-year national
development strategy that focuses on improving
governance and access to basic services, the elimination
of poverty and the promotion of economic prospects.
Senegal, a long-standing strategic partner of GuineaBissau, did not fail to contribute to the success of that
event, where pledges totaled €1.2 billion. However, the
political tensions that arose in August slowed the efforts
of Guinea-Bissau’s partners. Through the mediation
efforts of the Economic Community of West African
States and the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau, as well as the efforts of
the international community, we have hope that the
situation in that friendly country will improve further.

There should be greater cooperation between the
Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Commission,
as called for at its 2015 annual session, during which
participants strongly warned against the dangers of a
fragmented financing system that lacked the necessary
resources. As such, to fill the gaps it will be necessary
to strengthen partnerships with international financial
institutions, not only for peacebuilding projects but also
for the development of future development strategies.
In addition, for peace to be lasting the restoration
of security must go hand in hand with economic
development. Lessons learned from the peacebuilding
process, in particular in Africa, give us the full
measure of that dimension. Countries undergoing
the peacebuilding process need resources to finance
wealth- and job-creation projects for young people and
women, who play a key role in economic and social
recovery efforts. However, according to the report of
the Advisory Group of Experts, the Peacebuilding Fund
is just not sufficient to produce the expected impact on

16-120073/21

A/70/PV.94

its own, and it is far from having attained its goal of
serving as the catalyst for a stream of greater resources
from other sources.
My delegation also strongly supports the
recommendation of the Advisory Group of Experts to
invite the General Assembly to consider the possibility
of adopting measures to ensure that core funding
corresponding to $100 million, or about a symbolic 1 per
cent of the value of all United Nations peacekeeping
operations budgets, is allocated to peacebuilding
annually from assessed contributions under the budget
of the Organization.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): I welcome the convening of this meeting
to discuss the most recent reports on the current
peacebuilding architecture of the United Nations. This
meeting comes at a key moment, as it coincides with
the adoption of resolution 70/262, on the review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture.
Spain fully aligns itself with the statement made by
the delegation of the European Union (see A/70/PV.93),
but would like to make several remarks in our national
capacity.
We believe that the reasons that led to the
establishment of the peacebuilding architecture are more
valid today than ever. On certain occasions — on too
many occasions — countries that recently experienced
conflict have slid back into instability and violence.
Peacebuilding is a long-term undertaking that requires
sustained effort throughout the entire cycle of conflict.
Despite enabling us to maintain our focus on situations
and needs that might otherwise be neglected, we have
not made sufficient use of those tools, which explains
their failure to reach their full potential. Overcoming
those limits is the purpose of the current review.
We welcome the report (A/70/714) describing the
most salient activities carried out by the Peacebuilding
Commission during 2015. We also welcome the
report (A/70/715) of the Secretary-General on the
Peacebuilding Fund, which warns us of the paradox of
the disconnection between ambitions and results, on the
one hand, and resources, on the other. The new review
of the peacebuilding architecture being completed
now has allowed for the identification of certain key
elements to guide strategies and activities in support of
peacebuilding processes with a view to improving their
effectiveness, on the basis of experience and lessons
learned in a variety of countries. It seems to us that
4/21

27/04/2016

this practical and operational approach is particularly
correct.
We would urge that synergies and complementarities
between this review and those covering peace operations
and women and peace and security be maximized. We
must take advantage of the opportunity provided by the
three reviews to be sure that they all play a greater role
in fostering the necessary political commitment among
member countries, promoting consistency, both within
and beyond the United Nations system, and mobilizing
resources. We also have to take into account the new
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution
70/1). Unlike the Millennium Development Goals,
the 2030 Agenda was designed to be a transformative
vision for the entire international community. For
the first time, an international development agenda
includes a goal, in this case Goal 16, that addresses the
challenges of politics, peace, security, governance and
justice — because none of the least-developed countries
that have been affected by conflict has achieved a single
Millennium Development Goal. Without development
and poverty eradication, there is no sustainable peace.
In the Security Council’s open debate on
peacebuilding on 23 February (see S/PV.7629), Spain
emphasized that what we need now is a changed
mindset in the organizational culture of the United
Nations and greater coherence in the system, capable of
strengthening a country’s sense of national ownership
on the ground as well as its capacity for development.
My delegation also stressed the importance of
improving prevention and mediation and strengthening
cooperation with regional and subregional actors.
In Spain’s view, a key element to achieving a
peaceful society is working on conflict prevention in
its early stages. Moments of crisis and outbreaks of
violence are often symptoms of long-term tensions.
As the European Union has pointed out, in many
cases sustaining peace equals conflict prevention. The
United Nations system should make it a priority to help
countries establish effective and inclusive mechanisms
and institutions that will enable them to address the
underlying socioeconomic and political causes, as well
as the triggers of violent conflict. Such mechanisms
should cover issues related to strengthening the rule of
law, eradicating poverty, fostering social development
and respect for democracy, and promoting and
protecting human rights. Peace is not just an end in
itself; it also brings prosperity.
16-12007

27/04/2016

Preventive diplomacy is an important tool in
achieving sustainable peace, and we should view
collaboration with other international organizations
in that manner, particularly those in Africa, not just in
order to improve coherence and coordination between
our strategies and actions, but also to take better
advantage of their understanding of the local context. In
order to do that, the Security Council should recapture
the spirit of Chapters VI and VII of the Charter of the
United Nations. For such preventive efforts we should
also refine our early-warning and conflict-analysis
systems, together with those already in existence, so as
to enable us to share information, take advantage of and
transfer capabilities, and replicate good experiences for
anticipating conflicts. The good offices of the SecretaryGeneral and his responsibility, in accordance with his
mandate, to draw the Council’s attention to situations
that threaten international peace and security, are other
important tools in that regard.
Secondly, it is essential to emphasize the prominent
role that women should play at every stage of
peacebuilding. We were pleased to see that the review
(A/69/968) recognizes the importance of strengthening
the gender aspect and women’s participation in peace
processes from their early stages. In that regard,
Spain, as co-Chair with the United Kingdom, has
been promoting the creation of an informal Security
Council group on women and peace and security, with
the aim of addressing that issue comprehensively,
studying prevention and recovery, as well as protection
and participation.
Regarding the importance of the Peacebuilding
Commission as an advisory and evaluative body to
both the Security Council and the General Assembly,
the Commission can play a crucial unifying role
in bridging the gaps and compartments that divide
security, development and human rights commitments.
The proposed reforms of the Commission’s working
methods and functions should strengthen its role as a
tool useful to the Council in dealing with situations that
no longer qualify as crises but are still fragile and in
need of specific and sustained attention, or when the
Council has to address problems with implementing
missions’ peacebuilding mandates or with drawing
down and terminating missions. For that, we could also
increase participation by the Chairs of the Peacebuilding
Commission’s country-specific configurations in
Security Council consultations.

A/70/PV.94

Similarly, the United Nations should integrate the
work of the Security Council, the Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council at Headquarters in order
to enable them to lead more effectively on the ground. In
the field, we can enhance the role of the country teams
and their resident coordinators, who should be trained
in managing and planning for building and sustaining
peace. The fact that the Commission has no presence
on the ground makes that even more essential. I would
also like to emphasize the importance of promoting
and concretizing the partnerships between the United
Nations, national Governments and other stakeholders,
including civil-society organizations, that are supposed
to play a key role in peacebuilding.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
commitment of Spain, as a major donor to the
Peacebuilding Fund and a member of the Commission’s
Organizational Committee, to continuing to work with
as many countries as possible in order to maximize the
contribution of the United Nations system generally,
and the Peacebuilding Commission in particular, to
peacebuilding processes — something that seems to be
in such short supply — on the basis of resolution 70/262,
whose adoption we welcomed today. In that regard,
Spain intends to resume its voluntary contributions to
the Fund with the intention of establishing itself as one
of the top 10 donors, proof of our commitment to the
United Nations peacebuilding system.
Mr. Lal (India): This year’s annual discussion of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the Peacebuilding
Fund is being held a decade after their establishment as
part of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture in
the wake of the landmark 2005 World Summit. It has also
given us an opportunity for a comprehensive review of
the peacebuilding architecture’s impact in terms of the
role that it was expected to perform, particularly its role
in facilitating countries’ successful transition in postconflict situations and in contributing to the avoidance
of any relapse into conflict. We are also meeting only
months after the landmark adoption of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1), designed
to be a guide in the collective global effort to build
peaceful, secure and prosperous societies. The 2030
Agenda and its Sustainable Development Goals also
highlight the importance of the development dimension
and the cross-cutting nature of the issues involved in
building and maintaining peace.
We welcome the adoption today of comprehensive
resolutions on the review of the peacebuilding

16-120075/21

A/70/PV.94

architecture by both the General Assembly and the
Security Council (resolutions 70/262 and 2282 (2016),
respectively), and we appreciate the work that went
into the preparation of the report of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture (see A/69/968) for that major exercise. The
resolution clearly outlines the complexity of the issues
involved in sustaining peace. We especially welcome
the emphasis given to the importance of sustainable
development, economic growth and increased funding
for promoting peacebuilding efforts.
The Peacebuilding Commission, the Fund and the
Peacebuilding Support Office were designed to address
the significant gaps identified in existing strategies
for conflict prevention over the short and the longer
term. The peacebuilding architecture was intended to
provide international support for mobilizing financial
and technical resources, in particular for assisting
peacebuilding efforts. The Commission introduced
a much-needed focus on the development dimension
into the discourse on how to achieve lasting peace and
security. However, the record of the Peacebuilding
Commission’s effectiveness during its 10-year existence
has been mixed at best. It has succeeded in highlighting
the crucial importance of peacebuilding when conflicts
end and peacekeeping missions are drawn down, and
in providing some assistance in specific situations
relating to improving capacities for institution-building,
electoral reforms and so forth. The Ebola outbreak
also provided a new context for the PBC’s efforts. But
the impact of its peacebuilding efforts is still limited,
primarily because of its very inadequate funding and
less-than-optimum coordination with other United
Nations bodies, including the Security Council. It is
quite clear that those challenges can be overcome only
if there is genuine political will among those who are
able to contribute in that regard.
The changing nature of conflicts is affecting the
complexity of peacebuilding, especially in its tasks of
avoiding relapses into conflict and building sustaining
peace. While it is increasingly clear that instability in
one part of the world can affect security and economic
prospects even in far distant places, the focus on
peacebuilding continues to be limited. That must be
remedied. In a globalized world, peoples’ destinies are
interlinked, and conflicts present common challenges.
Their solutions also require collective responses. The
funds available for peacebuilding continue to be a
fraction of what is available for peacekeeping activities
6/21

27/04/2016

and are even declining. Only more predictable and
sustainable financing will help the Peacebuilding
Commission to be more effective.
While we recognize the relevance of greater
coherence and coordination within the United Nations
system and beyond, the subject should be carefully
examined, in view of the various responsibilities, tasks
and priorities involved. If peacebuilding efforts are to be
sustainable, they must be aligned with national priorities.
The role of women and young people in peacebuilding,
including in decision-making, is important. Skills
development and job creation are crucial to maintaining
peace and preventing relapses into conflict. We also
recognize the importance of cooperation with regional
organizations in peacebuilding efforts.
With its unique membership and interaction with
other organs, including the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council,
the Peacebuilding Commission can play an important
role in sustaining peacebuilding over the longer term.
As a member of the Commission since its inception,
India stands ready to help strengthen the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture.
Mr. Dalo (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): The
Argentine delegation is taking the floor in this debate
to express its approbation of today’s joint adoption
by the Security Council and the General Assembly of
substantively the same resolution on the review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture (resolutions
2282 (2016) and 70/262, respectively). We know that
the work on the text has been painstaking and reflects
a balance among the various positions of individual
countries and groups in the negotiations, while laying
a foundation for further progress on the issue in
future. My country would like to reiterate its thanks
to the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
Peacebuilding Architecture, chaired by Ambassador
Gert Rosenthal, for its efforts to identify and describe
peacebuilding’s challenges, which to a large degree
are addressed in the resolution. We would also like to
thank the facilitators, the Permanent Representatives of
Angola and Australia and their teams, for their efforts.
Argentina supports the concept of “sustaining
peace” as defined in the resolution, understood as a
continuous process involving the peacebuilding system
not only in the post-conflict stage but also before, during
and after conflicts, based on a comprehensive approach
that takes into account the importance of addressing the
16-12007

27/04/2016

A/70/PV.94

Another point that we would like to emphasize
about today’s resolution is its insistence on the need
for coordination among the principal organs of the
United Nations, avoiding isolated actions in silos and
working towards systemic coherence in peacebuilding
strategies, in an approach that ensures inclusive national
ownership with the participation of all relevant national
stakeholders, particularly civil society, and that takes
into account the importance of women’s leadership and
participation in conflict prevention and peacebuilding.

Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank the President for
convening this important joint debate on the report
of the Peacebuilding Commission (A/70/714) and the
Secretary-General’s report on the Peacebuilding Fund
(A/70/715). I would also like to thank my colleague
Olof Skoog, Permanent Representative of Sweden
and outgoing Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), for his detailed and edifying briefing this
morning (see A/70/PV.93). I commend him once again
for the exceptional professionalism and skill that he
showed during his stewardship of the Commission.
And while I have had the opportunity to do so on other
occasions, I would be remiss if I did not congratulate
the Permanent Representative of Kenya, Ambassador
Macharia Kamau, on his new responsibilities and
wish him resounding success for his tenure. I would
also like to commend the outstanding work of the
co-facilitators, the Ambassadors of Angola and
Australia, in conducting the negotiations leading up
to this morning’s adoption of resolution 70/262, on the
review of the peacebuilding architecture.

One aspect of the resolution where we would have
preferred to see a firmer commitment on the part of
Member States is the financing of peacebuilding
activities. In that regard, we stress how important it is
to be able to rely on predictable and sustainable funding
for such activities, and we reiterate our support for the
recommendation of the Advisory Group of Experts
that about $100 million should be allocated annually to
the Peacebuilding Fund from the contributions to the
Organization’s budget. That is the minimum financial
commitment that we should be willing to offer, and
even that is insufficient considering the magnitude
of peacebuilding’s tasks. We need only compare the
insignificance of that contribution to conflict prevention
and peacebuilding to the hundreds of billions of dollars
that the world spends on military expenditures.

Without going into the details of the report, I
would like to briefly echo some of its salient elements.
First, regarding the principle of national ownership, at
the risk of repeating myself, I would like to reiterate
how important it is to ensure national ownership of
the peacebuilding process by the countries benefiting
from it and the ongoing commitment of the countries
that receive peacebuilding support. Above all, we
should ensure that there is consultation and close
cooperation between international partners and
national Governments, along with coordination of the
efforts of those international partners, particularly in
the area of resource mobilization. We should remember
that identifying priority areas is the responsibility of
national and local authorities and that the Commission’s
role should be limited to one of support.

Argentina welcomes the adoption of today’s
resolution and encourages Member States to continue
to work to improve the peacebuilding architecture in
anticipation of the upcoming high-level meeting on the
subject to be held during the seventy-second session of
the Assembly, at which it will analyse the efforts and
the opportunities to strengthen our work on sustainable
security. We hope that this path will continue helping us
to give the Organization increasingly effective tools for
promoting the peace and development of our peoples.

Still with regard to national ownership, my
delegation believes that ownership on a single level is
not enough but must extend beyond that to the local,
regional and continental levels, the three levels of
ownership that are critical to implementing a sustainable
peace process. Local, national, regional and continental
ownership not only strengthens the legitimacy of the
programmes’ execution but also helps to ensure the
sustainability of national capacity as a whole once a
peacekeeping operation has ended.

root causes of such conflicts by, among other things,
strengthening the rule of law, promoting sustained and
sustainable economic growth, eradicating poverty,
fostering social development and promoting democracy
and respect for human rights. The concept of “sustaining
peace” is thereby linked to the Organization’s new and
fundamental emphasis on prevention, an element that
links the peacebuilding review to the other two recent
peace and security reviews carried out in parallel,
namely, those on peacekeeping operations and on
women and peace and security.

16-120077/21

A/70/PV.94

Secondly, with regard to the regional aspects
of peacebuilding, I would like to emphasize the
importance of the regional dimension. As the Assembly
is aware, the Commission is particularly well placed
to promote greater harmony between the subregional,
regional, continental and international aspects of a
post-conflict response. The Commission’s experience
in Burundi has shown that improved regional and
subregional coherence is a key supporting factor for
peacebuilding efforts.
Integrating regional and subregional perspectives
into the work of the Commission continues to be crucial.
In fact, many countries may prefer to receive help and
advice from peer nations in their own region, and
regional organizations may be better placed to intervene
at timely moments and help with decision-making in
arriving at sustainable solutions to very sensitive issues.
We welcome the fact that during the period covered by
the report, the Commission stressed the importance
of further strengthening regional cohereпсе, which is
vital in helping countries to maintain peace and avoid
relapses into conflict. While at times we have witnessed
differences in views of the political situation in Burundi
between our region, the African Union and New York,
we nonetheless commend this dynamic approach to
the regional dimension, which must be strengthened,
maintained and above all sustained.
Thirdly, regarding cooperation between the
Commission, the General Assembly and the Security
Council, my delegation believes that cooperation
between the Commission and the three main organs
of the United Nations remains crucial and should be
further strengthened. The informal dialogues organized
jointly by the President of the Security Council and
the Chair of the Commission, the periodic assessment
meetings at the expert level and the formal briefings
to the Council on the countries on its agenda and on
thematic issues have been extremely useful.
In the interests of strengthening relations between
the Commission and the Security Council, in future the
Council should consider inviting the Chairs of countryspecific configurations to Council briefings on matters
concerning countries on the Commission’s agenda.
We believe that their contributions, in addition to the
Secretariat’s briefings, would be very useful to Member
States in their stance on the issues. There can be no
doubt whatever that informal bilateral interactions with
the Security Council would help the PBC to maximize
and capitalize on its advisory role and to come up with
8/21

27/04/2016

and share ideas that could well be reflected in Security
Council resolutions.
Fourthly, with regard to recognition of the vital
issue of gender equality in cooperative activities
with countries, my delegation believes that women’s
participation in political life in the post-conflict period
and the gender-specific aspects of peacebuilding
deserve sustained focus and unwavering commitment.
In order to get off to a good start, women should be able
to participate in peace negotiations and thereby be part
of the post-conflict transition process. We support and
welcome the debate that began last year on formulating
a strategy that takes into account the importance of
ensuring parity in cooperative activities with countries
on the PBC’s agenda. Among other things, such a
strategy would enable the Commission to strengthen
and concretize its commitments to gender equality,
including those made in its declaration on women’s
economic empowerment for peacebuilding, adopted in
2013, and thereby to naturally ensure greater structural
integration of the gender equality issue into its work.
Fifthly, regarding the fight against Ebola, we
welcome the fact that the Commission has worked to
conduct an information campaign in New York on the
potential long-term effects of the Ebola crisis on peace,
stability, social cohesion and economic well-being in
the affected countries. The resolute commitment of
Member States to collective action from the beginning
of the epidemic showed that the Commission is capable
of making use of its political assets. In short, we can say
that the Commission’s involvement in the fight against
Ebola as soon as it first appeared represents a shared
success and a good experience that in future will enable
us to deal effectively with similar cases that might arise
anywhere in the world.
Sixthly, concerning the subject of new crosscutting issues, my delegation would like to emphasize
the active role that young people can and do play in
their countries. Very often, and this is certainly the
case in Burundi, unemployed young people are likely to
be manipulated and exploited by politicians for purely
political ends. Such underemployed young people,
often left to their own devices, resort to indiscriminate
violence under internal and external pressures aimed at
destabilizing fragile countries that have barely emerged
from conflict. We should do everything possible to
ensure that young people can find alternatives to
violence. That can be done only by supporting the
private sector in creating jobs that will significantly
16-12007

27/04/2016

reduce unemployment in the countries concerned.
To that end, we should encourage the establishment
of public-private partnerships through which the
business world can support efforts to enable countries
emerging from conflict to launch social and economic
reconstruction that is not vulnerable to the political
tensions that result in, for example, the exploitation of
natural resources, a lack of job creation, land disputes
and attempts at regime change by external actors.
Turning to the Peacebuilding Fund, it is extremely
regrettable to learn that it has been underfinanced for
two years in a row. That resource deficit has a negative
effect on the Commission’s projects and programmes
for its recipients. The report’s recommendations
concerning the need for sufficient and predictable
funding deserve particular attention from Member
States, particularly donor States.
I would like to conclude by commending the work
of the Peacebuilding Support Office under the able
leadership of Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco and his
team, to whom we once again reiterate our full support.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland welcomes today’s unanimous adoption
of resolution 70/262, on the review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture. Today’s adoption
highlights our collective commitment to a stronger and
more comprehensive vision of peacebuilding. Over the
past decade, substantive progress has been made in
peacebuilding, with regard to both the concept itself
and the related institutions and activities. Among the
many important achievements of the resolution, my
delegation would like to highlight five.
First, we welcome the notion of “sustaining
peace”, meaning preserving peace over time, and
thereby the inclusion of a more holistic perspective
of peacebuilding, which includes efforts aimed at
conflict prevention. This reflects one of the key
recommendations of the review and clearly strengthens
the understanding that peacebuilding is relevant before,
during and after armed conflicts. Switzerland remains
convinced that the peacebuilding architecture can and
should contribute to preventing relapses into armed
conflict, and we fully support the recognition of this
aspect in today’s resolution.
Secondly, the resolution renews and fosters our
collective commitment to supporting and further
strengthening coordination, coherence and cooperation
within the United Nations and regional and international

A/70/PV.94

actors, and acknowledges the role of civil society.
While this is not a new endeavour, the resolution
provides a solid foundation for helping to ensure this
key condition for the success of preventive measures
and peacebuilding.
Thirdly, the resolution highlights the importance
of a comprehensive approach to transitional justice
in peacebuilding by recognizing that peace, poverty
reduction and the promotion of good governance may
be achieved only with justice and the rule of law.
Fourthly, Switzerland welcomes the call for more
predictable financing of peacebuilding activities.
We look forward to studying the forthcoming
recommendations by the Secretary-General with a view
to increasing the overall predictability and availability
of funding for peacebuilding.
Fifthly, my delegation is convinced of the particular
merit of the Peacebuilding Commission and its country
configurations to address specific situations. We
look forward to continuing our shared reflection on
the diversification of working methods and remain
convinced that a strong peacebuilding architecture
should remain the backbone of the United Nations
peacebuilding efforts.
While the resolution adopted today represents a solid
framework and vision for the future of peacebuilding,
our collective efforts in building peace will need to be
pursued with vigour and unity of effort. Switzerland
is pleased to note today’s strong commitment of
the General Assembly to further strengthen the
peacebuilding architecture, and we very much remain
committed to contributing in future to that end.
Mr. Heen (Nigeria): On behalf of the Nigerian
delegation, I thank the President of the General
Assembly for convening this important joint debate
on the annual report of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) (A/70/714) and the Secretary-General’s report
on the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) (A/70/715). I would
also like to thank Mr. Macharia Kamau, Permanent
Representative of Kenya, Chair of the PBC, for his
statement, which provided fresh perspectives on the
activities of the Commission. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Olof Skoog, Permanent Representative of
Sweden and former Chair of the PBC, for his able and
committed leadership during his tenure. My delegation
would further like to express profound appreciation to
the Chairs of the various country-specific configurations
and Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant Secretary-

16-120079/21

A/70/PV.94

General for Peacebuilding Support, for their untiring
efforts in channelling assistance to countries emerging
from conflict.
My delegation welcomes the concurrent adoption of
resolution 70/262 and Security Council resolution 2282
(2016), on the review of the peacebuilding architecture,
and in this regard, commends the Permanent
Representatives of Angola and Australia for effectively
co-facilitating the intergovernmental process that
culminated in the adoption of these resolutions.
Nigeria associates itself with the statements made
by the representative of Sierra Leone on behalf of
the PBC African caucus, and by the representative of
Bangladesh on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
(see A/70/PV.93). Nonetheless, I would like to
underscore a few points of interest.
While the reports before us provide a comprehensive
overview of the substantive activities of the PBC
and the PBF, it is vital to note that developments
during the reporting period in some countries on
the PBC agenda remain a cause for concern. The
situation in these countries highlights the fact that
peacebuilding is not a linear, progressive process, but
a multidimensional approach, encompassing initiatives
that must proactively engender sustainable peace. In
this context, my delegation would like to reiterate the
following points.
First, when Nigeria convened an open debate on
preventive diplomacy at the Security Council some
years ago (see S/PV.6360), we were motivated by the
concern that the nature of conflict was outpacing
our collective ability to respond effectively to it. Ten
years after the establishment of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, post-conflict peacebuilding
remains a fragile undertaking, with mixed results.
While peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict
is indeed necessary, it cannot be an effective long-term
strategy or solution. We believe that early intervention
before simmering crises erupt into conflict is a critical
peacebuilding strategy that must be embraced. We
also believe that the global foresight of drawing up
structural peacebuilding initiatives, encouragement
in favour of institution-building, good governance,
respect for democratic institutions, human rights,
delivery of humanitarian assistance, as well as the
socioeconomic empowerment of fledging States and
regions, are essential prerequisites for a peacebuilding
strategy to be effective. That is why we support the
10/21

27/04/2016

simultaneous adoption of the resolution on the review
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture, which
emphasizes the centrality of the preventive approach
to peacebuilding.
Secondly, peacebuilding is essentially about
enhancing the capacity of affected countries and
regions to undertake the challenges of peacebuilding on
their own. This is in line with the principle of national
ownership, which is fundamental to discussions on
peacebuilding. The PBC must therefore ensure that its
engagement with the countries on the agenda results
in strengthening the capacity of these countries to
take up the tasks of peacebuilding on their own. In
addition, the principle of inclusivity, which seeks to
enhance women’s empowerment and participation and
the role of young people in fragile societies, must be
given primacy in the peacebuilding process. We believe
that the resolution adopted today will facilitate the
achievement of these goals.
Furthermore, lessons from the field have also
shown that due to the cross-cutting nature of the issues,
especially the interconnectedness and commonality
of challenges and opportunities within regions, the
PBC must adopt a regional approach by strengthening
collaboration with relevant regional organizations and
entities, such as, inter alia, the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Mano River Union, as a pragmatic engagement tool
for dealing with crises, as was seen in the recent fight
against the Ebola virus disease in West Africa.
Nigeria therefore emphasizes the need for increased
collaboration between the United Nations and regional
organizations in the formulation and implementation
of post-conflict peacebuilding activities. That is the
case because only actors that understand the root
causes of conflicts can undertake appropriate efforts to
avert any relapse into conflict. We therefore strongly
advocate that effective peace initiatives should be
nationally owned and driven, regionally anchored and
internationally supported.
Thirdly, the commitment of individual and
collective activities of the PBC must go beyond rhetoric
and be supportive and results-oriented, with special
focus placed on concrete contributions. It should be
reflected in financial contributions, provision for
material or technical contributions or the sharing of
experiences. While developing countries may not be
able to provide significant financial contributions,
16-12007

27/04/2016

they may have a tremendous wealth of experience to
share. In this regard, the overarching aim of the PBC
should be to reflect on how best to systematically
utilize all the accumulated lessons learned in the area
of peacebuilding in the countries on their agenda.
Fourthly, the PBC should intensify its efforts
to strengthen inter-institutional cooperation and
partnership with all relevant stakeholders, including
the principal organs of the United Nations. In this
regard, my delegation further welcomes the adoption
of the resolution on the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, which highlights the
importance of strengthening the PBC’s advisory role
with respect to the Security Council as well as in
advancing a coherent approach to multidimensional
peacebuilding mandates. In addition, forging coherence
and complementarity of action and improving
coordination of actors would avoid overlapping of
actions or duplication of efforts. It would further
ensure greater clarity of purpose, responsibility
and accountability.
There can be no meaningful peacebuilding
without funding, as funding is key to achieving and
implementing the critical peacebuilding mandate. That
is why we attach great importance to the work of the
Peacebuilding Fund. We believe that the commitment of
Member States should be reflected in their willingness
to make financial contributions, share their experiences
and provide technical support. My delegation commends
the steps taken by the Peacebuilding Support Office to
continually improve the efficiency and effectiveness of
the Peacebuilding Fund.
The 2015 PBF high-level stakeholders meeting was
no doubt a great success. However, this laudable effort
must be complemented by exploring other options for
longer-term and predictable financing. We commend
Member States and other donors for their invaluable
contributions. We also urge other donors, especially
in the private sector, to make sure their contributions
engender the sustenance of global peace and security.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Nigeria’s
commitment to peacebuilding activities. It is our fervent
hope that this debate will provide new insights and
impetus for enhancing post-conflict peacebuilding and
conflict-prevention activities, as we look forward to the
concrete implementation of the resolution on the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture adopted today.

A/70/PV.94

Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
thanks the Permanent Representatives of Angola and
Australia for conducting negotiations that led us to adopt
the comprehensive and consensual resolution 70/262, on
the United Nations peace and security architecture. We
also thank the Chairs of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) for the report on the activities of the Commission
(A/70/714) and the Secretary-General for his report on
the Peacebuilding Fund (A/70/715).
Belgium fully supports the statement made by the
observer of the European Union (see A/70/PV.93). In our
national capacity, we wish to emphasize the following.
Priority should be given to conflict prevention. The
fact that the resolution focuses on the sustainability of
peace, rather than preventing relapse in post-conflict
countries, as was the case in the past, is a step forward
that we should welcome. If peacebuilding processes are
to succeed, it is essential that they be subject to inclusive
national ownership. In other words, they should involve
both the Government and the opposition as well as civil
society, including women’s and youth organizations.
The Secretary-General has on many occasions stressed
that massive and repeated violations of human rights
are the warning signs of crisis and conflict. The
peacebuilding process must therefore systematically
incorporate respect and promotion of human rights.
Peacebuilding is above all a political process in
which the political will of the Government in question
plays a decisive role, and international partners
play a supporting role. The concept of “compact”
detailing the common objectives of the country and
its international partners illustrates this relationship.
The Peacebuilding Commission can therefore play
an important role in transition situations, whether
they be political transitions — which are often atrisk periods — or transitions following the scheduled
departure of a peacekeeping operation.
The report of the Peacebuilding Commission
rightly emphasizes the importance of the consolidation
of political, administrative and judicial institutions in
the countries concerned. Particular importance should
also be given to demobilization, disarmament and
reintegration and to security-sector reform, on the one
hand, and to economic governance, the rebuilding of
tax administrations, the fight against corruption and
illicit financial flows and a rational use of natural
resources for the benefit of the entire population, on
the other hand.

16-1200711/21

A/70/PV.94

Belgium has decided to focus its development
assistance on the least developed countries and
countries in fragile situations. We are part of the
country-specific configurations for the Central African
Republic, Burundi and, more recently, Guinea, which
has otherwise become a bilateral cooperation partner
of my country. Work undertaken in the framework of
the PBC’s country-specific configurations ensures
close contact with the reality on the ground and the
characteristics of each country on the agenda. It is a
format that also allows for the participation of various
development partners. This tailored approach is worth
retaining, even if improvements could be made to the
procedures and composition of the configurations. The
contribution of country configurations to the Security
Council’s thinking when it takes up issues relevant to
the PBC needs to become more systematic.
The Peacebuilding Fund has made it possible to
quickly finance urgent action in support of political
efforts, and its value added is widely recognized.
However, Belgium calls for peacebuilding and the
management of fragile situations becoming an essential
and integral part of cooperation programmes with
international partners in countries in fragile situations,
whether these partners be the States Members of the
United Nations working together, the World Bank,
regional banks, or regional and bilateral donors.
Indeed, the efforts aimed at peacebuilding go
well beyond the United Nations, and synergies must
be organized if we are to effectively reach our goals.
As an example, I would mention the International
Dialogue on Peacebuilding and Statebuilding, whose
fifth meeting was recently held in Stockholm, and the
New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States and the
cooperation initiative among fragile countries of the
Group of Seven Plus.
Belgium welcomes the adoption of the resolution
on the peace and security architecture and assures the
international community of its full implementation.
Mr. Morales López (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank Ambassador Olof
Skoog, Permanent Representative of Sweden and
outgoing Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, and
acknowledge him for his work. Similarly, I commend
the efforts of Ambassador Macharia Kamau, Permanent
Representative of Kenya and current Chair of the
Commission. We also welcome the submission of the
report of the Peacebuilding Commission (A/70/714) and
12/21

27/04/2016

the report of the Peacebuilding Fund (A/70/715) and we
reaffirm our support and commitment as members of
the Commission.
The year 2015 was a year of particular importance
for the future of peacebuilding and the Peacebuilding
Commission, especially considering the five-year
review of the peacebuilding architecture and today’s
adoption of resolution 70/262. I welcome the resolution
we adopted simultaneously in the General Assembly
and the Security Council (resolution 2282 (2016)) and
recognize the work done during the negotiations by
the co-facilitators, the Permanent Representatives of
Angola and Australia. This adoption is an important
step towards strengthening the peacebuilding work
of the United Nations work and, in particular, of the
Commission. The resolution strengthens anew the path
towards a unified and consistent vision of peacebuilding
in which all stages of conflict require attention. In this
approach, prevention is crucial to avoiding conflict and
relapse and their human and economic costs, and that is
why it should be a key task in the Commission’s work.
With regard to the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission and its work in 2015, the progress made
in the diversification of the Commission’s working
methods was important, and we welcome it. Let me
reiterate Colombia’s readiness to work with the Chair
of the Commission and the other members in order
to improve these methods. Colombia believes that
the Commission must become a valuable platform
for all countries that seek its recommendations and
support. In this regard, we welcome the idea of ​​
a
more flexible Commission, which goes beyond the
concept of configurations without losing its countryspecific focus.
Colombia considers it essential to continue to
address the needs for consistency among peacebuilding
policies and activities. With the first annual session of
the Commission held in 2014, representative progress
was made in identifying areas where coordinated work
can be achieved. In this regard, we wish to highlight the
joint work of the Commission with the Peacebuilding
Support Office, under the leadership of Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco, and with the Peacebuilding Fund.
The harmonization of their complementary roles and
strategies with a view to increasing cooperation has
generated visible progress in countries that have
received support.
16-12007

27/04/2016

The Commission has proved to be an inclusive
platform that brings together the countries concerned,
regional partners, international financial institutions
and regional and subregional organizations. In this
sense, the recent meetings of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which focused on the regional dimension
of peacebuilding, are activities that remind us of
and reinforce the importance of the Commission’s
convening power.
We cannot forget that the peacebuilding efforts
require the mobilization of predictable financial,
technical and political support in the short, medium and
long terms. The Commission is the most appropriate
platform to help develop and implement national
strategies for resource mobilization for peacebuilding
and to advocate for their timely deployment. In this
connection, the resolution welcomes the valuable work
of the Peacebuilding Fund and reaffirms the idea that the
Fund provides quick and flexible responses that serve
as a catalyst to conflict-affected countries. To achieve
sufficient funds we must ensure that the financing of
the Fund is sustained and predictable.
In order to achieve voluntary contributions to the
Fund and improve the predictability of funding, we
welcome the Peacebuilding Fund donors conference,
which will be held during the opening of the seventyfirst session of the General Assembly. Colombia, as a
country that has been both a donor and has received
resources from the Fund, hopes that there is substantial
participation in the conference and that financing for
the Fund increases.
Colombia also highlights the role that women
play in the prevention and resolution of conflicts
and in peacebuilding. We must continue to promote
the integration of gender issues in the work of the
Commission and the Fund. At this point, I wish to
underscore the launching of the development of the
gender strategy in the Peacebuilding Commission,
which integrates the work on gender issues and moves
women’s empowerment forward on matters of peace,
the economy and access to security and justice.
This improves quality of life, strengthens society’s
confidence in the processes and fosters economic
growth. Much remains to be done in these areas.
The nations that know how difficult it is to achieve
peace know that the road ahead is not easy, but we firmly
believe that achieving peace is possible. My country,
Colombia, has set in motion processes and innovative

A/70/PV.94

policy actions in pursuit of sustainable peace, with
the invaluable support of the international community
and the United Nations. After 50 years of conflict, my
country hopes to become one of the success stories in
achieving peace and to support those who are on this
arduous path.
Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): Portugal aligns itself
with the statement delivered this morning by the
observer of the European Union (see A/70/PV.93). We
would just like to add some additional remarks in our
national capacity
I thank the President for convening this meeting
this year, which is of particular importance given the
review of the peacekeeping architecture. The review
is widely seen as a key challenge and opportunity to
renew the concept of peacebuilding and the way it is
embodied in the United Nations system. I seize this
opportunity to congratulate the co-facilitators of
this lengthy and inclusive process, the Ambassadors
of Angola, Mr. Gaspar Martins, and of Australia,
Ms. Gillian Bird, for its successful conclusion leading
to the adoption this morning of resolution 70/262, as
well as the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
the Peacebuilding Architecture and its Chair for their
comprehensive and very useful report (see A/69/968).
The concept of post-conflict peacebuilding,
described as “action to identify and support structures
which will tend to strengthen and solidify peace in order
to avoid a relapse into conflict” (A/50/480, para. 33), was
introduced in 1992 to the United Nations system and
remains more than ever valued. Its potential remains to
be better explored for the sake of sustainable peace and
development. As the nature of conflicts changes and the
new causes of conflicts and new threats to peace and
security constantly emerge, the United Nations must be
able to adapt and respond so as to remain relevant. In
this context, a review of the peacebuilding architecture
is critical, and the Advisory Group of Experts played
an important role in this regard. I would like to point
out that one of its key conclusions contained in the
report is that the concept of peacebuilding cannot be
confined to post-conflict situations; it requires a broad
and holistic approach.
The recognition of the concept of “sustaining peace”
is a move in the right direction towards promoting
and enabling the necessary actions to foster peaceful
outcomes at every stage of the conflict. Sustaining
peace calls for a new form of political engagement, a

16-1200713/21

A/70/PV.94

new strategic engagement and cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, in which the role and participation of
women and youth must be enhanced and promoted.
It also calls for increased communication and close
interlinkages between peacekeeping and political
missions, which must be part of a whole. We all
understand that the stakes and challenges we face are
huge, and we trust that resolution 70/262 will set the
stage for United Nations peacebuilding to better address
conflict prevention and resolution and to sustain peace.
The annual report of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) (A/70/714) adequately reflects the challenges
that it currently faces. Procedures and negotiations in
the PBC can be lengthy, sometimes leading to results
that fall short of what is necessary to address. We must
bear in mind that the PBC is and will be what Member
States want it to be, and I believe we all understand that
it is far from having fulfilled its potential, particularly
as a vehicle for strategic prevention in conflicts.
In this regard, I would just underline the need for
an enhanced use of the PBC’s advisory role and of the
interinstitutional dialogue and interaction between
various United Nations bodies, in particular between the
Security Council and the PBC. That would contribute to
turning the PBC into what it was originally intended to
be — a platform where relevant actors and stakeholders
can be heard and effectively cooperate. Nonetheless,
I would like to commend the PBC and its countryspecific configurations’ continuous work to ensure
peace wherever it is at stake. Portugal is an active
member of the Guinea-Bissau-specific configuration
of the PBC, and I would like to stress the important
role it has consistently played in supporting peace and
stability in the country and in keeping Guinea-Bissau
on the international agenda.
Concerning the Peacebuilding Fund, we strongly
support a diversification of funding sources and a
more predictable means of financing peacebuilding
initiatives and activities. This can be done by, among
other options, establishing public-private partnerships,
promoting the involvement of financial institutions,
development aid agencies and donations and, certainly,
as we discussed last year, mobilizing domestic revenues
in developing countries.
Mr. Espinoza Jara (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by expressing the appreciation of my
delegation to Ambassador Olof Skoog, outgoing Chair
14/21

27/04/2016

of the Peacebuilding Commission, for his leadership and
commitment at the head of the Commission during 2015.
His efforts to foster greater transparency, coordination
and flexibility in the work of the Commission are
highly valued and recognized by my delegation. We
also welcome Ambassador Macharia Kamau and wish
him success in his work as Chair of the Commission
this year. We also welcome the simultaneous adoption
by the General Assembly and the Security Council
of resolutions 70/262 and 2282 (2016), respectively,
on the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. We take this opportunity to commend the
leadership of the Permanent Representatives of Angola
and Australia in their capacity as co-facilitators of
the resolution.
The presentation and discussion of the reports
considered today (A/70/714 and A/70/715) and the
resolution allow us to reiterate the importance of
the work of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Peacebuilding Fund in supporting countries in
sustaining peace and contributing to their development.
The report of the Advisory Group of Experts on the
Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture (A/69/968)
acknowledges this and identified the remaining
challenges and put forth proposals to improve our work.
Among the challenges, we recognize the importance
of redoubling our efforts to ensure that the Commission
can make an effective contribution to intergovernmental
and operational consistency within the United Nations,
as well as increase the amount and predictability of
funding for peacebuilding. This is a real challenge
that we must resolve because, as the report of the
Peacebuilding Commission indicates, global needs for
peacekeeping are rising while donor commitments are
decreasing. The issue of predictable funding is crucial
because sustaining peace requires political, technical
and financial resources in the short, medium and long
term. We also recognize how important it is to involve
and ensure the participation and coordination of
regional and subregional organizations — be they of a
political or economic nature — as well as neighbouring
countries, in order to ensure a more consistent response
to the peacebuilding needs of each country.
A cross-cutting and extremely important issue is
the role of women in peacebuilding, as are our efforts to
prevent and resolve conflicts. Therefore, we welcome
the first phase of the development of the gender strategy
completed in 2015 with a view to mainstreaming the
gender dimension in the Commission’s work. This
16-12007

27/04/2016

first report concludes that the attention given to this
matter has been uneven; there is a hierarchy of degrees
of importance and the implementation of the agreed
commitments has not been systematic. We stress the
importance of stepping up our efforts and making
progress in the second phase of the strategy starting
with the results obtained in 2015.
In the same vein, we underscore that the
Peacebuilding Fund has earmarked more than 15 per
cent of its investments to support the empowerment of
women. However, we must stress the need to further
these efforts to reach the established target of using
15 per cent of all the funds administered by the United
Nations for peacebuilding projects that promote gender
equality, empower women and address their specific
needs in these contexts.
On the other hand, as pointed out by the report,
the need for a comprehensive and integrated approach
to peacebuilding requires greater coordination and
communication among the various actors to overcome
the existing fragmentation. We emphasize the
importance of sustained and fluid communication with
the Assembly and, in particular, the Security Council.
We call for a recognition of this complementarity and
a further exploration of the communication bodies.
We must make better use of the knowledge and
experience of the Commission as an intergovernmental
advisory body.
We call for work to be continued along the lines
of the resolution adopted today and the report of the
Advisory Group of Experts. We hope this exercise will
help strengthen and improve the existing institutions
and dynamics of the peacebuilding processes, which is
a responsibility that ultimately concerns us all.
Ms. Yánez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, my delegation would like to join previous
speakers in thanking Ambassador Olof Skoog and his
team for their work this year leading to the General
Assembly’s joint adoption, with the Security Council,
of today’s resolutions (70/262 and 2282 (2016),
respectively).
Eleven years ago, in December 2005, in order
to build bridges between the three components of
peace and security, development and human rights,
the General Assembly and the Security Council
adopted simultaneous resolutions (60/180 and 1645
(2005), respectively) providing for the creation of
three entities — the Peacebuilding Commission, the

A/70/PV.94

Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office. With that structure, they sought to strengthen
the institutional and structural capacity of the
Organization in order to support countries in transition
from violent conflict to sustainable peace. In that regard,
I would like to highlight the opinion of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture that the issue cannot be limited to those
three entities and that peacebuilding is a challenge that
involves action on the part of the entire United Nations
system and its members.
I would also like to mention some factors identified
in the report (see A/69/968) of the Advisory Group
of Experts that have an impact on the United Nations
institutional peacebuilding machinery, including a poor
understanding of the nature of peacebuilding; the walls
dividing the areas of responsibility of the principal
intergovernmental United Nations organs responsible
for helping to maintain sustainable peace — the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic
and Social Council; the fragmentation that exists
throughout the United Nations and the Secretariat and
between the latter and the rest of the Organization;
and the growing number of conflicts, which have also
become much more violent, in a complex and changing
environment characterized by a combination of new
political, economic, social and environmental aspects
that are fraught with inequalities and that introduce
new difficulties into efforts to resolve those conflicts.
Ecuador acknowledges the importance of today’s
adoption by the General Assembly and the Security
Council of a joint identical resolution on the review
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture.
It is particularly important that the resolution puts
forward a broader and more comprehensive approach
to sustaining peace, with new elements that create a
framework for revitalizing the organizational capacity
for generating more efficient and effective responses
to the challenges and complexity of the environment in
which current conflicts develop. It also strengthens the
Peacebuilding Commission’s fundamental role as an
advisory and liaison body between the three principal
intergovernmental organs. Ecuador hopes that the
Security Council will contribute to strengthening the
Commission’s advisory role from one of intention, by
instituting a permanent practice of regularly asking
for and making use of the Commission’s advice when
it reviews the mandates of its peacekeeping operations
and peacebuilding missions.

16-1200715/21

A/70/PV.94

We commend the work of the Advisory Group of
Experts for its conclusions and a number of the ongoing
recommendations in their report, entitled “Challenge
of sustaining peace”. Among its initiatives and
recommendations, Ecuador particularly appreciates the
gender aspect and its recognition of women’s leadership
and their fundamental role in the processes of building
and consolidating peace, as well as that of young
people; the emphasis on the need for close cooperation
and linked efforts between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations; the affirmation
that development is a vital goal in itself; and the
recognition of the United Nations system’s important
contribution to peacebuilding, particularly through
economic development and the eradication of poverty,
among other things. Today’s resolution is the result of
extensive analysis and debate and a thorough review of
the issues related to the peacebuilding architecture that
require greater attention and strengthening.
Lastly, we share fully the commitment expressed
in the 2005 World Summit Outcome to promoting and
strengthening the effectiveness of the Organization
through the implementation of its decisions and
resolutions. We hope that today’s resolution will
represent a turning point, after 10 years of structural
fragmentation and failed efforts, towards a crucial
redefinition and reorientation of the work of the United
Nations, with the goal of taking on the challenge of
establishing a just and lasting peace that will preserve
future generations from the scourge of war.
Ms. Carrión (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): The
resolution adopted today (70/262) is of major importance
for the entire United Nations system, since it not only
strengthens but optimizes the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission and its links to other United Nations
entities. Uruguay is grateful to the delegations of
Australia and Angola for their efforts as co-facilitators
of the intergovernmental body working on the process,
as well as to all the regional organizations and groups
that played such a constructive part in it. We would
also like to thank the Advisory Group of Experts,
chaired by Ambassador Gert Rosenthal, for its report
(see A/69/968), which has been a valuable tool in the
negotiations and will continue to be a major reference
point in the future.
The new view of peacebuilding introduced by
today’s resolution fosters new institutional synergies
that will make it possible to address its current
challenges holistically. Its approach will cease to be
16/21

27/04/2016

merely reactive but will evolve along with the various
phases affecting vulnerable and fragile States. In
that regard, Uruguay would like to pay tribute to the
contribution that peacekeepers make to peacebuilding
in its early stages and whose efforts are often so vital to
societies beset by conflict.
We commend those countries that have made
voluntary contributions to the work of the Peacebuilding
Fund and urge that they continue their efforts in order
to ensure greater predictability for the Fund and greater
continuity and certainty for the Commission in its
work. We would also like to emphasize the importance
of national ownership in all peacebuilding processes,
as well as of ensuring that such processes are always
inclusive and take into account the role to be played
by all national stakeholders, so as to ultimately make
sure that peace dividends reach every sector of society
and that the peace itself is more likely to be sustained.
For various reasons, as mentioned in the report of the
Advisory Group of Experts and reflected in part in
today’s resolution, there should be a particular focus
on gender mainstreaming and a gender perspective in
conflict resolution. Uruguay will continue to support
and strengthen all activities conducive to empowering
women, in particular in situations where their rights are
especially vulnerable.
Lastly, we should emphasize the importance of the
links between today’s resolution and our achievement
of the Sustainable Development Goals, which are at
the core of United Nations efforts. Together with its
peacebuilding activities, they are already making a
difference in the most fragile of our societies. We
hope that the new momentum and constructive spirit
displayed in both the resolution and the report of the
Advisory Group of Experts will be reflected in all the
United Nations bodies that so urgently need it.
Mr. Sandoval Cojulún (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala is grateful for the convening
of today’s meeting to adopt the resolution entitled
“Review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture” (70/262), and we would like to take this
opportunity to thank the delegations of Angola and
Australia for their leadership of the negotiations on
this important resolution. We are pleased to note that
both the main sponsors of the resolution and various
delegations considered the report (see A/69/968) of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture, chaired by Ambassador
16-12007

27/04/2016

A/70/PV.94

Gert Rosenthal, as a basis for launching the negotiations
on that important resolution.

fact that some countries that had already entered the
peacebuilding stage have relapsed into conflict.

In our view, the resolution is a constructive text,
as it includes various significant aspects with regard
to the structure of the peacebuilding architecture at
the United Nations and the search for, maintenance
of and building of peace. In particular, we are pleased
to note that concepts on sustainable peace have been
included describing the important role of civil society
in achieving peace.

Today that same enthusiasm is re-emerging based
on both a proper analysis and relevant recommendations
put forth by Ambassador Rosenthal and the members
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
the Peacebuilding Architecture. They submitted the
report (see A/69/968) based on present revisions as
well as General Assembly resolution 70/262, which
was adopted this morning concurrently with Security
Council resolution 2282 (2016). It was the result of
strenuous negotiations of three months’ duration and
the participation of the Ambassadors of Angola and
Australia. Above all, Cameroon wishes to commend
those individuals for their excellent and prodigious
efforts, which have led to a revival of hope in a new
start and a more promising tomorrow with respect
to peacebuilding.

Moreover, we also consider it appropriate to
highlight the inclusion of language on the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission as a bridge between the
principal organs and relevant United Nations bodies by
means of information exchange on peacebuilding needs
and priorities, in accordance with the competencies
and responsibilities of those organs. In that context,
peacebuilding is recognized as a political process
inherently aimed at avoiding crises or the escalation,
repetition or continuation of conflict. In addition, it
embraces a wide range of programmes and policies on
development and human rights.
As Member States we must ensure adequate,
consistent and sustainable financing aimed at efficiently
assisting countries in the area of peacekeeping and in
preventing the escalation, continuation or resurgence of
conflict. As States Members of the Organization, we
must continue to work to ensure greater coherence in
ensuring sustainable peace by coordinating the efforts
of the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council, in accordance with their
respective mandates as set forth in the Charter of the
United Nations.
However, we underscore the text’s lack of reference
to human rights and emphasize the importance of
the Human Rights Council as the most important
United Nations intergovernmental body tasked with
promoting and protecting human rights. It should
therefore be involved to a greater degree within the
peacebuilding architecture.
Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon) (spoke in French):
I should like once again to recall the enthusiasm that
greeted the creation of the Peacebuilding Commission
in 2005 and its supporting institutions, namely, the
Peacebuilding Support Office and the Peacebuilding
Fund. More than 10 years later, the implementation
and results have fallen short of the pledges made and
the initial objectives when taking into account the

I would like to underscore, without courting
pessimism, the fact that, if we fail to fully draw upon
the lessons of the past, we will risk making the same
errors and experiencing the same disappointment later
on in the review of the implementation of the resolution
we have just adopted today. To avoid such a negative
situation and bleak future, in our view four strategic
factors demand close follow-up.
The first is holistic coordination. The Peacebuilding
Commission must strive today more than yesterday,
and tomorrow more than today. It must work most
assiduously to ensure that all stakeholders work
together towards a coherent and synergistic vision
and guidelines, especially in terms of the time frame
on planning and tasks during the various stages
of peacebuilding.
Secondly, we must address the highly critical issue
of resource mobilization, in terms of both sufficient
quantity and quality. Is there a persistent need to
highlight the fact that the Peacebuilding Fund, in
its present state, despite the generous contributions
of donors — whom we take the opportunity to
commend — has not achieved its declared ambitions?
That is due to scarce resources, unpredictability and
other related constraints.
Thirdly, we must note the lack of ownership,
or perhaps insufficient ownership, of the realities
and specificities characterizing each aspect of
peacebuilding. In that regard, we have too frequently
sought a one-size-fits-all approach to time management.

16-1200717/21

A/70/PV.94

Lastly, on capacity-building, we can never say
often enough that peacebuilding, especially concerning
countries just emerging from conflict, must focus
particular attention on the issue of capacity-building.
Countries mired in conflict, as well as institutions and
individuals, have all been weakened. They now find
themselves in a vegetative state of vulnerability, or
perhaps even of non-existence. In that context, we must
act, certainly in a diligent manner, but we must also act
in a patient way while looking towards the long term in
order to prevent the patient from rapidly relapsing.
In conclusion, coordination, resource mobilization,
ownership and capacity-building seem to us to be
the crucial areas that warrant great focus in the
implementation phase, and later in the evaluation stage,
of the new resolution on peacebuilding that we adopted
this morning. Otherwise, as the saying goes, we can
expect to turn a thousand times around the same centre.
Mr. Raja Zaib Shah (Malaysia): I join earlier
speakers in thanking the President of the General
Assembly for convening today’s meeting to consider
the report of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
on its ninth session (A/70/714) and the report of the
Secretary-General on the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF)
(A/70/715).
Malaysia welcomes this morning’s adoption of
resolution 70/262, on the review of the peacebuilding
architecture.
Malaysia
commends
Ambassador
Gaspar Martins, Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Angola, and Ambassador Bird, Permanent
Representative of Australia, co-facilitators of the
intergovernmental consultations on the 2015 review
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture, for
their tireless efforts and commitment in steering the
process towards the successful adoption of the joint
resolutions by the General Assembly and the Security
Council (resolution 70/262 and resolution 2282 (2016),
respectively). We are pleased with the comprehensive,
transparent and inclusive approach undertaken by the
co-facilitators and the constructive spirit and flexibility
demonstrated by all delegations during the negotiations.
Malaysia is confident that the adoption — and, more
important, the subsequent implementation — of the
resolutions on the review of the peacebuilding architecture
will provide for a significant and positive shift in
the PBC’s approach, in particular with regard to its
advisory role and in sustaining peace. The scope and
nature of the challenge of sustaining peace require close
18/21

27/04/2016

and strategic partnerships among the United Nations,
Governments and other key stakeholders, including
international, regional and subregional organizations,
international financial institutions, civil society and
the private sector, taking into account their national
priorities and policies.
The review comes at a crucial juncture when
growing calls have been made on the need to address
fragmentation in the efforts of the United Nations system
and on the importance of building coherence in our
collective efforts across the three pillars of the United
Nations, namely, peace and security, development and
human rights, at the intergovernmental and operational
levels. As a member of the PBC, Malaysia is encouraged
by the Commission’s continued engagement with
States not on its formal agenda, namely, Burkina Faso,
Papua New Guinea and Somalia, which demonstrates
that the PBC has the flexibility to engage outside the
predetermined scope of its mandate.
The Commission was also able to adopt a successful
regional approach in supporting United Nations efforts
to respond to the outbreak of the Ebola virus disease in
West Africa. Such engagement indicates that the PBC
possesses a latent ability to respond using a preventive
approach. My delegation believes that the outcome of
the review of the peacebuilding architecture recognizes
that potential and that the Commission should consider
taking and strengthening the necessary measures in
that regard. We are also confident that the PBC will
be able to strengthen its crisis-prevention role in the
long term, which would contribute to the deepening of
the culture of prevention. Investments in the prevention
of outbreaks and their escalation and in the recurrence
of conflicts are less expensive and more sustainable as
compared to merely responding to crises.
Malaysia is of the view that the conclusion of the
review processes of the peacebuilding architecture,
the United Nations peacekeeping operations and
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) provide an
opportunity for the United Nations to better address
the issue of fragmentation and to promote better
synergy, coordination and complementarity in the work
of the relevant United Nations bodies, agencies and
mechanisms towards achieving the core objective of
promoting and sustaining peace.
My delegation would like to underscore the need for
the implementation of the review of the peacebuilding
architecture and its outcome to be aligned with the
16-12007

27/04/2016

goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1). The eradication of hunger and poverty,
as well as economic revitalization and stabilization,
including by increasing the revenue-generating capacity
of countries in transition, must count among the core
objective of peacebuilding initiatives. At the same
time, we support efforts to strengthen the participation
of women and youth in peacebuilding. Therefore,
the overall post-conflict peacebuilding effort should
incorporate inclusive approaches and policies that
involve all stakeholders in conflict-affected countries.
There is no doubt that building a lasting peace
requires predictable, sustained and adequate financing
to address the root causes of conflicts. While Malaysia
acknowledges that the role of the PBF in providing
financing to countries has been important, nevertheless
its impact has been very limited. We recognize the need
to establish strategic partnerships, ensure full funding
and establish blended financing from the United
Nations, bilateral and international donors, multilateral
financial institutions and the private sector to maximize
the impact of peacebuilding efforts.
In conclusion, we envisage that the overall outcome
of the review of the peacebuilding architecture will
provide an opportunity for the United Nations to
improve the mandate and functioning of the PBC,
which is a unique entity with enormous potential.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to take
advantage of this opportunity to congratulate the
President on his steering of the work of the General
Assembly. We also take this opportunity to congratulate
the Permanent Representative of Australia, Ambassador
Gillian Bird, and the Permanent Representative of
Angola, Ambassador Ismael Gaspar Martins, as well
as their respective teams, for the successful work as
co-facilitators of the joint resolution entitled “Review of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture”, which
was adopted by consensus this morning by the General
Assembly and the Security Council (resolutions 70/262
and 2282 (2016), respectively). We would also like to
express our most sincere thanks for the untiring work
carried out by the delegation of Bangladesh as the
coordinator of the working group on peacebuilding of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
With the adoption of these resolutions, we are
sealing our commitment to put into practice the
recommendations that came about as a result of the

A/70/PV.94

review of the peacebuilding architecture. The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela is proud of having played an
active role in the process of drafting the resolution
and of having organized on 23 February, when we
presided over the Security Council, an open debate on
the theme “Post-conflict peacebuilding: review of the
peacebuilding architecture” (see S/PV.7629).
Today we are considering the report (A/70/714)
of the Peacebuilding Commission on its ninth session
and the Secretary-General’s report (A/70/715) on the
Peacebuilding Fund. In that regard, we would like to
commend the work carried out by the former Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission, the Permanent
Representative of Sweden, Ambassador Olof Skoog.
We wish the current Chair of the Commission, the
Permanent Representative of Kenya, Ambassador
Kamau, every success.
The Ebola crisis and the resumption of conflict in
many countries throughout the world taught us some
important lessons about the process of peacebuilding,
some of which have been encapsulated in the farreaching and substantive report (see S/2015/490) of
the Advisory Group of Experts headed by Ambassador
Gert Rosenthal. We find major objectives and changes
emerging from that review.
On the one hand, we must make preventing the
resumption of conflicts in countries a United Nations
priority, while taking into account the fact that
peacebuilding is inherently a political process that
requires sustained support and attention. On the other
hand, we must always act on the premise that peace can
arise solely from within societies and that Governments
and national authorities must assume full responsibility
for peacebuilding processes. At the same time, we
should emphasize the fact that sustaining peace
encompasses a process for developing a common vision
within a society, taking into account all sectors of the
population. We must also underscore to a greater degree
the resumption of sustainable development in conflictaffected countries. We cannot hope to build peace
when we ignore the needs of a population attempting
to meet the most basic socioeconomic requirements,
to obtain the simple means to earn a living and to
put in place the groundwork for development that
is inclusive, sustainable and fair, and ensures social
justice. Therefore, we need to give the population ways
to incorporate in the economy and in society the means
to create the foundations of inclusive, sustainable

16-1200719/21

A/70/PV.94

and just growth, which must be part of the whole
peacebuilding process.
To that end, we should establish preferential and
differentiated conditions in the international financial
system in order to directly provide support to countries
where war has ceased and where there is no desire to
return to conflict. We must ensure that those countries
emerging from conflicts are provided with the means
for capacity-building, managing their own natural
resources and managing their own economies. It is
necessary for our countries and more important than
support from this or that donor. Finally, we must
acknowledge the fundamental role played by the
Peacebuilding Commission in fostering a consistent
focus among political actors — those dealing with
relevant security and development efforts, both within
and beyond the United Nations.
The Ebola crisis served to reveal the challenges
linked to peacebuilding and to highlight the
Commission’s potential role in promoting security
and development policies and providing international
support and a sustained political focus on mobilizing
resources and alliances with international, regional and
subregional organizations, as well as in encouraging
consistency among political actors dealing with the
relevant security and development issues both within
and beyond the United Nations. In Guinea, Liberia and
Sierra Leone, the Commission played an important
role by providing a rapid response by the international
community and other parts of the United Nations
system, in particular with regard to the risks posed
by the crisis to the achievements in peacebuilding in
those three affected countries. The early leadership of
the Commission was strengthened by funding from the
Peacebuilding Fund, thereby making it possible to cover
various funding shortfalls in areas where political and
social tensions were emerging in the affected countries.
The Ebola crisis also revealed the extensive and
ongoing challenge of reducing poverty, providing
access to education and jobs for youth. It showed
clearly that sustaining peace and minimizing the risk
of a resumption of conflict required a continuing
investment in those areas over time and measures to
bolster confidence in State institutions. As also shown,
the Peacebuilding Commission can play an ambitious
role in preventing the outbreak, intensification,
continuation and recurrence of conflicts by dealing
with the deep-rooted causes driving them. However,
certain conditions must first be in place in order
20/21

27/04/2016

to carry out that task effectively and in a sustained
fashion. On the one hand, it is vital that peacebuilding
activities carried out by the United Nations, and in
particular by the Peacebuilding Commission, be able to
count on predictable and ongoing funding. On the other
hand, the Commission should adopt more flexible and
innovative working methods so that it is able to study
regional and intersectoral issues that are pertinent to
sustaining peace. In addition, the Commission should
establish much more well-defined synergy with the
Peacebuilding Fund. It should focus on joint strategic
planning within the entire United Nations system, with
an emphasis on long-term cooperation in conflictaffected countries. Lastly, the Peacebuilding Support
Office should be revitalized as one of the central pillars
of the entire peacebuilding architecture.
In conclusion, I would like to refer to the
achievement of Latin America and the Caribbean
in building a new zone of peace with an architecture
of regional organizations that were established and
revitalized our leaders — the Bolivarian Alliance for
the Americas, the Union of South American Nations,
PetroCaribe, the Southern Common Market, the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States,
and the Special Initiative for Governance in Africa and
the Caribbean Community. That achievement is proof
of what countries can do when they deal with issues
using their own vision and on the basis of inclusive
leading models of participatory democracy, with
absolute respect for the sovereignty of countries and the
principle of non-interference.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker in the joint debate on agenda
items 31 and 110.
(spoke in English)
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda items 31 and 110.
Before proceeding to agenda item 175, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Organization for Migration”, I should like
to consult the Assembly on a matter pertaining to the
rules of procedure.
As agenda item 175 was included on the agenda of
the seventieth session of the General Assembly at its
92nd plenary meeting, held on 26 April, in order to take
up that item today, it will be necessary to waive the
16-12007

27/04/2016

relevant provisions of rule 15 of the General Assembly’s
rules of procedure, which reads as follows:
“No additional item may, unless the General
Assembly decides otherwise by a two-thirds
majority of the members present and voting, be
considered until seven days have elapsed since it
was placed on the agenda”.
May I take it that the General Assembly agrees
to waive the relevant provision of rule 15 of the rules
of procedure?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 175 (continued)

A/70/PV.94

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Organization for Migration
Draft resolution (A/70/L.46)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/70/L.46, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Organization for Migration”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/70/L.46 without a vote?
Draft resolution A/70/L.46 was adopted (resolution
70/263).
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to conclude this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 175?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

16-1200721/21
