S/PRST/2017/26

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 December 2017
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 8136th meeting of the Security Council, held on 14 December 2017, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Libya”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf
of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls its resolution 1970 (2011) and all subsequent
resolutions on Libya.
“The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of Libya.
“The Security Council reiterates that two years since the signing of the
Libyan Political Agreement (LPA) on 17 December 2015 in Skhirat, the LPA
remains the only viable framework to end the Libyan political cr isis and that its
implementation remains key to holding elections and finalising the political
transition. The Council emphasises the continuity of the LPA throughout Libya’s
transitional period and rejects incorrect deadlines that only serve to undermine
the UN-facilitated political process.
“The Security Council reaffirms its endorsement of the United Nations’
Action Plan for an inclusive Libyan-owned political process under the
leadership of the United Nations (UN) as presented by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General (SRSG), Ghassan Salamé, in New York
on 20 September 2017, in order to deliver the establishment of stable, unified,
representative and effective governance under the framework of the LPA.
“The Security Council supports the sequencing of the Action Plan set out
in the Chairperson’s Summary of 20 September 2017 and endorsed by the
United Nations Security Council, including a limited set of amendments to the
LPA, welcomes progress already made under this process and looks forwa rd to
further implementation of the Action Plan including preparation for elections.
“The Security Council acknowledges the important role played by
Mr. Fayez al Sarraj, Prime Minister and President of the Presidency Council of
the Government of National Accord (GNA), as well as other Libyan leaders, in
promoting national reconciliation.
“The Security Council strongly urges all Libyans to redouble efforts to
work together in a spirit of compromise and to engage urgently and
constructively in the inclusive political process, noting that further delay would
only prolong the suffering of the Libyan people. The Council reiterates the
importance of the meaningful participation of women throughout the process.

17-22547 (E)

141217

*1722547*

S/PRST/2017/26

“The Council welcomes, in this regard, the launch of the registration
campaign by the High National Elections Commission.
“The Security Council urges the GNA and all Libyans to work towards the
peaceful conclusion of the transitional phase. The Council reaffirms its strong
encouragement to the House of Representatives to draft and approve a new
electoral law and encourages continued progress toward finalizing a new Libyan
Constitution.
“The Security Council recalls paragraph 5 of resolution 2259 (2015) and
reaffirms that any attempt, including by Libyan parties, to undermine the
Libyan-led, UN-facilitated political process is unacceptable. The Council
underscores that Libyans should decide their own future without foreign
interference.
“The Security Council underlines the importance of unifying and
strengthening Libya’s armed forces under civilian oversight, and in that regard
takes note of the meetings held in Cairo that have aimed to achieve that goal.
“The Security Council further underscores the importance of Libya’s
national economic institutions which must continue to function for the benefit
of all Libyans and reiterates that the GNA must exercise sole and effective
oversight over these institutions, without prejudice to future constitutional
arrangements pursuant to the LPA, in accordance with Libyan law.
“The Security Council condemns recent violence across Libya, reiterates
that all parties must comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law as applicable and
underlines the need for those responsible for violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human rights to be held
accountable.
“The Security Council further condemns all acts of terrorism in Libya and
urges all Libyans to unite in their fight against terrorism under a unified, civilian
government.
“The Security Council underscores that there can be no military solution
to the crisis and reaffirms the need for all parties in Libya to exercise restraint
and refrain from any violence or actions that could undermine the UN -facilitated
process. The Council repeats its call on all Libyans to respect the ceasefire, as
called for in the Joint Declaration issued after the meeting in Paris on 25 July
2017.”

2/2

17-22547
