Resolutiom1 adopted on reports of the Second Committee
526 (VI). Continuation of the regional economic
commi88ions
The General Assembly,
Having considered the account of the activities of
the regional economic commissions for Europe, Asia
and the Far East, and Latin America contained in the
report of the Economic and Social Council ( chapter
II)9,
Notes with satisfaction the valuable work which is
being done by the regional economic commissions and
the decision of the Economic and Social Council, contained in its resolution 414 (XIII), section C. I, of
20 September 1951, to continue them.
365th plenMy meeting,
26 January 1952.
527 (VI). Living standard,; of the working
population
The General Assembly,
Considering that general developments in the world
economic situation since the fifth session of the General
Assembly are likely to affect adversely the economic
stability of many countries, and considering ·that, in
addition, real wages in many countries have declined
owing to price increases and inflation, a circumstance
which may likewise adversely affect the living standards of the working population,
. Bearing in mind _that Art(cle SS of the Charter provides that th~ _Umted Nations shall promote higher
standards of hvmg, full employment, and conditions of
economic and . social progress and development, and
that under Article 56 of the Charter the Member States
ha~c pledged themselves to take ''joint and separate
action in co-operation with the Organization" for the
achievement of these purposes,
Considering that, in promoting economic progress
!)Ormal trade relations among all countries are most
important for the raising of living standards in both
exporting and im1~)fting countries,
Emphasizing the recommendations made by the Economic and Social Council at its twelfth and thirteenth
sessions regarding t~e maintenance of living standards
and of the purchasing power of the sections of the
pop~lation with lower incomes, and reg,J.rding the prevention of the development of inflationary pressure and
speculative profits,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council to continue to pay spec~al_ attention to changes occurring in
the sta~dards of hvmg of the working population, and
to provide for the :Vorking out of adequate statistical
methods and techmques so as best to facilitate the
gathering and use of pertinent data in order to enable
the Secretary-General to publish regular annual reP?:ts sh?wing chang~s in absolut_e levels of living conditions m all countries and which would permit the
study o_f this ~r?blem in t~e ~ight of changing general
economic cund1t1ons; and mv1tes all Mc:mber States to
• See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session1
Supplement No. 3.

23

furnish to the Secretary-General all the data required
for this purpose ;
2. Recommends that all Members of the United
Nations, in order to combat inflation a11d to maintain
and raise the general standard of living of their populations, give special attention (i) in the domestic sphere,
to increasing the production of food and consumer
goods, to reducing the burden of taxation of the lowerincome population groups, to adopting social legislation
and other measures for improving conditions of health,
housing and education and for strengthening tradeunion rights; and (ii) in the international sphere, to
promoting economic and commercial relations between
all countries.
365th plenary meeting,
26 January 1952.

528 (VI). Production and distribution of newsprint and printing paper
The General Assembly
N ates with satisfaction:
1. The decision taken by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations at its Conference, 10
pursuant to the resolutions of the General Conference
of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Orangization 11 and of the Economic and Social
Council, 12 to adopt a long-term programme to supply
the world with newsprint and printing paper;
2. The decision taken by the Economic and Social
Council to study at its fourteenth session the report to
be prepared by the Secretary-General pursuant to
Council resolution 374 (XIII) regarding measures '·to
improve the position and ultimately put an end to the
shortage of newsprint and printing paper", both "with
a view to immediate results" and "with a view to action over a longer period".
365th plenary meeting,
26 January 1952.
529. (VI). Libya: problem of war damages
The General Assembly,
I-! aving examined and noted the report 13 of the
Secretary-General containing a general survey of the
problem of war damages in Libya, submitted in accordance with resolution 389 (V) adopted by the General
Assembly on 15 December 1950,
Having heard a statement 14 made by a representative
of the United Kingdom of Libya,
Believing that the problem of war damages should
be considered within the general framework of the
over-all economic development plans for the country,
"See n:solution No. 26 adopted on 7 December 1951 by the
Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations at its sixth session.
a See resolution adopted on 13 July 1951 by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its sixth session. See also documents
E/2052/ Add. 1 and Corr. 1.
u See resolution 374 (XIII) adopted on 13 September 1951
by the Economic and Social Council.
"See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 21, document A/2000.
"Ibid., SL;cond Committee, 1"89th meeting.
