A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/70
9 January 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 57
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/49/694)]
49/70.

Comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 48/70 of 16 December 1993, in which the entire
international community, for the first time, supported the commencement of
multilateral negotiations on a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty,
Reaffirming that a comprehensive nuclear-test ban is one of the highest
priority objectives of the international community in the field of disarmament
and non-proliferation,
Convinced that the most effective way to achieve an end to nuclear
testing is through the conclusion of a universal and internationally and
effectively verifiable comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty that will attract
the adherence of all States and will contribute to the prevention of the
proliferation of nuclear weapons in all its aspects, to the process of nuclear
disarmament and therefore to the enhancement of international peace and
security,
Reaffirming the conviction that the exercise of utmost restraint in
respect of nuclear testing would be consistent with the negotiation of a
comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty,
Noting the aspirations expressed by the parties to the 1963 Treaty
Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under

95-76015
/...

A/RES/49/70
Page 2

Water 1/ to seek to achieve the discontinuance of all test explosions of
nuclear weapons for all time, which are recalled in the preamble to the 1968
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 2/
Welcoming the preparation of a rolling text in the Ad Hoc Committee on a
Nuclear Test Ban of the Conference on Disarmament, as reflected in the report
of the Conference and its appendix, 3/ and noting the decision of the
Conference to continue its work in inter-sessional meetings,
1.
Welcomes the multilateral negotiation on a comprehensive nucleartest-ban treaty in the Ad Hoc Committee on a Nuclear Test Ban of the
Conference on Disarmament, and the positive and substantial contributions to
the elaboration of the rolling text made by States participating in those
negotiations;
2.
Calls upon participants in the Conference on Disarmament to
advance work on the basis of the rolling text during the inter-sessional
negotiating period with a view to making substantial progress;
3.
Also calls upon the Conference on Disarmament, upon the
re-establishment of the Ad Hoc Committee at the commencement of its 1995
session and renewal of its mandate, to proceed to a new phase of negotiation;
4.
Urges all States participating in the Conference on Disarmament,
in particular the nuclear-weapon States, to negotiate intensively, as a high
priority task, and to conclude a universal and multilaterally and effectively
verifiable comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty which contributes to nuclear
disarmament and the prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons in all
its aspects;
5.
Calls once more upon all States to support the multilateral
negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament for a comprehensive nucleartest-ban treaty and their conclusion without delay;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the provision to the
Conference on Disarmament of adequate administrative, substantive and
conference support services for these negotiations;
7.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fiftieth
session the item entitled "Comprehensive test-ban treaty".
90th plenary meeting
15 December 1994

__________
1/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 480, No. 6964.

2/

Ibid, vol. 729, No. 10485.

3/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session,
Supplement No. 27 (A/49/27), sect. III.A.
