S/PV.8790*

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8790th meeting

Tuesday, 8 June 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jürgenson/Mr. Auväärt

(Estonia)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Dime Labille
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Kuzmin
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Woodroffe
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Dang

Agenda
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals
Letter dated 17 May 2021 from the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2021/487)

*Reissued for technical reasons 14 September 2021.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-14423 (E)
*2114423*

S/PV.8790

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals
Letter dated 17 May 2021 from the President
of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2021/487)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Rwanda and Serbia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Aleksandar Vučić, President of the Republic of
Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Judge Carmel
Agius, President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and Mr. Serge
Brammertz, Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of the Council
members to document S/2021/487, which contains
the text of a letter dated 17 May 2021 from the
President of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to Judge Agius.
Judge Agius: It is my great pleasure to brief
the Security Council once again on the progress of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals in the implementation of its mandate and
to do so under the presidency of Estonia. Estonia
has a distinguished record of supporting the rule of
law — and the Mechanism in particular — and I wish it
every success during its presidency.
A few hours ago, the Mechanism’s Appeals Chamber
pronounced its judgment in a high-profile case against
Mr. Ratko Mladić. In brief, the Appeals Chamber
2/25

08/06/2021

dismissed Mr. Mladić’s appeal and affirmed his
convictions for genocide, persecution, extermination,
murder, deportation and other inhumane acts consisting
in forcible transfer as crimes against humanity and
for murder, terror, unlawful attacks on civilians and
hostage-taking as violations of the laws or customs
of war. The Appeals Chamber also dismissed the
Prosecution’s appeal and affirmed the Trial Chamber’s
finding that Mr. Mladić is not guilty of genocide in
relation to crimes committed in certain municipalities
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Appeals Chamber
affirmed Mr. Mladić’s sentence of life imprisonment.
I invite Council members to read the Judgment, which
includes both the majority position and dissenting
opinions and is already publicly available on the
Mechanism’s website.
On this occasion, I wish to thank the judges of the
bench as well as the assigned Chambers team for their
tireless efforts to ensure that any delays in the conduct
of the case and the delivery of the judgment were kept to
a minimum. This was a remarkable achievement, given
that the appeal process was complex from the beginning.
I recall that issues pertaining to the disqualification
of judges on the bench had to be addressed early on
in the proceedings and that the health situation of
Mr. Mladić required the postponement of the appeal
hearing originally scheduled for March 2020. Then
the coronavirus disease pandemic struck, and travel
restrictions and social-distancing requirements caused
progress to be further impeded. Finally, we had the
unexpected and tragic passing of a member of the
bench — in this case, Judge Gberdao Gustave Kam,
of Burkina Faso — in February of this year. The
Mechanism — and I personally — still deeply mourn
his loss.
I take this opportunity to honour Judge Kam and
his impressive contributions to international justice. He
was not only an excellent judge with a brilliant legal
mind, but also a kind and enthusiastic colleague who
was valued and respected by his fellow judges and
staff alike. At this sad moment, the Mechanism was
fortunate that Judge Mustapha El Baaj of Morocco
agreed to be appointed to the Bench at short notice in
Judge Kam’s place. I sincerely commend Judge El Baaj
for taking on the substantial responsibilities involved
in joining this case at a later stage. Thanks to his
diligence and unrelenting efforts, the deliberations and
judgment preparation could continue. In the end, the
21-14423

08/06/2021

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Appeals Chamber was able to pronounce its judgment
just shortly after the previously projected date.
With today’s delivery, the Mechanism has made
another tremendous step towards the finalization of its
core judicial work. This case is also a testament to what
can be achieved through international justice processes
when States have the will to cooperate and overcome
geopolitical roadblocks. In that regard, I recall that,
while Mr. Mladić was indicted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
as early as 1995, it was thanks to the persistence of
the ICTY Prosecutor, together with the support of the
international community, that 15 years later his arrest
was eventually secured. The issuance of the final
judgment sends a strong message to victims of atrocities
committed in the former Yugoslavia and elsewhere that
the perpetrators of such heinous crimes will ultimately
be brought to justice regardless of their position or how
powerful and untouchable they consider themselves to
be. While judgments such as this cannot bring back
loved ones or heal the wounds or trauma endured, it is
my hope that victims and their families will take some
measure of solace from seeing justice being done and
history being recorded.
Today’s events leave us with two more judgments
to be issued this month.
First, I am pleased to inform you that the judgment
in the Stanišić and Simatović retrial is expected to
be delivered by 30 June. The proceedings progressed
extremely efficiently during the reporting period,
with closing arguments held in April despite various
challenges and intensive deliberations continuing
apace. I commend the Trial Chamber for having kept
things on track throughout. Following the conclusion of
the retrial, any appeal proceedings in that case will be
heard at the Hague Branch.
Secondly, at the Arusha Branch, the contempt
case against Mr. Anselme Nzabonimpa et al., formerly
Turinabo et al., is also nearing its conclusion.
Notwithstanding pandemic-related obstacles that
impacted the parties’ ability to prepare their cases
for trial, and the unfortunate passing of co-accused
Mr. Maximilien Turinabo, the defence phase was
completed by 7 May. The closing arguments are
scheduled from 21 to 23 June and the trial judgment
is expected before the end of the month. Any appeals
from the judgment will be heard at the Arusha Branch.

S/PV. 8790

With regard to other proceedings related to the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), I
take this opportunity to provide an update on the case
against Mr. Félicien Kabuga, who remains detained in
The Hague following his transfer to the United Nations
Detention Unit in October 2020. At a status conference
held on 1 June, the parties discussed progress made with
regard to case preparation and other relevant issues,
and, following that, a pretrial workplan was announced.
Furthermore, an independent medical expert has been
assigned to examine Mr. Kabuga’s health, including his
fitness to stand trial and ability to travel to the Arusha
Branch. A report on those questions is expected later
in June.
While most of our cases involving in-court
proceedings are winding up, I recall that the Mechanism
is, of course, mandated to carry out many other residual
functions. Among them is the supervision of the
enforcement of sentences imposed by the ICTR, the
ICTY and the Mechanism itself. I again express my
deepest appreciation for the invaluable contribution
of the 15 States Members of the United Nations in
Africa and Europe that, in currently enforcing the
sentence of one or more convicted persons, continue to
assume significant additional responsibilities. I fully
recognize that that has been more challenging during
the pandemic.
Your country, Mr. President, as well as France,
Norway and the United Kingdom, present here today,
together with the Mechanism’s other enforcement
States, have gone above and beyond in enabling us to
carry out our mandate. I praise each of them for taking
the necessary measures to keep our convicted persons
safe and for regularly reporting to the Mechanism with
regard to their well-being and the COVID-19 situation
within the relevant prisons.
Bearing in mind the paramount importance of
securing the continued enforcement of sentences, I
sincerely hope that additional States will step forward
and enter into enforcement agreements with the
United Nations for that purpose. That would allow the
Mechanism to expand its enforcement capacity and to
alleviate the burden on those States that have already
supported us in that regard for many years.
Turning to a separate matter, I note that the report
before the Security Council is in fact the twentythird report of the Mechanism raising the situation of
the acquitted and released persons in Arusha. It is of

21-144233/25

S/PV.8790

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

08/06/2021

fundamental importance that those individuals, who
were either acquitted by the ICTR or have served
their sentence, be resettled. Regrettably, a sustainable
solution is yet to be found. However, I laud the efforts
made by our Registrar, Mr. Abubacarr Tambadou, to
keep exploring new possibilities despite the difficulties
created by the ongoing global health crisis. As all Council
members are aware, we depend on the international
community’s assistance in resolving this long-standing
challenge, which impacts on the Mechanism’s ability to
complete its mandate. The Security Council’s continued
leadership and the cooperation and support of Member
States are essential in tackling this situation once and
for all.

the Security Council today, our progress in ensuring
accountability and strengthening the rule of law is very
much dependent upon States staying the course. Indeed,
the backbone of the Mechanism’s success is the support
of the Security Council and that of the international
community at large. It is our symbiotic relationship with
Member States that has brought fugitives to justice and
ensured that those convicted can serve their sentences.
Without States’ willingness to assist and cooperate, the
efforts of the Mechanism cannot materialize. Without
their ongoing trust, the Security Council’s vision, as
expressed in the creation of the two ad hoc Tribunals
and the Residual Mechanism, will never come to its
full fruition.

I now refer to my letter of 11 May (S/2021/452)
informing the members of this organ of the Republic
of Serbia’s continued failure to comply with its
international obligations to arrest Mr. Petar Jojić
and Ms. Vjerica Radeta and surrender them to the
Mechanism. Upon the request of Judge Liu Daqun, the
single judge seized of the case, I exercised my duty to
notify the Security Council of Serbia’s non-cooperation
with the Mechanism. It has been more than six years
since Serbia was first requested by the ICTY to
execute arrest warrants in relation to those accused
persons, and this is the third time that Serbia’s failure
to cooperate, despite endless opportunities to do so,
has been reported to the Council. Serbia’s inaction not
only undermines the effective administration of justice
before the Mechanism, but also defies the international
community by challenging the Security Council’s
authority and the Charter of the United Nations.

On behalf of the principals, judges and dedicated
staff, I would like to convey our deep gratitude in
particular to our host countries, our enforcement States
and all Security Council members for their unwavering
support. Their robust commitment is admirable. I
encourage others to follow suit so that the Mechanism
lives up to its potential and that international criminal
justice delivers on its promise.

We have come a long way since the Security
Council’s pioneering decisions to establish the ICTY
and the ICTR, and later the Residual Mechanism itself.
Equipped with a legacy of unparalleled achievements
in international criminal justice thanks to the ad hoc
Tribunals, the Mechanism has been able to further close
the impunity gap. Since it commenced operating, it has
rendered landmark judgments, tracked the remaining
ICTR fugitives, overseen the enforcement of sentences,
continued to protect witnesses and victims, safeguarded
the precious archives and assisted and monitored
national proceedings for international crimes. No
other institution is endowed with such a versatile and
demanding mandate.
However, our accomplishments are not to be
assessed in a void, and neither should they be taken for
granted. As is evident from what I have shared with
4/25

The President: I thank Judge Agius for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Brammertz.
Mr. Brammertz: I am grateful for this opportunity
to remotely address the Security Council about
the activities of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. Our written report provides details about
our activities and results during the reporting period in
relation to our strategic priorities. Today I would like to
highlight a few important issues.
In July 1995, Ratko Mladić was indicted by my
Office for the atrocities he committed against hundreds
of thousands of innocent civilians in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. For more than a decade and a half, he was
among the world’s most wanted fugitives and a symbol
of a culture of global impunity. Today though, justice has
been done. After a fair trial by impartial international
judges, Mladić was finally convicted for his crimes and
sentenced to the most severe punishment possible.
I spoke earlier today with the mother of Srebrenica
survivors of Mladić’s genocide. For 26 years, they have
suffered the loss of their husbands, fathers and sons
and have courageously fought to see Mladić punished
for his crimes. They have asked me to convey to the
Security Council a simple message: justice matters. It
21-14423

08/06/2021

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

is not a slogan, but a fundamental truth. Justice matters
to the victims because, while it will never bring back
their loved ones, it can mitigate the pain they must live
with. But even more, they told me, justice matters to the
present and the future.
Today too many perpetrators in conflicts around
the world still use their power to cause inhumane
suffering. Too many commanders still treat innocent
lives as inconsequential. There are sadly still too many
people like Mladić.
Justice matters because it is how we condemn and
punish great wrongs so that they are not repeated. That
is why today is not about only what we have achieved,
but about what more there is still to be achieved. For my
Office, while we take satisfaction from Mladić’s final
conviction, we are also aware of the work we still have
ahead of us.
A major part of our remaining work is at the
Arusha Branch, where we continue to seek more
justice for the victims of the 1994 genocide against
the Tutsi and Rwanda. The Kabuga case is one of our
key priorities, obviously. Following his arrest last May,
after two decades as a fugitive, my Office has quickly
undertaken further investigations and preparations for
the commencement of his trial.
In February, we took an important step forward
with the confirmation of our amended indictment.
We made a number of key updates and revisions to
streamline and clarify the case, including specific
incidents of sexual violence. Ultimately, we believe
the amended indictment will promote an expeditious
trial while appropriately reflecting Kabuga’s added
criminal responsibility.
We are now fully focused on trial preparations. We
will submit our pretrial brief and complete key pretrial
responsibilities by the end of August, and my Office is
currently committed to being ready to start trial when
decided by the Trial Chamber.
Also, the Nzabonimpa case, which is an old case,
will soon conclude, with a judgment expected in the
coming weeks. The importance of that case must be
underscored. Corrupting witnesses strikes at the core
of the justice process, and my Office will continue to
fulfil its mandate to investigate and prosecute contempt
of court cases.

S/PV. 8790

Finally, in the Stanišić and Simatović case, we
delivered our closing arguments and are now expecting
a judgment in the near future.
My Office further continues to actively search for
the remaining six fugitives indicted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). A few years
ago, I informed the Council that we were reforming
and strengthening our fugitive tracking activities on
the understanding that it was our responsibility to
demonstrate a track record of success (see S/PV.7960).
Those efforts produced results, as demonstrated last
year by the arrest of Kabuga and the confirmation of
Bizimana’s death.
Currently we have viable leads on all remaining
fugitives and, with continued efforts, we can reasonably
expect further results. Our primary challenge, however,
is the lack of full and effective cooperation from
Member States. Simply put, a number of countries are
not adhering to their international obligations and are
preventing my Office from securing arrests.
Six months ago, I informed the Security Council
that Kayishema remains at large because South Africa
fails to provide cooperation. Unfortunately, the situation
remains unchanged and there has been no meaningful
improvement. As it stands today, South African
authorities are effectively sending the message that
their country is a safe haven for fugitive génocidaires.
With respect to the other fugitives, our priority is
Protais Mpiranya, former Commander of the Presidential
Guard. While some investigations are hindered by
the absence of cooperation from key Member States,
other investigative leads are still moving forward.
In particular, we are actively investigating evidence
that Mpiranya, in addition to his crimes during the
genocide, has for the past two decades has engaged in
further serious criminal activity. We have reasons to
believe that he has also operated business enterprises
using illicit funds. Many individuals are likely to
have interacted with him or learned of him. Those are
persons of interest to us, and we encourage them to
come forward with information about Mpiranya. My
Office reiterates that any person, including Mpiranya’s
associates and supporters, who provides information
leading to an arrest is eligible for a reward of up to
$5 million.
My Office is determined to account for the
remaining fugitives as quickly as possible so that our
tracking activities can finally be brought to an end.

21-144235/25

S/PV.8790

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

I know that the Security Council fully shares and
supports that goal. As my Office works to resolve the
challenges we face, the firm support of the Council will
be vital.
As I mentioned earlier, the final judgment against
Mladić reminds us of the other important work still
ahead. In particular, many of Mladić’s accomplices
and subordinates still need to be held accountable for
their crimes, like many other war crime perpetrators
in all the countries of the former Yugoslavia. That is
why my Office’s third strategic priority is to assist
national jurisdictions prosecuting international crimes
committed in the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda.
And I was recently again in contact with the Chief
Prosecutors in Sarajevo, Belgrade and Zagreb in
that regard.
I would like to briefly update Council members on
three important developments.
First, the arrest of Kabuga has brought renewed
attention to continuing national efforts to prosecute
alleged génocidaires. During the reporting period,
Rwandan authorities achieved important results
in cases referred by the ICTR under rule 11 bis. My
Office continues to urge all countries to provide full
cooperation to the Prosecutor General of Rwanda as
he seeks to account for hundreds more fugitives who
remain at large.
Secondly, in both Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Serbia, new national war crimes strategies are being
put in place. There are still thousands of war crime
suspects to process in those two countries. The
new strategies set high expectations for the swift
resolution of outstanding cases and should also address
shortcomings in previous efforts.
Improved regional cooperation will be critical.
Many suspects who committed crimes in Bosnia
Herzegovina fled to Serbia and Croatia. Urgent
efforts are needed by prosecutors to bring all such
persons to justice. The new war crime strategies are
important opportunities to clearly demonstrate national
commitment to full accountability, in particular with
respect to senior- and mid-level suspects.
Two decades after the conflict, much more remains
to be done. My Office will continue to engage directly
with our counterparts to support further investigations
and prosecutions. Diplomatic support from the
European Union and other partners will remain critical.
6/25

08/06/2021

Finally, I am compelled to bring to the Council’s
attention once again the issues of genocide denial and
the glorification of war criminals. It is certain that
reactions to the conviction of Ratko Mladić today
will include denials of the Srebrenica genocide, the
siege of Sarajevo and the ethnic cleansing campaigns
he unleashed. Some will claim that he is a hero, while
posters and murals of him will be displayed. Sadly, this
has become what must be expected.
In Montenegro, the Minister of Justice recently
denied the genocide in Srebrenica, after previous
Governments had taken a firm stand in support of the
wise judgment of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. In Serbia, convicted workers are
regularly given platforms to deny their crimes. Denial
and glorification by officials and official bodies in the
Republika Srpska have become so commonplace that
they often pass without remark.
As for Rwanda, the recent commemoration of the
1994 genocide against the Tutsi has again demonstrated
that genocide denial continues to flourish, particularly
among diaspora communities. Denial and glorification
continue to be treated as differences of opinion or
arguments about legal terms. They are not. The reality
is that denial and glorification are the final stage of
genocide. There are political tools used for political
purposes. Urgent action is needed.
In conclusion, my Office is pleased that two trials
and one appeal will conclude this month. We are
satisfied with the Appeals Chambers judgment in the
case Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladić, which confirmed his
convictions and sentence of life imprisonment. Yet my
Office still has much important work ahead of us. We
will continue to work towards the commencement of
the trial of Félicien Kabuga as soon as possible. As for
the remaining fugitives of the ICTR, we are committed
to ensuring that they are brought to justice just as
Mladić was. In order for that work to be successfully
completed, it is critical that the Security Council
send an unmistakable message to Member States
that cooperation with my Office is required. We are
grateful for the continued support of the Council in all
our efforts.
The President: I thank Mr. Brammertz for
his briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of note S/2017/507, which encourages
all participants in Council meetings to deliver their
21-14423

08/06/2021

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

statements in five minutes or less, in line with the
Security Council’s commitment to making more
effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank Judge Carmel Agius,
President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, and Mr. Serge Brammertz,
Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, for their briefings and updates
on developments following the Mechanism’s eighteenth
report submitted to the Security Council.
I wish to express my deepest condolences on the
passing away of Judge Gberdao Gustave Kam of Burkina
Faso, as well as our appreciation for his dedication and
contribution to the work of the Mechanism.
I welcome the President of Serbia and the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and
Rwanda to today’s meeting.
I would like to start by commending the principals
and staff of the Mechanism for the meaningful progress
in judicial activities during the reporting period. Under
the leadership of Judge Agius, despite insurmountable
challenges caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
the Mechanism was able to maintain continuity in its
in-court hearings and implement rigorous measures
to maintain the health and safety of its staff, as well
as of detainees, prisoners and other persons under
its supervision.
We take note of efforts to advance judicial
proceedings and subsequently move towards a new
and leaner phase in its core judicial activities. We are
hopeful that the proactive approach undertaken by the
new Registrar with regard to the relocation of nine
acquitted and released persons will produce a concrete
outcome and resolve this problem. It is worth recalling
that the Security Council emphasized the importance
of finding an expeditious and durable solution to this
problem, including as part of a reconciliation process.
The work of the Mechanism in carrying out
the mandate given by the Security Council is an
important contribution to reaffirming our collective
commitment to fighting impunity, delivering justice
and supporting reconciliation.
Secondly, we welcome the President’s priority to
fully implement resolution 2529 (2020), including by

S/PV. 8790

providing a clear projection of the timeline for the
completion of its judicial activity and other residual
functions, strengthening close cooperation among
the main organ, the Mechanism, ensuring geographic
diversity and the gender balance of staff, as well as
fostering staff morale and performance.
Looking forward, we encourage the Mechanism
to continue implementing effective steps to adhere
to its schedule of completion, realizing the Security
Council’s vision of a small, temporary and efficient
structure, whose function and site will diminish over
time. Among measures to reduce the residual burden
of the Mechanism, consideration should be given to
granting States greater responsibility in supervising the
enforcement of sentences.
Thirdly, States’ cooperation with the Mechanism
remains crucial in fulfilling its mandate. It is the
responsibility and obligation of States, in accordance
with Security Council resolutions, to cooperate with
and assist the Mechanism when needed, including in the
search for fugitives at large. We welcome the enhanced
efforts of the Prosecutor and his team to forge stronger
direct communication with relevant States, identify
challenges that might hinder cooperation and determine
a feasible approach. At the same time, it is States
that bear the primary responsibility for fighting and
preventing heinous crimes. Building national capacity
and assisting States in exercising their responsibility
should be our top priority. We therefore welcome the
assistance provided by the Office of the Prosecutor to
national authorities with regard to the cases that are
referred to it.
In conclusion, Viet Nam reiterates its firm
commitment to the work of the Security Council
in upholding the Charter of the United Nations and
international law in the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Mr. Woodroffe (United Kingdom): I would like
to start by thanking President Agius and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their briefings to us today.
We are impressed that the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals has continued to
function so well, despite the difficulties imposed on it
by the coronavirus disease. Lockdowns have prevented
travel. Social distancing has forced different ways of
working, including in the courtroom.

21-144237/25

S/PV.8790

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

It is also appropriate to express our condolences on
the passing away of Judge Gberdao Gustave Kam. We
pay tribute to his contribution to international justice.
We are impressed that the Mechanism has
nonetheless been able to progress its work. We now
see cases coming to conclusion, with three important
judgments to be handed down this month. Through its
tireless work, the Mechanism continues to show that
impunity does not and will not be allowed to prevail.
We continue to welcome the Mechanism’s work to
hold perpetrators of the genocide in Rwanda to account
and remain committed to supporting it. Building on
successes to date, we are grateful for the Mechanism’s
continued progress in the case Prosecutor v. Félicien
Kabuga. We also urge progress to ensure the remaining
suspected genocidaires face justice. In particular, we
note that Mr. Protais Mpiranya remains at large and
encourage all States to cooperate in his arrest.
We commend the Mechanism for making progress
in the trials. In fact, today, in one of the final judgments,
focused on the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the Appeals Chamber of the Mechanism upheld the
conviction of Ratko Mladić. His attempts to outrun
and evade justice have failed due to the Mechanism’s
tenacity. We hope this decision offers some respite to
the survivors and the families of his victims.
The United Kingdom is proud to be supporting
the Mechanism by agreeing to the transfer of Radovan
Karadžić to serve his life sentence in a British jail.
He is one of the few people in the world to have been
convicted of genocide. Along with Ratko Mladić, he
was responsible for the massacre of men, women and
children at the Srebrenica genocide and helped pursue
the seizure of Sarajevo, with its remorseless attacks
on civilians.
International justice can be achieved only through
international collaboration. We call on all Member
States to assist the Mechanism. We have a collective
responsibility to seek justice for victims. Under
resolution 1966 (2010), there is a clear obligation on all
States to cooperate with the Mechanism.
Nevertheless, regional judicial cooperation in the
Western Balkans remains inadequate. That has direct
implications for achieving justice for victims. The
Mechanism’s referral of Serbia to the Council for a
third time for the failure to arrest and transfer Petar
Jojić and Vjerica Radeta is serious and follows years of
8/25

08/06/2021

requests, considerations and discussion. We therefore
urge Serbia to comply with the Mechanism’s order. We
also call upon States to cooperate with the Office of the
Prosecutor in its efforts to track the remaining fugitives
from justice.
The glorification of war criminals and the denial
of genocide is unacceptable and increases the suffering
of victims. Reconciliation is difficult. We must accept
and acknowledge the truth of the past in order to move
forward. Glorifying perpetrators of heinous acts takes
us away further from reconciliation and hinders the
achievement of a positive future.
As Council members have seen, through our
actions the United Kingdom remains committed to the
Mechanism, and we reaffirm our willingness to assist
it, wherever possible, in fulfilling its mandate and
implementing its vision of being a small, temporary
and effective organization.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Judge Carmel Agius, President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and
Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the Mechanism,
for their briefings and for the eighteenth progress report
submitted in accordance with resolution 1966 (2010).
At the outset, Tunisia reiterates its support for the
mandate of the Mechanism to combat impunity for the
perpetrators of the most serious crimes and prevent
such violations from recurring. Achieving justice and
accountability through this Mechanism, including
before relevant national courts, is an issue of increasing
importance today given the concern about the increase
in revisionist ideologies as well as the glorification of
war criminals and the denial of genocide.
Tunisia stresses that, in order to realize
comprehensive reconciliation at the local, national and
regional levels and to build lasting peace and the rule
of law, early and decisive action must be taken by the
international community and the Security Council to
address those ideologies through a broad recognition
of the past, trying criminals and offering stronger
guarantees to stop these crimes from recurring within
the countries and communities affected.
We emphasize, in that context, the importance
of the Mechanism continuing to receive full and
expeditious cooperation and support from countries so
that the remaining six accused persons who are still at
large do not continue to evade justice, as well as to help
21-14423

08/06/2021

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

in finding lasting solutions for those persons who still
live in a safe house in Arusha.
Tunisia appreciates the continuous efforts deployed
by the President of the Mechanism to ensure it is
more effective and efficient and to lighten its caseload
guided by the vision of the Security Council that the
Mechanism, as a structure, must be small, temporary
and effective. It must also diminish over time.
Moreover, Tunisia expresses its satisfaction at the
progress made by the Mechanism in its deliberations
and by issuing three expected judgments this month in
spite of all the obstacles imposed by the coronavirus
disease pandemic and other related difficulties. In that
connection, we welcome Judge Agius note regarding
the judgment issued today in the Mladić case. We also
commend the measures and flexible working methods
established by the Mechanism, as well as the interaction
and coordination between its two branches in order to
ensure the continuity of its work within reasonable time
frame against a backdrop of the constraints imposed by
the pandemic.
In addition, we commend the efforts of the
Prosecutor’s Office to enhance its capacity and review
its working methods while continuously working
with the international community to pursue fugitives
wherever they may be found and to strengthen the
capacities of national courts.
In conclusion, Tunisia hopes that the Mechanism
will continue its activities with the same dynamism
and professionalism that it has always shown in
discharging its important mandate. We hope that it will
work effectively and efficiently with the support of the
Security Council so that international criminal justice
can be done with a view to achieving its noble goals.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The cheer and enthusiasm of Judge Agius and
Prosecutor Brammertz in reporting on the achievements
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals was palpable. What haste in sharing with us
the news of the conviction of another high-ranking Serb.
The publicized verdict against Ratko Mladić is
the continuation of a politicized approach adopted by
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY). It has become a vivid stain on the reputation
of the Residual Mechanism. Soon it will be 30 years,
almost a third of a century, in which we see a biased and
costly machinery of justice in The Hague methodically

S/PV. 8790

grind the lives of the participants of the war in the
Balkans — a war that has become a tragedy for
hundreds of thousands of Serbs, Croats, Bosnians and
members of other ethnic groups; a war that destroyed a
once unified State — Yugoslavia; a war that highlighted
quite clearly how vulnerable international law is.
How easy it was for NATO States to trample the
Charter of the United Nations with complete impunity
and begin military operations in a third country. Was
anyone held responsible for the massive air strikes
against civilian targets, including within Belgrade’s
city limits and in other major cities? Was anyone held
responsible for the murder and wounding of thousands
of civilians, including journalists, in the attacks on
Radio Television Serbia and the Chinese Embassy
in Belgrade? Why has the ICTY, an entity with
jurisdiction to act, become blind and deaf to certain
crimes? Why did it prefer to turn a blind eye to the
evident crimes of Kosovar Albanians? Now their cases
are being handled by the Kosovo Specialist Chambers
and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office. The ICTY has gone
down in history as an instrument of revenge rather
than an instrument of justice. The Residual Mechanism
inherited the negative attributes of its predecessor.
Recently, President Agius endorsed the decision
of the transfer of the former leader of the Bosnian
Serbs, Radovan Karadžić, to serve his sentence in
Great Britain. That was done despite the request of
Karadžić and his lawyers, who justifiably pointed out
that the life and security of the convicted Serb would
be under threat in that country. As we know, there has
already been a case in a British jail of a knife attack in
which one of the former Serbian military commanders,
Radislav Krstić, was wounded. The leadership of the
Residual Mechanism and the Government of the United
Kingdom now bear the full responsibility for the life
and health of Radovan Karadžić. We will carefully
monitor the protection of his rights.
Unfortunately, the ICTY and the Residual
Mechanism have not been instrumental in reconciling
the diverse Balkan community. The reason for that is a
shortage of fairness in the verdicts issued, where one
side of the conflict is bashed while the wrongdoings of
the other side are hushed up. We are now witnessing once
again the promotion of the thesis of Belgrade’s alleged
lack of cooperation with the Residual Mechanism on the
contempt of court case. I just want to remind everyone
that the case itself is indirectly linked to questionable
accusations against the Serbian politician Vojislav

21-144239/25

S/PV.8790

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

08/06/2021

Šešelj, who spent over 11 years — imagine that, 11
years — in United Nations jails operated by the ICTY
while awaiting an acquittal.

this morning in the Mladić case, are indicative of
the efforts invested by the Mechanism even during
the pandemic.

Wherever there is a lack of justice and coherence,
there is also a lack of trust. What, then, is the solution
to this situation? On cases of contempt of court, there
is the well-known position that France adopted on the
Hartmann case.

Kenya acknowledges the Mechanism’s reported
improved tracking capability, which we recall enabled
the arrest of Félicien Kabuga after a long search that
was beset by a great deal of misinformation. We hope
this growing capability will also help to accurately track
and apprehend the remaining fugitives. We urge that
the trial in Kabuga be conducted expeditiously to help
provide closure for survivors and families of victims,
which is important in the reconciliation process as
a whole.

Russia attaches great importance to safeguarding
the rights of individuals under detention, including the
right to medical assistance. In resolution 2529 (2020) ,
the Security Council specifically adopted a position on
this point. Nevertheless, the Residual Mechanism does
not consider it a good idea to report to the Council on
how these rights are being ensured.
We did not find any information on the current
state of health of Ratko Mladić, including his degree of
convalescence after his operation. A full independent
examination and certification, including whether
he has retained his cognitive function, has still not
been conducted. We strongly insist on this kind of
examination being conducted.
Last year, the case against Félicien Kabuga was
added to the docket of cases of the Residual Mechanism.
We will carefully monitor the state of health of the
defendant, and we expect the appointment of an
independent medical expert to assess the advisability
of transferring the defendant to the facilities of the
Mechanism in Arusha as well as his capacity to stand
trial. At the same time, we hope that the Mechanism
will complete its work within the projected time period
for the court proceedings and will indeed refrain from
artificially dragging them out.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Judge Agius,
President of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, and Mr. Brammertz, Prosecutor of
the Mechanism, for their briefings and detailed reports.
Kenya acknowledges the important work of the
Mechanism in the service of justice and accountability
for war crimes. I reaffirm Kenya’s continued support
for and cooperation within the Mechanism’s mandate,
as renewed by resolution 2529 (2020).
We commend the Mechanism for ensuring the
continuation of work, including by putting in place
precautionary working arrangements in the light of the
coronavirus disease pandemic. The three judgments
lined up for this month, including the judgment issued
10/25

Kenya further notes the Mechanism’s report on
requests for assistance from national jurisdictions. We
encourage the Mechanism to continue engaging with
relevant members and partners in cases where it has
sought cooperation.
Finally, we laud and encourage the Mechanism’s
continued improvement of its legal and regulatory
framework. Specifically, we note the ongoing
implementation of the Secretary-General’s bulletin
on discrimination, harassment, including sexual
harassment and abuse of authority (ST/SGB/2019/8).
This is important, especially for institutions that stand
for justice, fairness and equality.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank the President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge
Carmel Agius, and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz,
for their briefings. We also welcome the President of
Serbia, Mr. Aleksandar Vučić, and the Permanent
Representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia
and Rwanda, to the Security Council. We also express
our heartfelt condolences for the loss of Judge Gberdao
Gustave Kam.
My country, Mexico, has carefully reviewed the
eighteenth reports of the President and the Prosecutor
of the Mechanism, and we note the significant progress
reported therein. In this regard, we acknowledge the
judgment announced today at The Hague in the Mladić
case. We underline the value of this outcome for
international justice, in particular for the victims of the
genocide perpetrated in Srebrenica and, in general, of
the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mexico takes note of the progress in the judicial
functions of the Mechanism, and we remain attentive
21-14423

08/06/2021

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

S/PV. 8790

to the rulings in two other cases this month. We
commend the work of the Mechanism team in making
these results possible despite the constraints imposed
by the pandemic. Similarly, we note the progress in
the pre-trial stages in the Félicien Kabuga case. These
developments are undoubtedly important contributions
to accountability, and Mexico reiterates its support for
the work of the Mechanism.

crimes — at the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, the Extraordinary African Chambers within
the Senegalese judicial system and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, where
he served an instrumental role in ensuring a fair trial
for Ratko Mladić. We also thank Judge Mustapha El
Baaj for stepping into the case to ensure that the appeal
could continue in a timely fashion.

We emphasize that locating, arresting and
prosecuting persons who remain fugitives is one of
the main priorities of the Mechanism. We call on the
relevant authorities to intensify cooperation with the
Mechanism in order to locate, apprehend and arrest
these persons, so that they can be prosecuted and held
accountable in the cases that remain pending.

Today, of course, is a historic day. Earlier this
morning, the Appeals Chamber announced its decision
on Ratko Mladić’s appeal. Almost 30 years ago, Mladić
and other perpetrators began a campaign to permanently
remove Bosnian Muslims and Bosnian Croats from Serbclaimed territory in Bosnia and Herzegovina through a
campaign of genocide, extermination, murder and other
inhumane acts. We recall with particular horror the
days in July 1995 when Mladić and his forces entered
Srebrenica, forcing 25,000 women, children and the
elderly out on buses and systematically murdered the
Bosniak men and boys of the area.

It is also of concern that the order for the accused
to be transferred to the Mechanism in the case against
Jojić and Radeta remains unfulfilled. Further, the most
recent arrest warrants issued in this case, in 2019,
remain unexecuted. Moreover, this non-compliance has
already been reported to the Security Council on three
occasions. We call for compliance with these orders
and with the obligations under resolution 1966 (2010).
Cooperation is essential for international justice to be
effective, as well as to strengthen the rule of law.
In conclusion, it is worrisome that the denial of
crimes committed and of facts proven before various
international tribunals continues. We reiterate our
rejection of the glorification of war criminals who
have already been tried and found guilty. Likewise, it
is indispensable to present the new generations with
truthful information about recent history, as well as
about the work of the International Criminal Tribunals
and the Mechanism. In 2021, there is no place for
discourse that seeks to divide and incites hatred; it is
necessary to make way for reconciliation, cohesion
and inclusion.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for
their briefings. We are grateful for their hard work and
the unwavering commitment of the judges, attorneys
and staff in Arusha and The Hague, as well as in the field
offices in Kigali and Sarajevo, in their pursuit of justice
for the victims in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia.
We should take a moment to acknowledge the loss of
Judge Gberdao Gustave Kam, from Burkina Faso. Judge
Kam passed away earlier this year after a remarkable
career dedicated to ensuring justice for the gravest

We hope that the decision brings a measure of peace
to the victims and their families. We also acknowledge
the courage of the hundreds of victims who came
forward to testify and without whom justice would not
have been served. The verdict today also represents the
hard work of the judges, lawyers and the entire staff
of the Mechanism, who have dedicated themselves to
gathering, organizing and presenting evidence, finding
witnesses and supporting victims.
We also note the upcoming trial verdict in the
Stanišić and Simatović case, which we expect will
shed light on their responsibility for crimes committed
in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as
the work of the Mechanism to bring charges against
Félicien Kabuga, arrested in France last year. We
continue to support the Mechanism’s efforts to bring
the remaining Rwandan fugitives to justice, including
through our offer of a reward of up to $5 million for
information that leads to each fugitive’s arrest. We
urge all countries to cooperate with the Mechanism
in those efforts. In addition to the Mechanism’s work
to finalize cases involving charges of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity, we also note the
importance of its work to ensure the administration of
justice, including in the ongoing case against Anselme
Nzabonimpa and other defendants.
Along those lines, we are deeply disappointed
that Serbia has failed to comply with its obligations

21-1442311/25

S/PV.8790

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

to arrest two individuals charged with contempt of
court in relation to witness intimidation. Serbia, as a
Member of the United Nations and as a party to relevant
international and regional commitments, including its
European Union accession commitments under Chapter
3 of the accession acquis, has an obligation to cooperate
with the Mechanism in that case. Failure to cooperate
with the Mechanism undermines the operation of
international law and the effectiveness of the Security
Council. The United States calls on Serbia to execute
the arrest warrants without further delay.
We underscore that contempt cases are a critical
aspect of the Mechanism’s work and play an important
role in ensuring the rule of law. The assistance of
Member States is no less important in such cases,
as confidence that witnesses will testify truthfully
without fear is essential for the just resolution of cases
concerning the gravest crimes.
Finally, we commend the work of the Mechanism
in supporting national jurisdictions in prosecutions
and educational projects. As President Agius and
Prosecutor Brammertz note in their reports, there is still
much work to do to encourage the acknowledgement of
historical facts and further justice at the domestic level.
Serbia’s decision to grant citizenship to Mirko Vrućinić
in June last year, while he faced war crimes charges in
a court in Sarajevo, for example, effectively shields him
from justice. The United States calls on all States in the
Western Balkans to cooperate with the Mechanism and
with one another to prevent impunity from taking hold
in the region.
Mrs. Dime Labille (France) (spoke in French):
I thank President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz
for their reports and their briefings. On behalf of
France, I also pay tribute to the memory of Judge
Gberdao Gustave Kam and his valuable contribution
to international criminal justice. We extend our
condolences to his family.
France reiterates its full support for the Mechanism
and its work to fight impunity and preserve the legacy
of International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR). In particularly difficult circumstances,
the Mechanism has been able to make concrete progress,
which testifies to its relevance and effectiveness. The
Security Council must support its work.
The three decisions scheduled for this month
are awaited. We note today’s judgment in the Mladić
12/25

08/06/2021

appeal case. That is an essential step for justice and
reconciliation in the Western Balkans. The trial in the
Prosecutor v. Félicien Kabuga case will be another
important moment for the victims and for national
reconciliation in Rwanda. In order to complete that trial
and the other pending proceedings in a timely manner,
the Mechanism must have adequate financial resources.
France once again urges all States to cooperate
fully with the Mechanism, in accordance with their
international obligations. We regret that some partners
still refuse to do so despite the numerous calls of
the President of the Mechanism, the Prosecutor and
many Member States relayed within the Council. We
call on the Serbian authorities to fully cooperate with
the Mechanism.
Furthermore, it is essential that the remaining
fugitives indicted by the ICTR be brought to justice.
The death of the alleged perpetrators of the most serious
crimes cannot be justice for the victims. Where such
deaths are reported, the States concerned must provide
evidence of them.
With regard to the cases referred to national
jurisdictions, France reaffirms its full commitment to
bringing the Prosecutor v. Laurent Bucyibaruta case to
a conclusion within a reasonable time frame. The trial
in that case is currently being heard before the Court
of Assizes of Paris and should take place during 2022.
The work of the Mechanism is not limited to
judicial activities. The protection of the more than
3,000 witnesses is of paramount importance, and we
commend the work of the Kigali and Sarajevo offices
in that regard. We welcome the Mechanism’s initiatives
to raise awareness among affected communities and
younger generations of the legacy of the criminal
tribunals and the work being done. That memorial work
is essential to reconciliation. In a historic visit at the end
of May, President Emmanuel Macron visited the 1994
Tutsi Genocide Memorial at the invitation of Rwandan
President Paul Kagame. The aim is to translate the
memorial work carried out over the past two years into
political action. At the same time, President Macron has
committed to expanding the efforts already undertaken
to fight against the impunity of alleged Rwandan
perpetrators of genocide residing in France.
We remain deeply concerned about the denial of
crimes and the glorification of perpetrators of genocide
and war criminals convicted by international criminal
tribunals after impartial and independent proceedings.
21-14423

08/06/2021

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

The trend is worrisome. The statements made by the
authorities of several countries of the former Yugoslavia
are unacceptable in that regard. We reiterate our call to
all those responsible to refrain from such statements.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me at the outset
thank President Carmel Agius and Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz for their briefings and for their assessment
of the work of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals. On behalf of my delegation, I
also extend my condolences to the family of esteemed
Judge Gberdao Gustave Kam, who recently passed
away, and to the Government of Burkina Faso.
I would also like to thank Ambassador Dinh Quy
Dang and the delegation of Viet Nam, as the Chair of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
and the Office of Legal Affairs for the effective
coordination between the Council and the Mechanism.
Allow me to commend President Carmel Agius for his
stewardship of the process and for ensuring that the
Mechanism remains on track and continues to deliver.
We welcome the progress made by the Mechanism
during the reporting period, both in The Hague and in
Arusha, including efforts aimed at ensuring business
continuity, to the extent possible, under the current
extraordinary circumstances. We have taken note
that the restrictions in place to curb the spread of the
pandemic have adversely affected some timelines for
case completion.
India reiterates its support for the Mechanism
and commends its contribution to the fight against
impunity and to the preservation of the legacy of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
We have taken note of the work of the Mechanism in
scheduling judgment in the two proceedings in the
coming weeks and we also take note of today’s verdict.
Needless to add, the Mechanism should continue to
implement its mandate strictly, in accordance with the
principles of justice, impartiality and fairness.
We acknowledge the progress made on other
judicial matters during the reporting period, such as the
variation of protective measures and the supervision of
the enforcement of sentences. We also note the work of
the Prosecutor’s Office in its other residual functions.
The Mechanism should continue to make headway in
its remaining residual functions, including protecting
victims and witnesses, tracking the remaining fugitives
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,

S/PV. 8790

extending assistance to national jurisdictions and
managing the archives of the ad hoc Tribunals and
the Mechanism.
We welcome the progress made in the two defence
cases of Mr. Jovica Stanišić and Mr. Franko Simatović,
which were concluded on 23 February. It is our collective
responsibility to seek justice for the victims. We also
look forward to early progress on the relocation of the
nine acquitted persons, who are still in the safe house
in Arusha. This is a humanitarian issue that needs to be
addressed with urgency and sensitivity.
In conclusion, we urge the Mechanism to take
appropriate measures to keep the trial and appeal
schedules on track and also contribute to the capacitybuilding of national judicial authorities so that they
can effectively discharge their mandate on a selfsustaining basis.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I
too would like to thank Judge Agius and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their comprehensive briefings. I also
recognize the presence of the President of Serbia and
our colleagues, the Permanent Representatives of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Rwanda.
At the outset, we express our condolences on the
passing of Judge Kam of Burkina Faso. His passing is
a tragic loss to the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals. We welcome the announcement
of the nomination of his replacement and have full
confidence that the Mechanism’s mandate will continue
to be effectively fulfilled.
The International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals continues to be an essential pillar of the
international criminal justice system, and its critical
role in the fight against impunity cannot be overstated.
The Mechanism’s activities related to witness support
and protection, the monitoring of cases referred to
national jurisdictions, the preservation of archives and
the provision of multifaceted assistance to Member
States remain relevant. For this reason, we reaffirm our
unwavering support for its important work.
We continue to applaud the Mechanism for its
commitment to ensuring operational continuity,
notwithstanding the various challenges resulting from
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We note
that three judgments are expected to be delivered in
June, one having been received just this morning. This
is indeed a notable accomplishment, and it certainly

21-1442313/25

S/PV.8790

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

speaks to the tireless efforts of everyone involved in
the work of the Mechanism.
We recognize the laudable efforts to ensure the
rights and well-being of persons in detention during
this time, including through regular inspections by
organizations, such as the International Committee
of the Red Cross, and the facilitation of COVID-19
vaccinations. Persons in detention must be treated
humanely and with dignity.
The fulfilment of the Mechanism’s mandate is
undoubtedly dependent on international cooperation,
without which, the Security Council’s vision of a small,
temporary and efficient structure, whose functions and
size will diminish over time, cannot be achieved.
Where there exists a lack of political will to
cooperate with the Mechanism, the search for missing
persons, whose families still do not know their fate,
and the tracking and apprehension of fugitives will
be severely impeded. Further, the enforcement of
judgments will not be guaranteed, and above all victims
will be denied justice.
The arrest of Félicien Kabuga last May is a testament
to effective legal cooperation, which is critical to the
successful tracking, apprehension and prosecution of
the remaining fugitives of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda.
International cooperation also remains necessary
to resolve the matter of those individuals who have been
acquitted and released and are presently residing in
Arusha, Tanzania. We commend the Registrar’s efforts
in this regard, and it is our hope that a that a durable
solution to this protracted matter will soon be found.
We have taken note of the President’s
11 May referral of Serbia to the Security Council.
Non-compliance with the obligations encapsulated in
the statute of the Mechanism and Security Council
resolutions is unacceptable and serves to undermine the
administration of justice and the rule of law.
Remembrance of the horrific events of the past is an
important tool to prevent recurrence. As such, all forms
of genocide denial and the glorification of convicted
war criminals must be met with condemnation by
the international community. They hinder national
reconciliation and promote dangerous ideologies
that disregard the suffering of victims. Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines unequivocally denounces these
indefensible actions.
14/25

08/06/2021

In closing, we urge Member States to engage
constructively with the Mechanism in the pursuit
of accountability for mass atrocity crimes and the
strengthening of the rules-based international system.
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I thank Judge
Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their briefings.
My delegation conveys its condolences to the
President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals and his colleagues following
the tragic passing of Judge Gberdao Gustave Kam of
Burkina Faso.
We welcome the participation of the President
of Serbia and the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Rwanda at this meeting.
The Niger commends the work undertaken
and progress made by the Mechanism, despite the
constraints imposed by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.
My delegation takes note of the announcements of
the imminent conclusion of a number of proceedings
in June. The two judgments and the decision that
will be issued by the Mechanism before the end of
June will stand as tangible proof of the Mechanism’s
achievements. The same is true of the pretrial phase
in the Prosecutor v. Félicien Kabuga case and the
continuation of work on the Mechanism’s other judicial
functions during the reporting period, including issues
related to the supervision of sentence enforcement and
the protection of victims and witnesses. In that regard,
we commend the Mechanism for all its efforts to deliver
justice, while calling on it to respect due process and
the rights of the accused.
My delegation is pleased that the Mechanism has
been able to fully continue its work on pending cases
for 2021, despite the COVID-19 pandemic, and supports
its request to be granted a budget commensurate with
its responsibilities.
Witness protection, the provision of medical care
and psychosocial support for witnesses suffering
psychological trauma or living with HIV/AIDS, which
many contracted during and following genocide, are
measures we support. Furthermore, the Mechanism
must continue to develop its legal and regulatory
framework to harmonize and capitalize on the best
practices of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda and the International Tribunal for the Former
21-14423

08/06/2021

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

S/PV. 8790

Yugoslavia, as well as its own practices, in order to
successfully discharge its mandate.

I would also like to express our condolences on the
tragic passing of Judge Kam.

To ensure that genocide and other war crimes do
not go unpunished, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, with regard to the issue of
fugitives my delegation calls upon States with authority
over the territories in which fugitives are suspected
to reside to strengthen their cooperation with the
Mechanism and provide it with the necessary assistance
so that persons indicted by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda and the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia can be apprehended and brought
to justice. Furthermore, the Mechanism, together with
States, must take appropriate measures to address the
issue of acquitted or released persons in ongoing legal
limbo, which undermines their rights.

Due to the impact of the coronavirus disease
pandemic, the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals has faced many challenges in
conducting its work. Under the leadership of President
Agius, the Mechanism has overcome difficulties by
adopting remote working methods, resuming in-court
hearings and convening online plenary meetings,
among other means, to ensure the timely and efficient
conclusion of judicial proceedings, while enhancing
interbranch coordination and boosting staff morale.
Progress has been achieved.

My delegation is of the view that coordinated
communication in relation to the Mechanism and its
work with the European Union and Switzerland on the
project to raise awareness among communities affected
and among the young generations of the former
Yugoslavia is important in efforts to prevent another
genocide. We are aware of the challenges facing the
Mechanism and some, such as the lack of cooperation
and the denial of genocide, result in a veritable deadlock.
My delegation calls on the Office of the Prosecutor
to strengthen national capacities, which will help
underscore the principle of complementarity and ensure
that national authorities take responsibility for holding
perpetrators accountable.
In conclusion, my delegation encourages the
Mechanism to step up its efforts to implement the
recommendations outlined in the 2020 report of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services (S/2020/236),
as well as those outlined in the Office’s 2018 report
(S/2018/206), as those recommendations have been
only partially implemented.
Allow me now to highlight a section of the report
submitted to the Council, which states that only with
the tireless support of those committed to promoting
international justice, accountability and the rule of law
will the Mechanism be able to continue to discharge the
crucial mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for
their briefings.

The Office of the Prosecutor has also continued its
efforts to track down fugitives and actively advance
its work on trials and appeals. China commends the
aforementioned measures.
Pursuant to Security Council resolutions, the
Mechanism is a small, temporary and efficient structure,
whose functions and size will diminish over time. China
hopes that the Mechanism will carry out its activities
as mandated by Council resolutions. In particular, we
hope that judicial proceedings will be conducted and
completed in accordance with the timelines set out in the
report. In the process, the Mechanism should rationalize
its use of budgetary resources and prioritize judicial
activities. As cases draw to a close, the Mechanism
should reduce its expenditures as appropriate.
Practical and effective cooperation between the
Mechanism and relevant countries is important to
its ability to implement its mandate and advance its
work. President Agius briefed us earlier on the friction
between the Mechanism and the Serbian Government
in relation to the relevant case. China hopes that the two
sides will strengthen communication, increase mutual
trust, accommodate each other’s legitimate concerns
and learn from the successful practices of international
criminal tribunals. The goal is to find proper solutions
to issues, work together to combat impunity and
promote national reconciliation. In addition, China
expects the Mechanism to continue improving its work
by implementing the recommendations made by the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
and the Office of Internal Oversight Services and
finding swift solutions to issues, such as the relocation
of acquitted and released persons.
In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity
to thank Viet Nam, Chair of the Council’s Informal

21-1442315/25

S/PV.8790

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Working Group on International Tribunals, and the
Office of Legal Affairs for their efforts in coordinating
the Council and the Mechanism.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I thank President
Carmel Agius and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for
their comprehensive briefings today.
I would also like to offer my sincere condolences
on the passing of Judge Gustave Kam. Judge Kam’s
death is a loss for international criminal justice. I
would like to acknowledge his dedicated service to
both the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.
Although it is more than a quarter of a century
since the genocides in Rwanda and Srebrenica,
victims, survivors and their families deserve nothing
less than justice. We see the continued relevance of
the Mechanism’s mandate as clear. It is equally clear
that the leadership and staff of the Mechanism share a
dedication to that work. It is evident in the considerable
progress that has been made over the past year in
spite of very trying circumstances, with the efficient
conclusion of outstanding cases, including the three
cases reaching their final stages in this month alone. I
must also mark the issue of today’s landmark judgment
by the Mechanism’s Appeals Chamber, which dismissed
the appeal of Mr. Ratko Mladić and reaffirmed his life
sentence for genocide, crimes against humanity and
violations of the laws and customs of war. It is our
sincere hope that this judgment can bring some closure
to the survivors and victims of his crimes.
Last year, the Council reiterated its call on States
to intensify cooperation with the Mechanism and
provide all necessary assistance to achieve the arrest
and surrender of all remaining fugitives indicted by
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda. Cooperation is sine qua non for the
Mechanism to carry out its work, whether in relation to
the arrest and surrender of fugitives, the enforcement of
sentences or the resettlement of acquitted and released
persons. Ireland was therefore pleased to note the many
instances of positive cooperation by member States and
regional organizations with the Mechanism, as well
as the provision of assistance by the Mechanism to
national jurisdictions.
Nevertheless, we note with serious concern that
the Mechanism continues to encounter obstacles from
16/25

08/06/2021

a number of member States in connection with the
arrest and surrender of fugitives. In particular, Ireland
was deeply concerned about the 11 May notification
from the President of the Mechanism detailing Serbia’s
non-compliance with the Mechanism in relation to the
surrender and arrest of Mr. Jojić and Ms. Radeta.
We strongly urge Serbia to cooperate fully with the
court and comply with its obligations in this matter.
We also call on all States to assist the Mechanism in
relation to efforts to arrest and surrender the remaining
fugitives of the ICTR. Ireland looks forward to working
with Council members with the aim of promoting
cooperation with the Mechanism.
When the Council established the ICTY and the
ICTR, it sought to ensure not only that the perpetrators
of these crimes would face justice, but also that the
Tribunals would act as a preventive tool against future
acts of violence. Ireland recognizes the importance
of the Mechanism’s efforts, in conjunction with the
European Union, to raise awareness of the former
ICTY and the Mechanism’s work among affected
communities and younger generations in the region of
the former Yugoslavia.
In that light, we find concerning the Prosecutor’s
reports of ongoing attempts to minimize or deny
genocide that took place within living memory. Denials
of genocide and the glorification of convicted war
criminals are unacceptable, undermine reconciliation
and must be challenged and condemned.
In closing, as part of our steadfast commitment to
international criminal justice, Ireland will continue to
support the work of the Mechanism in ensuring that
perpetrators of atrocity crimes are held to account.
This accountability is a crucial step in achieving
and sustaining reconciliation and in preventing the
recurrence of these atrocities. We are grateful to be
able to meet today in person here in New York, and
we also look forward to the day when we can welcome
you Judge Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz back to the
Chamber in person.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I too would like to
thank Judge Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for
their thorough report to the Security Council and for
their briefings.
First, I wish to express our condolences on the
passing of esteemed Judge Kam of Burkina Faso in
February. His passing is a great loss to the International
21-14423

08/06/2021

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

S/PV. 8790

Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and to the
international legal community.

detailed progress reports submitted to the Security
Council and for the informative briefings today.

The fight against impunity is a central element
of Norway’s foreign policy. We have been a staunch
supporter of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda since their establishment in the early 90s, as
well as of the Residual Mechanism. Despite pandemicrelated challenges, the Mechanism has maintained
an impressive level of activity, and three important
decisions are to be announced in June, including
today’s delivery of the Appeals Chamber judgment in
the Mladić case, as referred to by President Agius. We
further commend the Mechanism for solid progress in
its other judicial functions and its important support to
national judicial authorities.

We express our condolences for the passing, in
February, of Judge Gberdao Gustave Kam of Burkina
Faso, who had served with distinction as a Judge of the
Mechanism since 2012.

The Mechanism is dependent on the cooperation
of Member States in order to fulfil the mandate the
Council has provided: to ensure accountability and
justice for the victims.
Norway is deeply concerned by the non-compliance
of the Republic of Serbia. We strongly urge Serbia to
comply with its international obligations to arrest and
surrender Mr. Petar Jojić and Ms. Vjerica Radeta to
the Mechanism. After more than six years and three
referrals on this matter to the Security Council, it is
beyond time for this protracted situation to be solved in
accordance with international law.
Norway greatly appreciates the Office of the
Prosecutor’s work to account for the remaining six
fugitives indicted by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda. We are concerned about the
reported lack of timely and effective cooperation from
Member States, preventing successful results. We
urge all States to fully cooperate with the Mechanism
and arrest and surrender all remaining fugitives.
The Security Council’s decisions must be adhered
to. Non-cooperation undermines the Mechanism, it
undermines the Council and it undermines international
law. The Council should assume its responsibilities
by examining every possible measure to facilitate the
arrest and surrender of those wanted by the Mechanism.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Estonia.
I thank Judge Carmel Agius, President of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for the

We commend the work of the Mechanism and
positively note the continuation of its judicial activities
despite pandemic-related constraints. We especially
note the expected delivery of three judgments during
the month of June, including the judgment in the appeal
case of Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladić pronounced today,
upholding the judgment of life imprisonment for the
crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity and laws
or customs of war. We also note the ongoing pre-trial
phase of the recently captured Félicien Kabuga, in line
with an amended indictment.
We thank the President of the Mechanism for the
efforts to secure the relocation of the nine acquitted and
released persons currently residing in Arusha, Tanzania.
We call on all stakeholders to step up cooperation to
facilitate this resettlement in a safe and speedy manner.
We welcome the efforts of the Mechanism
for assistance provided to national jurisdictions
prosecuting international crimes committed in the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. We note that the
progress in national justice initiatives has been slower
in recent years and call on States to increase their
efforts in that regard.
Estonia is deeply concerned about the ongoing
denial of the genocides in the situations under the
jurisdictions of the Mechanism. This must stop.
Estonia remains concerned about the challenges
that the Office of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism
continues to face in relation to cooperation with national
authorities in apprehending the remaining fugitives.
We strongly urge States, especially the African States
where fugitives are suspected of being at large, to
intensify their cooperation with the Mechanism in order
to arrest and surrender all of the remaining fugitives.
Finally, the Security Council received a
communication from the President of the Mechanism
on non-compliance by Serbia in executing the arrest
warrants for Petar Jojić and Vjerica Radeta. Resolution
1966 (2010) clearly stipulates that all States shall
cooperate fully with the Mechanism, in accordance
with the resolution and the Statute of the Mechanism

21-1442317/25

S/PV.8790

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

08/06/2021

annexed to the resolution. It also clarifies that all States
shall take any measure necessary under their domestic
law to implement the provisions of the resolution and
the Statute.

going to be the view of Serbia on everything that has
taken place in The Hague Tribunal and what the Tribunal
verdicts have brought to people in the region of the
former Yugoslavia.

Estonia condemns the ongoing disregard by Serbia
of its obligations under international law to comply
with the Mechanism’s orders. We strongly urge Serbia
to fulfil its obligation to comply with the latest warrants
by the Mechanism from May 2019 to arrest, detain and
transfer the accused to the custody of the Mechanism.

The Republic of Serbia has raised before the
Security Council, on several occasions, the issue of
the possibility of detainees serving sentences handed
down by the ICTY and the Mechanism in the Republic
of Serbia. Despite the effort to move this issue from
square one, not a single response has been received
from the Security Council. The majority of persons
who are serving prison sentences are citizens of the
Republic of Serbia, and it is natural that the Republic
of Serbia should be interested in enabling them to serve
their prison sentences in the Republic of Serbia.

We further refer to reported delays in responses from
Serbia to requests for assistance from the Office of the
Prosecutor in relation to court-ordered investigations,
and call on Serbia to resolve the backlog of responding
to the Office and to cooperate in a timely manner.
I conclude by extending our gratitude to the
President and Prosecutor of the Mechanism and
their staff for their outstanding work. We recall that
international criminal justice and the fight against
impunity relies on collective efforts. The international
community and the Council have to put the victims and
survivors first. We need to make sure that the rule of
law prevails and that there is full accountability for the
atrocities committed.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to President Vučić.
President Vučić: I shall point to a few ongoing
issues in my speech that refer to the competences of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, namely, the possibility of detainees serving
the sentences passed by the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and Mechanism in
the Republic of Serbia, with the current practice of
disabling the early release of the sentenced persons, as
well as the obligation of the Mechanism regarding the
protection of sentenced persons.
The second part of the speech will be dedicated to
issues that are raised by the six–month report on the
work of the Mechanism, as presented by Mechanism
President Mr. Agius, and the briefing by Chief
Prosecutor Serge Brammertz, especially regarding
the current cooperation of the Republic of Serbia and
the Mechanism.
The third part of my speech — and in that regard I
take note of many statements delivered here today — is
18/25

The ICTY and the Mechanism have made
references to the Security Council as an institution in
charge of dealing with this issue. I am ready to reiterate
here the readiness of the Republic of Serbia to assume
obligations and liability for executing prison sentences
that the Tribunal or the Mechanism have handed down
to the citizens of the Republic of Serbia, under the
monitoring of the Mechanism and with full respect for
the authority of the Mechanism regarding early release.
A particular problem that we are facing is
disturbances created by the judicial institutions
established in the territory of Kosovo and Metohija,
which is within Serbia and which is under the interim
administration of the United Nations. We have been
witness to attempts to retry two citizens who are
serving prison sentences for which they had already
been tried before the ICTY. More concretely, in the
recent past there was an attempt to hear the case of
Nebojša Pavković and to obtain the extradition of
Vlastimir Đorđević.
I urge the Mechanism and the Security Council
to prevent attempts to violate the principle of non bis
in idem — a civilizational principle that is confirmed
in article 7 of the statute of the Mechanism — and
to disable retrials for persons already convicted by
the ICTY, particularly in order to make sure that it is
not done in the territory that is under interim United
Nations administration.
Apart from the regular report, on 11 May the
President of the Mechanism, Judge Agius, also
delivered a letter (S/2021/452) to the President of the
Security Council, whose subject was the alleged failure
of the Republic of Serbia to apprehend and turn over to
21-14423

08/06/2021

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

the Mechanism Petar Jojić and Vjerica Radeta, indicted
for contempt of court, claiming that in this way the
Republic of Serbia was acting contrary to its obligations
under resolution 1966 (2010) and asking the Security
Council to take measures to ensure that Serbia meets its
alleged obligations in accordance with the Mechanism
statue and resolution 1966 (2010).
The point of the argumentation of the President
of the Mechanism is that the Republic of Serbia has
the obligation to deprive of liberty and extradite to
the Mechanism its citizens accused of contempt of
court — I repeat, contempt of court — regardless of
the nature of the accusation, the circumstances under
which such an order was made and the consequences
that might result from its implementation.
It is about accusations that do not refer to severe
violations of international humanitarian law and that
are related to a case before the ICTY that ended in
2018 — the case of Prosecutor v. Vojislav Šešelj— by
acquitting the defendant in the first instance. Upon the
Prosecutor’s complaint, the defendant was declared
guilty and sentenced to 10 years of imprisonment,
which were covered by the time he spent in the United
Nations Detention Unit.
Judge Agius stated that Serbia was ignoring its
obligations in accordance with resolution 1966 (2010).
Quite the opposite — the Republic of Serbia takes
seriously its obligations regarding cooperation with
the Mechanism. After the warrant for the apprehension
and extradition of the two persons accused of contempt
of court to the Mechanism had been introduced, the
Higher Court in Belgrade established that assumptions
for their apprehension and extradition to the Mechanism
had not been met. The decision is founded on the rules
of international law and domestic law of the Republic of
Serbia, and it is mandatory for holders of the executive
power in the Republic of Serbia.
I recall here that the first decision of a single
judge — Aydin Sefa Akay, on 12 June 2018 — who was
acting in this case was that the criminal prosecution of
Vjerica Radeta and Petar Jojić for alleged contempt of
court was to be forwarded to the judicial authorities of
the Republic of Serbia. In procedures that followed, the
argument concerning the alleged unwillingness of the
witnesses to cooperate with the judicial authorities of
the Republic of Serbia was raised for the first time, and
the decision to prevent the transfer of the case to the

S/PV. 8790

jurisdiction of the judicial authorities of the Republic
of Serbia was based on that argument.
The Republic of Serbia expressed its readiness to
take over the court procedure against Petar Jojić and
Vjerica Radeta on several occasions and provided
appropriate guarantees. Additionally, the Republic of
Serbia fully recognizes and accepts the obligation of the
Mechanism to monitor trials that have been transferred
to national courts, with the help of international and
regional organizations, as well as to take measures
envisaged in article 6 of the statute of the Mechanism.
I recall here that the Republic of Serbia has
extradited to the Tribunal all persons indicted by the
Prosecutor’s Office, including a large number of the
highest-ranking political, military and police officials;
it has enabled the presence of a vast number of witnesses
and delivered extensive documentation. The obligation
of the Mechanism, in accordance with the resolution of
this Security Council, is to take measures that enable
the transfer of cases to national justice systems. In
previous practice, 13 cases were transferred to Bosnia
and Herzegovina, 2 to Croatia and only 1 to Serbia.
Last but not least, I want to remind everyone here
of the fact that France — of course, as a sovereign
and independent country — on being requested to
apprehend and extradite Florence Hartmann for
publishing documents and contempt of court, refused
the request for extradition, with the explanation that it
does not extradite its citizens. For far smaller offences,
the Council asks us to extradite our citizens Jojić and
Radeta, showing both its mistrust of Serbian justice,
the Serbian judiciary and the Serbian State, and the fact
that the rule from ancient Rome — quod licet Iovi, non
licet bovi — remains valid.
It does no harm to underline the fact that high-level
officers and politicians have not been tried for crimes
against Serbs and that crimes against Serbs remain
unsanctioned by the ICTY and the Mechanism. Let me
recall, just as an example, that the case of Prosecutor v.
Rahim Ademi and Mirko Norac, concerning ferocious
crimes against Serb civilians in Medački Džep, was
left to Croatian justice institutions. Proven crimes
against Serbs, like those of Haradinaj, Orić, Gotovina
and others indicted for participating in the military
Operation Storm, which led to the complete ethnic
cleansing of the Serb population in the larger part of
today’s Croatia, resulted in acquittals before the ICTY.
Many horrible crimes against Serb civilians that were

21-1442319/25

S/PV.8790

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

committed in the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia and the autonomous province of Kosovo and
Metohija, and that resulted in ethnic cleansing, simply
were not the subject of the interest of the ICTY.
What is very important, and in order to leave nothing
unclear, is that Serbia is a country that condemns all
the crimes and all criminals who perpetrated them
in the region of the former Yugoslavia. However, it
is interesting that, despite frequent criticism, Serbia
is the only country that speaks openly and condemns
crimes perpetrated by Serb nationals, while in other
regional countries they do not speak at all about crimes
that representatives of those nations committed against
members of Serbian people. And I want to emphasize
once again here, in front of everyone, that Serbia
condemns the terrible crime committed in Srebrenica
and extends its deepest condolences to the families of
all killed in that massacre. And there are no buts in
that respect.
Nevertheless, we are here to analyse the results
and penal policy of the ICTY and the Mechanism,
which are such that it has never gained the trust of
the Serbian people, no matter where they live. I say
this not because we Serbs do not acknowledge crimes
committed by some of our compatriots, but because
The Hague Tribunal, with exceptions, has judged
only Serbs and in all three territories of the former
Yugoslavia — Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Kosovo and Metohija — the latter of which some
Council members see and name — of course, contrary
to law, legal norms and United Nations resolutions — as
an independent State. I will try to concretely prove how
The Hague’s justice has been tailored, even though I
know that it will not be understood by many here, but
to me it is important because of the history, facts and
school books that will be written in accordance with
the facts.
Specifically, Serbs have been sentenced to a
total of 1,138 years of imprisonment and to 8 life
sentences. At the same time, The Hague Tribunal
has not sentenced a single Croat for crimes against
Serbs — neither those committed in Operation Medački
Džep, nor those committed in Operations Flash and
Storm. This was done with great political cunning
in the Tribunal, and all wrapped in the formalities of
law and justice. Prosecutors of The Hague Tribunal
deliberately chose Ante Gotovina, Naser Orić and
Ramuš Haradinaj — three military and political
leaders of Croats, Bosniac Muslims and Albanians
20/25

08/06/2021

from all of the three aforementioned territories — to
try for crimes committed against Serbs. It is interesting
that, following the same pattern, this injustice was
shared. Specifically, all of them were sentenced in the
first-instance procedure, with the exception of Ramuš
Haradinaj, because not a single witness survived.
Gotovina was sentenced to 24 years’ imprisonment
in the first-instance procedure, while by a mysterious
decision of the second instance Chamber and a ratio
of three justices to two, the verdict was changed to
acquittal. Naser Orić, tried for crimes against Serbs
in Bosnia, was also found guilty in the first-instance
verdict, but by a mysterious decision of the secondinstance Chamber, and again by a decision of three
to two, was acquitted and freed of all liability. Let
me reiterate: all witnesses in the trial against Ramuš
Haradinaj either committed suicide or were killed
under very strange circumstances.
In conclusion, I do not want to believe that
someone wants to say that there were no crimes
against Serbs; but judging by the verdicts at The Hague
Tribunal, no one — absolutely no one — is responsible
for those crimes. Nevertheless, we in Serbia will
show responsibility and fight for peace, stability and
reconciliation in the region.
We ask Security Council Member States to help
us with a rational and pragmatic approach and respect
for international law, and not with attempts at further
humiliation of Serbia. Serbia is a small country, with
a proud and courageous people, the country that made
the biggest sacrifice during the First and Second World
Wars — a people who want to leave in peace with their
neighbours. And when I am asking for this, I do not
think I am asking for too much.
Serbia is the fastest-growing country of the
Western Balkans region, and we cannot progress
unless our relations with neighbours, friends and other
countries are good, solid and better. That is why, despite
the selective justice that was applied at The Hague
Tribunal, we will be open for any dialogue, any kind
of cooperation, and we will look towards the future and
not towards the past.
I have only one message for the citizens of Serbia
and the citizens of Serbian nationality in the entire
region: keep your heads up; neither Serbia nor Serbian
people are convicted of anything. And it is up to us
to work even more diligently, to open factories and to
fight for our children and our future.
21-14423

08/06/2021

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At
the outset, please allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We wish you every
success in performing your duties during the ongoing
special circumstances caused by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
I would also like to thank Judge Carmel Agius and
Mr. Serge Brammertz, the President and the Prosecutor
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals (IRMCT), respectively, for their reports and
today’s comprehensive briefings. We are grateful that
the Mechanism continued to make progress in its work
during the reporting period and that it continues to
function despite the pandemic.
On behalf of the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, I would like to express our deepest
condolences to the families and to the Mechanism on
the loss of Judge Gberdao Gustave Kam of Burkina
Faso, who passed away on 17 February.
We note the continued progress made by the
Mechanism in fulfilling the remaining activities of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY). We commend the IRMCT for its efficiency in
bringing all of its unfinished cases to a close this year
in spite of its reduced resources during the pandemic.
Since the previous two meetings of the Security
Council, the COVID-19 pandemic has had a serious
impact on the actions and activities of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals as well as
on the judicial authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We are aware of the challenges that the pandemic has
posed for national prosecutors of war crimes in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The work of the Prosecutor’s Office
and the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which deals
primarily with the unfinished and most complex war
crime cases, were particularly affected. Bearing in
mind that a massive programme to vaccinate all citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina has begun, we expect that
national- and international-level judicial institutions
will carry out their duties and responsibilities at an
accelerated pace.
I hereby inform the Security Council that the judicial
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina have taken
all the measures necessary to implement the revised

S/PV. 8790

strategy for the work of war crimes cases, as adopted
by the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in September 2020. One of the first and most important
goals of the strategy is to conclude all unresolved war
crimes cases by 2023. To that end, the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina are working to resolve all open
war crimes cases among judicial authorities of different
levels in Bosnia and Herzegovina. All potential
perpetrators of war crimes must be prosecuted for their
personal or command responsibilities. In accordance
with the revised strategy, judicial authorities should
unify court practice in order to strengthen trust in the
judicial system and ensure the equality of all citizens
before the law. The implementation of the strategy will
send a strong message that impunity will not and must
not be allowed.
I would like to emphasize again, as evidenced in these
reports throughout the relevant period of operations,
that the cooperation of Bosnia and Herzegovina with
the ICTY and the successor Mechanism was stable and
complete. We remain committed to contribute actively
to the Mechanism’s efforts to accomplish its mission. We
would also like to reiterate our commitment to its work
and to call on all Member States to fulfil all obligations
and to make their financial contributions in order to
provide for the Mechanism’s uninterrupted work.
We would like to express our gratitude for the
support of the European Union, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the United
Nations Development Programme for strengthening the
human and material resources of judicial institutions
prosecuting war crimes and engaged in general capacitybuilding. In that regard, I would like to inform the
Council that Bosnia and Herzegovina recently opened
its first national-level prison facility built in accordance
with high human rights and European Union standards.
That institution was constructed with the assistance
of the European Union, other international donors and
domestic resources.
I would like to emphasize that Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains committed to investigating,
prosecuting and punishing all persons responsible for
war crimes, regardless of the offenders’ nationality,
ethnicity, religion or political or other affiliation.
Cooperation between institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and those of neighbouring countries
in the exchange of information is also critical as we
continue to search for more than 6,000 persons who
remain missing in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I would

21-1442321/25

S/PV.8790

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

also like to emphasize that the glorification of war
crimes and their perpetrators is unacceptable and must
be punishable under the law. All those measures are
necessary for reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the Western Balkans region.
Lastly, I take this opportunity to draw the attention
of the Security Council to the three specific cases that
pertain to this important point.
First, I refer to the case of General Jukić, which
illustrates the vital importance of consistent cooperation
among the Prosecutor’s Office, the competent authorities
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and those of neighbouring
countries Serbia and Croatia, in accordance with the
principles of international justice and the rule of law,
which is crucial for the investigation and prosecution
of war crimes. Having been convicted of war crimes by
the relevant court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Jukić
escaped to Serbia, a catastrophe that has undoubtedly
had a negative effect on cooperation in the region and
damages good and productive bilateral and multilateral
relations throughout the region. Mr. Jukić must be
returned to face the legal and judicial consequences of
his severe crimes.
Secondly, on behalf of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
I am pleased to note that, after many years, the war
crimes proceedings against Jovica Stanišić and Franko
Simatović, who stand accused of grave offences, are
close to conclusion. It is equally important that the
adjudication of those cases be completed and that the
verdicts of the judiciary be issued and implemented.
In conclusion, the Security Council is undoubtedly
aware that the IRMCT issued its final verdict today in
the case of Ratko Mladić, who, after years of eluding
justice with the complicity of Serbian authorities, was
convicted in 2017 of genocide and other war crimes
against humanity. Today the mechanism confirmed that
verdict and, in doing so, brought to a conclusion one
of the worst chapters in modern human history. Today
Bosnian Serb leaders continue their efforts to hide
their atrocities and deny the genocide. They glorify as
heroes the evil men and women who perpetrated these
crimes, even though Mladić and most other key figures
in the Bosnian Serb ultra-nationalist leadership have
been brought to justice and convicted of war crimes
against humanity.
As today’s final verdict illustrates, these denials
and efforts to rewrite history will continue to fail.
Mladić, known as the Butcher of the Balkans ever
22/25

08/06/2021

since the mass murder of defenceless men and boys was
uncovered, will die in disgrace and live in infamy. The
devastating consequences of these offences remain, and
family members of the victims can never see their loved
ones again, but justice has prevailed. For this, Bosnia
and Herzegovina stands today as a grateful nation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): I thank the President of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Judge Agius, as well as Prosecutor
Brammertz, for their briefings today and for their
recent reports. I wish to express my condolences to the
family of Judge Kam.
Croatia welcomes today’s long-awaited final
judgment rendered by the Residual Mechanism,
which confirmed the life-imprisonment sentence
against Ratko Mladić for atrocity crimes committed
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Considering the gravest
war crimes and crimes against humanity that were the
subject matter of the indictment and the various joint
criminal enterprises in which Mladić participated in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and keeping in mind that
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) had established that genocide was committed
in Srebrenica, this judgment is appropriate.
While the final judgment in the Mladić case brought
a degree of relief to the families of his many victims
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including of the genocide
in Srebrenica, we remind the Security Council once
again that it was in Croatia in 1991 that he began his
infamous warpath. Hundreds of his victims in Croatia
never saw him stand trial for those crimes. What is
more, they were never even included in his indictment,
although Croatian authorities provided assistance to the
ICTY Prosecutor’s Office by meeting their requests in
this case.
President Vučić pointed out that during the conflict
in the former Yugoslavia, no one was an angel. I
will not discuss in this Chamber the many cases
he mentioned because it is not the time or the place.
However, I will mention that it is also quite clear who
the devil was. Mr. Milošević’s death deprived us of
the judgment that would have provided the framework
for all individual atrocity crimes committed during
the conflict in Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Kosovo. Today’s final judgment and the life sentence
against the General Mladić — one of Mr. Milošević’s
21-14423

08/06/2021

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

most brutal henchmen — cannot fill that void, but at
least it provides justice for some of their victims.
Croatia is paying great attention to the progress of
all ongoing cases, in particular the case against Jovica
Stanišić and Franko Simatović, which is in the trial
phase. We note the Mechanism’s efforts to minimize
coronavirus-disease-related delays of trials, yet, despite
these efforts, the Mechanism was regrettably not in a
position to conclude the Stanišić and Simatović case as
previously planned. Therefore, we urge the Mechanism
to redouble its efforts to deliver its judgment by the end
of this month, as stated in the report we have before
us. We have every confidence that the prosecution
provided the Trial Chamber with enough evidence to
determine beyond any doubt Stanišić’s and Simatović’s
criminal responsibility for atrocity crimes committed
in the armed conflicts in Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as their role in the joint criminal
enterprise. Since unfortunately the Milošević case
did not end with the verdict against him, it is very
important that this case ends with a judgment that
clearly demonstrates involvement of the top Serbian
authorities in atrocity crimes committed in Croatia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Croatia remains firmly committed to the
development of good relations and cooperation with
neighbouring States, and we strongly support their
aspirations towards European Union membership,
based on their full compliance with clear and wellknown criteria, especially with regard to the rule of
law, including full cooperation with the Mechanism. In
order to persist on this path and deliver results, a strong
political commitment is required, as well as a more
decisive approach in processing war crimes.
In that regard, we remain very concerned with
Serbia’s lack of cooperation with the Mechanism.
Recently, the Court sitting in single-judge formation
issued the decision in which it found that Serbia has
failed to comply with its obligations to arrest the accused,
Petar Jojić and Vjerica Radeta, for contempt of the court
and transfer them to the Mechanism. We underline the
need for Serbia to fully cooperate with the Mechanism,
including by fully accepting and implementing all of
its rulings and decisions. Intimidation of witnesses is
a serious crime that undermines accountability efforts,
and it should be treated as such.
We give great importance to the continuation of
cooperation with other neighbouring States in matters

S/PV. 8790

related to war crimes. In this respect, we appreciate
positive developments in cooperation with Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Croatia hopes to achieve the same
progress with Serbia in due time as well. Croatia is
still waiting for Serbia’s response to its September 2019
invitation to the fourth and final round of negotiations,
which we hope would result with the finalization of
the draft text of a bilateral agreement on processing
war crimes.
Croatia continues to work to establish the
whereabouts of the remaining wartime missing
persons. While thousands of cases have been resolved,
the search for 1,864 missing Croatian citizens and their
remains is ongoing, without regard to their ethnicity.
We must remember that behind every number there
is a person, and behind every person there is a story
that deserves to be told, in the hope that it might
contribute to the reconciliation efforts and the peaceful
coexistence of peoples as well as provide comfort to the
families of victims. To this end, Croatia holds dialogues
with other States and international organizations in the
hope of establishing whereabouts of missing persons.
Unfortunately, Serbia still does not invest sufficient
energy in efforts to find the victims who went missing
in the war. This issue has been raised on every possible
occasion with Serbia’s representatives.
In conclusion, let me reconfirm Croatia’s full
support for the mission and work of the Mechanism.
Croatia remains a strong supporter of international
criminal justice, including this Mechanism as well as
the International Criminal Court.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): I thank President
Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their progress
reports and detailed briefings. We commend them for
their continued efforts in the execution of the mandate
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. We appreciate the good cooperation
existing between the Mechanism and the Government
of Rwanda.
We express our sincere condolences to the
Mechanism on the passing of Judge Gberdao Gustave
Kam, of Burkina Faso.
Rwanda notes the focus of both briefers’ reports
on the remaining fugitives. We are disappointed by the
continued lack of effective cooperation from Member

21-1442323/25

S/PV.8790

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

States. This is the single most important impediment
to the completion of the mandate the Security Council
gave to the Mechanism, and it calls for the Council’s
urgent attention. Let us recall that Rwanda sent out
more than a thousand indictments to countries around
the world, requesting their cooperation with the
arrest and prosecution of genocide fugitives or their
transfer to Rwanda. Few countries have responded to
these indictments.
Rwanda commends countries that have extended
cooperation to the Office of the Prosecutor of the
Mechanism and to the Rwanda prosecution. Rwanda
welcomes the commitment of His Excellency
Mr. Emmanuel Macron, President of France, during his
visit to Rwanda last month to pursuing efforts to seek
justice for the victims and survivors of the 1994 genocide
against the Tutsis in Rwanda by bringing to justice the
alleged perpetrators living on French territory.
We also welcome the cooperation extended by the
law enforcement agencies of France, which led to the
arrest of genocide fugitive and mastermind Félicien
Kabuga in May 2020. He had been on the run for more
than two decades. We welcome too the more recent
decision by the French judiciary to set the trial date for
genocide fugitive Laurent Bucyibaruta, who resides in
France. The date has been set for 9 May 2022. Lastly,
we welcome the start of the trial proceedings for both
Kabuga and Bucyibaruta and encourage the courts to
accelerate the proceedings to allow the long-delayed
justice to finally be rendered.
We wish to express our appreciation for the
cooperation extended by the United States with regard
to the recent extradition to Rwanda of genocide fugitive
Beatrice Munyenyezi in April.
Those developments demonstrate that justice can be
rendered where there is political will to extend judicial
cooperation to bring to justice those responsible for
crimes against humanity.
As indicated in the report of the Prosecutor, a
number of genocide fugitives live in African countries.
This is the place for us to recall the African Union
(AU) Peace and Security Council decision PSC/PR/
COMM.(CMLXXXIX), dated 12 April, which calls on
all African Union member States to investigate, arrest,
prosecute or extradite the genocide fugitives currently
residing on their territories.
24/25

08/06/2021

Failure to comply with both the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council resolutions and
decisions to cooperate and bring genocide fugitives
to justice has a negative impact on the maintenance
of international peace and security, which should be
obvious to the Council. The attacks of extreme violence
perpetrated against populations by armed groups in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which were formed and funded by genocide fugitives,
are well-documented and their crimes against civilians
of communities to which they fled have often been
reported to the Council.
In conclusion, I wish to say a few words about the
issue of genocide denial. The Office of the Prosecutor
has regularly reported on genocide denial. Rwanda
and many other countries have expressed their grave
concern in that regard. The Government of Rwanda
welcomes the prosecution of those who interfere with
witnesses with the aim to revise established facts. We
agree with the Prosecutor that such contempt of court
is a form of genocide denial and those guilty of it must
face the force of the law.
The President: The President of the Republic
of Serbia has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now give him the floor.
President Vučić: I wanted to reply on some issues
that were mentioned by delegation representatives
during this afternoon’s meeting and to provide a little
more information about Serbia’s non-compliance with
the requests and demands of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
First of all, I wanted to say that the representative
of the Bosnia and Herzegovina delegation said that he
was speaking on behalf of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which is not true. We all received a letter from the
presiding Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Milorad Dodik, who said that it was not
with the real consent of the Bosnian Presidency; it was
the private opinion of the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I am not going to go into the details in
which he was criticizing Serbs from Bosnia and Bosnian
Serb leaders. It is not the best politics to criticize and
offend one’s own people, but it is up to them.
I did not say anything against anyone or any
country of our region in my statement, but the Bosnian
and Croatian representatives did. The Croatian
representative, the head of the delegation, said that it
was well known who the devil was. It would be easy
21-14423

08/06/2021

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

for me to reply to him by saying that it is very obvious.
There was only one, a very big and one of the largest
concentration camps in this region, found in a very
small place — Jasenovac. I think that at least everyone
knew who the devil was.
But we do not need to go that far back in history. I
think that we have different opinions on the events of
recent history. But, as a matter of fact, we respect their
attitudes, although we do not share them.
At the same time, those present will notice that
there were no responses to the issues that we tackled
or the questions that we raised with regard to the fact
as to why there were no Croats responsible for the
terrible crimes committed against Serbs, not a single
one, before the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. There was not a single one — only a few
Bosnian Muslims with regard to heinous crimes against
Serbs in Bosnia.
Of course, I need to say once again that we strongly
condemn the atrocities and the crimes committed by
our compatriot Serbs. That is the difference between us.
I wanted to add one more thing for everyone
present this afternoon around this table, that is, the
nice rhetoric on missing persons. But the Croatian
representative forgot to say that there are more missing
Serbs than missing Croats. They always forget to say
that. I am saying this officially to the Council. That is
the conclusion of the Croatian Red Cross, not the Red
Cross of Serbia. This is just for the Council to know
that we are completely ready to deliver everything

S/PV. 8790

on missing persons. What we propose to Croats and
Albanians as well is that they should find a place in
Serbia and let us know they have some doubts regarding
the fact that there were some buried people. We will go
there, together with them, within 24 hours, excavate the
place and bring the truth to the families of those missing
persons. We have nothing to hide and will never protect
or hide perpetrators of those terrible crimes. That is
why I think that the position of the Republic of Serbia
is very strong.
Many Member States were asking us this afternoon
and demanding from us to ensure compliance and abide
by resolution 1966 (2010). Those words came mainly
from those that brutally violated resolution 1244 (1999),
which mentions the territorial integrity of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. They started to recognize
Kosovo’s independence. That is something that shows
those red-herring principles, double standards and
everything else.
Finally, we will continue to cooperate with the
Mechanism and the Office of the Prosecutor. We will
fulfil our obligations. But, as the Chinese representative
proposed, I ask that the Council try to find some proper
solutions and not to humiliate Serbia, but to work
together with us to find a partnership relationship.
Then I think that would be good, as something good
would be done for the benefit for us all. I once again
thank the Council very much for listening to me and for
giving me an opportunity to intervene.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

21-1442325/25
