United Nations

294th

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING
Saturday, 7 October 1950, at 10.45 a.m.

FIFTH SESSION
Official Records

Flushing ~eadow, New York
CONTENTS
Pa,qe

Problem of the independence of Korea: reports of the First Committee
(A/1422) and the Fifth Committee (A/1424) (concluded) ...•.•..• 227
Election of three non-permanent members of the Security Council (continued) 235
Inclusion of new .items in the agenda: rep<;'lrt of the General Committee
1: • • • • • •
236
(A/1430) . ,
fl • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

,

• • • • '.

,

•

••

Election of three non-permanent members of the Security Council (concluded) 239
Inclusion of new items in the agenda: report of th~ General Committee
240
(A/1430) (concluded)
President: Mr. N asrollah ENTEzAM (Iran).

Problem of the independence or Korea: reports of
the First Committee (A/1422) and of the Fifth
Committee (Al1424) (concluded)
, [Agenda item 24]
1. Mr. BARANOVSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from Russian): The debate on
the Korean problem is drawing to a close. The General
Assembly faces the task of adopting a decision on one
of the most im.1?ortant matters on its agenda.
2. The discussions in the First Committee1 and in the
Assembly have brought out two clearly distinguishable
approaches to the settlement of the Korean problem.
3. The delegations of the USSR, the Ukrainian SSR,
the Byelorussian SSR; Poland and Czechoslovakia ,have
insisted on the need for a pf~ceful settlement of the
Km'ean conflict.
4. The delegations of those five Pow,~rs have submitted a draft resolution [A/1426] t,o the General
Assembly. Essentially, that draft resolution provides
for putting an end to foreign intereference in t.he settlement of the internal conflict between N orth ~~nd South
Korea, and for giving the Korean people itself, by its
, freely e.."'Cpressed will, the opportunity to settle the problem of the unification of Kqrea in a single, democratic
, State and of the establismnent of a legislative organ and
,
, a goverJ;11nent of the Republic.
5. These proposals show the sincere deslte of the
~()viet Union· and. the peace-loving States united with
it to step the war at once and to create conditions pro-

pitious to, the peaceful development of Korea, to which
United States intervention and aggressiotl have brought
innumerable misfortunes and heavy losses. These peace
proposals are designed only to put an end to the Korean
conflict through the concerte;d efforts o~ the United
Nations. Nevertheless, they have been opposed and
countered by a number of delegations, headed by the
delegation of the United States.
6. But however much the opponents of our proposals
try to distort their meaning and belittle their importance
by alleging that their only aim is propaganda, they will
not succeed in concealing from world public opinion
and from their own peoples the steadfast will for peace
. .'
expressed in those proposals.
7. The other approach to the solution of international
problems is expressed in the d.raft resolution [A/14Z2]
submitted by eight delegations headed by the United
Kingdom. What kind of a programme for the settlement of the Korean conflict does that draft resolution
propose?
8. The basic difference between it and the five-Power
'draft resolution is ~hatit does not provide for p'utti!lg
an end to the war In Korea. On the contrary,. Its mm
is to extend the aggression to the entire territory of
Korea.
9. Thus, on the' one hand, there is an attempt to stop
the conflict forthwith and end the war in Korea by
peaceful means, and on the other 'an iattempt to extend
the area 01 -conflict and· to prolong the internecine war
in Kfllrea.

".1 See Official Records of ~'he General Assembl~, Fifth Session,
{'srst Commilt.ee, 346th to 353rd mccHngs inclusive.

10. 'That is why it is diffi,~111t to reconcile the posi14on
of, the delegations of the five State~ with that otthe

'I·

22'1
,Tti-.

'.;

228

__

General Assembly-Fifth Se~sion-Plenary Meetings
------_---:._-_-..:._--_...:......--_---------.-

paring their plans of aggression the war-mongers are
convinced that the United States will take a 1eadihg
part in carrying them out.
16. The adventurous plans for the unleashing of war
are the direct result of the foreign policy pursued during recent years by the United States1 which has been
seeking to create aggressive blocs and to establish military bases, and has embarked on a feverish armaments
race; they are also the result of unbridled propaganda.
17. The aggressive policy of the United States, which
is the accomplice in these adventurous plans of aggression, cannot be concealed by resounding phrases and
hypocritical assertions of attachment to peace.
18. Thus the draft resolution submitted by the eight
Powers seeks to disguise the aggressive measures
against Korea as defence measures which, it is claimed,
will help the cause of peace.
19. What kind of peace is it that the eight-Power draft
resolution wishes to establish in Korea?
20. By what means does it propose that such a peace
should be established? The answer is given in Mr.
Acheson's speech to the National Citizens' Committee
for United Nations Day, delivered in Washington on
7 September 1950.
"Korea," said Mr. Acheson, "is the workshop in
which the United Nations has the chance to make
the prototype of the kind of world which it wants
to make universally."
21. This clearly confirll~s our assertion that a regime
desired by the United States will be foisted on Korea
regardless of the will and desires of the Korean people.
22. We know of numerous examples of such imposition by force of political regimes alien to the peoples
concerned.
23. We still remember the bloody events in Greece
,14. As early as 3 December ~948, Pen Ku-en, a
and the ruthless vengeance wreaked upon the people,
(minister of the Syngman Rhee chque, sent a letter to
to the accompaniment of so-called "democratic elecSyngman Rhee concerning what he called tpe future
tions" and the establishment of ~lorder".
destiny of Asia. He wrote:
24. The United States aggressors wish to impose their
i "After the liberation of our northern territory, the
kind of "peace" on Korea by force. Realizing that it
Korean and American a):mies should proceed across
can expect no support for it~ plans from the Korean
the Liao-tung peninsul8. and up to Harbin. A reconpeople, the United States is concealing its intentions
stituted Chinese nationalist army should restore the
and acts behind the authority and flag of the United
territories lost by China, including the province of
Nations, thus transforming this international OrganiLiao-tung... After the victorious completion of the
zation into a branch of the State Department. The
war, the Korean and American armies should occupy
delegation of the Urtited States is hastening to ensure
Manchuria . . . At a subsequent stage in the rethe adoption by the General Assembly of a resolution
organization of the Far East, Japan should be asjustifying American aggression in Korea, and is trysured a preponderant influence, and should receive
ing to obtain the sanction of the United Nations for
Vladivostok and part of Siberia . . . You no doubt
the occupation of the entire country.
have a better plan for the reconstruction of Asia
25. That is why, yesterday [292nd meeting], Mr.
than the one that I have;" outlined, but I am again
Austin so insistently demanded the execution without
expounding this point of view in full so that I, rather
delay
of the purposes of the United Nations in North
than you, the supreme head of 30 mi!li~n Koreans,
Korea,
thus calling for the extension of aggression beshould be the obj~ct of attack at;ld rIdICule b~ our
yond the 38th paralIel.
enemies if our plans should be discovered or mtercepted."
\ 26. As was admitted by Mr. Spencer, the repres~t1ta­
tive of Australia and one of the authors of the eight..
15. Perhaps the United States delegation will say that
Power draft resolution, the text was deliberately drafted
the United States was not a party to the elaboration of
in vague terms, leaving broad possibilities for any kind
these adventurous plans; but that cannot justify the
of interpretation or action. That point was stressed by
United States Government. The United States Governa
number of representatives; during the ~ebate, p~r·
ment bears the responsibility for i:he fact that s,uch plans
ticularly by EI-Khouri Bey, th,e representattve of Syria.
are made and implemented, and for the fact that in pre-

delegations headed by the United Kingdom and the
United States. The two draft resolutions are fundamentally different in their .aims and basic postulates
because they represent two different views on the settlement of international problems. One approach is to
strive for peace; the other, to unleash war. The preparation for the attack on North KOl'ea and the unleashing of the civil war were a natural extension of the
internal policy of the anti.,national Syngman Rhee government.
11. The government of Syngman Rhee is the embodiment of a regime which suppresses not only al~ the elements inimicql to it, but even those merely not m agreement with the government's policy of dismemberitl:g
the country. It is a regime which abolishes democratic
freedoms and ~hamelessly violate~ ~he ~onstituti~n: It
is a regime WIth a corrupt admInIstration; a regime
which has brought economic ruin and poverty to the
population. It is quite clear-and this is proved by
numerous facts and documents adduced here or not
yet mentioned-that the South Korean Government
did not and does not now enjoy the support of the
people, and can th~lrefore exist only by l\elp from outside.
12. The policy of the Syngman Rhee government lo.ng
ago ceased to be a Korean policy and became the pohcy
of the United States in Korea.
13. It is small wonder, therefore, that the puppet government of South Korea, following the general line of
United States foreign policy, was concocting broad
plans of aggression long before the actual attack on
North Korea. It was banking on United ~tates int~r­
vention in the internal affairs of Korea, an mterventton
aimed at destroying the democratic regime in North
Korea and which was to be the first step towards the
. . extension of United States aggression in Asia.

I

229

294th Meeting-7 October 1950
._----------------_.::..._-------------------27. The United States and th~ other count~es par, tidpating in the K.or~an aggressIOn do not wlsh to be
bound by any restncbons. In order to have a freehand
in Korea, they propose to introduce into all parts of
the country armed forces whose bayonets will impose
order and democracy, United States style.
28. But the United States and the other authors of
that draft resolution base their proposals on false premises. They entirely ignore the masses of the people,
who cannot be disregarded and to whom the final word
belongs.
29. We know that the enemies of peace, among whom
are· a number of delegations to the present Assembly,
wiIJ vote against our draft resolution..We shall not be
astonished to find Mr. Spender at thelr head. It could
not be otherwise. Mr. Spender brags too much about
the illusory independence of his government's foreign
policy' and with affected indignation thunders at those
who would question that point, passing over in silence
certain well known facts. Those facts are that Mr.
Chifley, former Prime Minister of Australia and leader
of the Labour Party, connected the dispatch of Australian troops to Korea with the securing for Australia of
a loan of 100 million dollars from the United States.
He said that the Australian people was getting the impression that Menzies was trading Australian soldiers
for a dollar loan.
'
30. .That is no communist propaganda: it is a statement by the leader of the Labour Party and the former
Prime Minister of Australia.
31. Naturally we cannot count upon support for our
proposals from traders in human lives and human blood,
or from their representatives in the Assembly. No one
will be deceived by the theatrical pathos ,and menacing
outcries made by Mr. Spender and his New Zealand
or other colleagues in the anti-peace camp against the
imaginary "aggressors". The aggressive intentions of
the Governments of the United States, the United
Kingdoril, Canada, Australia and some other countries
towards Korea are clearly distinguishable through the
camouflage of grandiloquent phrases which conceal the
real intentions of the authors of the eight-Power draft
resolution.
.
32., We repudiate the eight-Power draft resoJution
because it would bring to Korea a continuatiol1 and
aggravation of the war, and an indefinite occupation.
It would not give Korea democratic freedom or political
independence. It would necessarily impose the Syngman
Rhee regime, deeply hated by the p.eople, on all Korea.
nis hostile to the people, for it is designed to secure
the enslavement of the country by foreign capital. The
people of Korea would not accept a decision of the
Ge~eral ,Assembly which ~hus ,ignored its interests.

33. The United Nations should show its determina;.,·
tion to resist Anglo-American pressure and should not
permit the transformation of an international instru, !llent of peace into a tool of aggression-a tool for the
[ ~thplementation of imperialist and expansionist plans
In the Far East.
, .
34. The governments represented at this Assembly
~'.
,hou,,Id realize what the adoption of the draft, resolution
of. the ,Anglo-American bloc would mean for. them. It
will not settle the Korean conflict. It can only further

I

I,

exacerbate international relations and jeopardize the
cause of peace.
35. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSh, therefore~
appeals to the delegations of all those countries which
are concerned for the maintenance of international peace
and security, and urges them to adopt the five-Power
draft resolution on the Korean question. That draft
resolution is inspired by a sincere desire for the peaceful settlement of the Korean conflict and it points the
way towards a peaceful settlement of the Korean problem.
36. Mr. POLITIS (Greece) (translated from
French) : Before dealing with my own subject, I should
like to say a few words about the reference wl;1ich has
just been made to elertk,,,,s in Greece. I did .not quite
grasp the purport of that remark, but I should like to
say that the whole world, and in particular this Organization, knows very well how elections are conducted
in Greece. If the reproach, or insinuation, we have just
heard refers to the fact that we have not yet reached
the ideal stage of democratization in which the oneparty system spares the electors the bother of making
a choice, or if the intention was to reproach us with the
fact that we remain impervious to a type of electoral
magic which makes it possible to persuade more than
a 100 per cent of the electorate to vote in favOtJ..t of the
party in power, I must say that we are indeed o.t fault.
37. In the First Committee we devoted eight fuU meetings to the consideration of the Korean question. All
the arguments were set forth at length there, some of
them several times and sometim€s in the very same
manner by a series of ·speakers. There we heard rather
absurd theories ,expounded, such as that South Korea
was the aggressor. I was nevertheless somewhat surprised yesterday morning to hear the criticism expressed that perhaps this matter had not been considered in sufficient detail. Even in the First Committee
I at times had the feeling that the debate was being prolonged unduly, while the United Nations forces, composed almost entirely of the sons of this great democracy, were risking death and sacrificing their lives in
defence of a people wilfully attacked. As for our delegation, we emerge from this debate thoroughly convinced
of certain fundamental points, which I shall enumerate.
38. There was armed aggression, premeditated and
organized well in advance.
39. That aggression ,originated in the part of Korea
which is situated north of the 38th parallel, and from
the very beginning the regime established there has
ignored and up to this moment is still ignoring the
United Nations; it has ignored its decisions and has
stubbornly refused all contact with its most highly ac' ,
credited representatives.
40. The Government of South Korea, the only government legally established by elections conducted
under the supervision of the United Nations Commission, has offered the United Nations unlimited cooperation, assisting every inquiry and keeping its doors
open to all the investigations which the Commission
undertook.
41. Here, in its main outlines, is the framework in
which this tragic affair is taking place. These are facts
which leave no room for doubt to any 111an of good
faith. They are pertinently set forth in the' report of

230

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

the United Nations Commission on Korea2 ; it would
be absurd to dispute its statements, which have been
f\111y confirmed by events.
.
42. To r~medy this situation, we must now choose
between tW(,) draft resolutions which may have certain
similarities but which are none the less essentially different. In ()ur view, the fundamental difference lies in
the fact that the draft resolution [A/1422] submitted
by the First Committee, on the initiative of eight
Powers whose names you know, provides for the withdrawal of United Nations forces from Korea as soon
as the basic objectives which are laid down have been
attained. And, of course, among these objectives is
included the establishment of a legal authority in a
united Korea. On the other hand, the draft resolution
[A/1426] submitted by the group of Suviet Powers requests the immediate' withdrawal of United Nations
forces as soon as the guns have ceased to fir,e. Under
that draft resolution, the United Nations ;forces would
pack up their bags and leave as soon as the aggressors
laid down their arms. That is to say, the day after the·
close of so bitter and bloody a conflict, with the ruins
still smouldering and passions aflame, the aggressors
and the victims would be left alone to discuss the uniilcation of their country between themselves, to discuss
it perhaps in the way of which the North Koreans have
given us an edifying example. Is that not a curious
challenge to our intelligence?
43. This situation, we know, is the one which existed
before the aggression. It is the very situation which
made the aggression possible, and we know the inevitable relationship between cause and effect. What guarantee does the five-Power draft resolution offer that the
same thing will not happen as soon as the forces of the
United Nations have been withdrawn?
44. Doubtless you realize that this policy of the status
quo ante tells uS nothing of value. The' interesting
speech of the Czechoslovak representative has .given
us a foretaste of what would happen then. We owe him
thanks for his astonishing frankness in saying that the
Korean people would already have been united if the
United Nations forces had not intervened. United how?
No doubt by fire and sword, by the completion of the
conquest of the South by 'the North, by the enslavement
of the 20 million South Koreans by North Korea.
45.

Peace and the policing of the peace are the
purposes of our Organization. Determined
o;)position to the exercise of this function, which is
it'itended to ensure peace while the new State is being
organized, is a repudiation of the most essential part
of the Charter. Nevertheless, to judge by a later paragraph of the five-Power draft resolution-the penultimate, if I am not mistaken-the United Nations would
be wel~ome to reconstruct the country ravaged by the
aggr~ _.•! and to rehabilitate the .sorely-tried population. . i virtue of what principle can the Charter be
repudiated in some of its parts, and upheld in others,
according to whether these parts are favourable or unfavourable to our designs?

ptim~ry

46. These reasons are, Lt! our vi~w, sufficient for us
to say here, as we did in the First Committee, that we
a.re in favour of the draft resolution proposed by the

United Kingdom ~md the seven other Powers. We
choose it without the least hesitatioq because if is the
only text in harmony with the Charter. We choose it
because it is logical and constructive. Lastly, we choose
it because w'e prefer order .and peace to violence and
chaos.
47. Sir Benegal N. RAU (India) : I have already explained in the First Committee the views of my delega..
tion on the main draft resolutions before us. Much of
what I am going to say will therefore necessarily be
repetition, for which I apologize in advance.
48. There is a great deal in the eight-Power draft
resolution with which my d.elegation is in full agreement. Confining myself to ~ts operative part, Qur main
difference is with regard to sub-paragraph (C:) at the
beginning of the .operative part, wherein the Assemhly
recommends:
HThat United Nations forces should not remain in lh1y
part of Korea otherwise than so far as necessary for
achieving the objectives specified at (a) and (b)
above".
.
49. Whatever may be the strict technical interpretation of this clause, it has been widely regarded as authorizing, if not positively, at least by implication, the
United Nations forces to enter North Korea and tQ
remain there until the ~nification of Korea has been
completed and stability achieved. If such is the intention
of the draft resolution-and there is a widespread impression that it is-then the draft resolution authorizes
the United Nations forces not only to cross the 38th
parallel but to remain in North Korea for a somewhat
indefinite pet:iod of time, because 11.0 one knows how
long unification may take.
.
50. My government fears that the result may be to
prolong North Korean resistance, and even to extend
the area of con.i~ict. Our fears may turn out to be
wrong, but each government has to judge the situation
.upon the best information at its disposal and to act
accordingly. Thus we 'View with the gravest misgivings
the particular re(;ummend~Ltion that I have mentione<l.
51. There is another con.sideration that is very much
in the minds of my delegation. For some time past
India has done whatever it· could to exercise a restraining influence on ~ll1 concerned and to plt'event at whatever cost the K(Jreanconflict from extending to other
regions and, as I have. said elsewhere, even at the risk
of being misunderstood, India has to go on doing so
in the interests of peace in tl1e Far East. My government feels that for us to support the recommendation
in question would seriously diminish our effectiveness
in this respect. During the past few' days India has been
charged with having no positive policy or definite view
in regard to Korea. I thought I had ttlade our position
perfectly clear in the First Committee. Let me repeat it.

I

52~ Our position, broadly stated, is that at this stage
the General Assembly should first of all declare, or
reaffirm, its objectives, namely, first, the creation of an
independent and united Korea by .means of free etectiops and, secondly, economic rehabilitation of the
country.

53. On these two points there is complete unanimity
in the General Assembly. Both these points are men·
tioned in almost identical language in both the eight- ,

_.~

..... ',.

231

294th Meetlng-70clober 1950
le

•

I

power and the five-Power draft resolutions. Therefore
the dec1atation of these two objectives can be made
with the assent of all the Members represented here
or, at least, without the dissent of any.

54. Having done this, and before the United Nations
forces advance further, we should call upon the North
Korean forces to cease hostilities by a certain specified
date. In the face of a declaration of objectives made
by all of us t'll·~.re-unanimously, or at least without dis·sent-the Nm."th Korean forces would, in their present
military situation, have every inducement to comply
with the call. If they did comply, we could then go
on with the implementation of the declared objectives;
if they did not comply, we could review the situation
and decide upon some other course. In this way we
should minimb:e the chances of arty further prolongation or extension of the conflict, and We should be in
a position to achieve our objectives with the least possible friction or discord.
, ..
55. .My delegation, in the First Committee, proposed
the appointment of a sub-committee for co-ordinating,
a~ far as possible, the various proposals and suggestions
which bad been made regarding the future of Korea.
To give an example of the kind of service which such
a sub-committee might have rendered, I would refer
to the proposal in the five-Powe~ draft resolution, that
when Korea was unified the question of its admission
to the United Nations shoulo' be considered..That was
actually adopted by the First Committee by 18 votes
to 10, with 31 abstentions. Bu.t it does 110t appear in
the eight-Power draft resolution now before us. The
proposal is along the lines of similar proposals which
were adopted by us in the case of Indonesia and Libya
[resolution 289 A(IV)). It is obviously a useful idea
which, suitably worded, might have been woven into
the draft resolution. It is now lost unless we retrieve it
by a last-minute amendment. This is only one example
.:.-.whi'ch is almost before our very eyes-and it should
suffice to prove that the sub-committee might have
served a useful purpose.
.

bring back the dead-and that it will leave behind no
bitter memories.
58. 1t has been said that the empires of the future
are the empires of the mind, and we must do all we
can to win the hearts and minds of the Korean people,
whether of the North or of the South.
59. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The debate is closed. We shall rlow proceed to the vote.
The first draft resolution which I shall put to the vote
is that submitted by the First Committee [A/1422].
60. Abdel Hamid GHALEB Bey (Egypt): I would
request that we should ·vote by paragraphs, beginning
with the word "Recommends", which is the first word
of the operative part. I do not request a separate vote
on each paragraph of the preamble.
61. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The representative of Egypt requests that part of the
text should be voted on separately, but not an the paragraphs. He refers only to the part which begins with
the word "Recommends" and comprises sub-paragraphs (a) , ( b) , (c) 11 (d) and ( e). If there is no
other request for a' separate vote, we can proc.eed to
vote on those sub-paragraphs.
62'. I therefore put to the vote the preamble of the
draft resolution, from the wordS! "The' General Assembly, Having regard ..." to the words "•.. a unified, independent and democratic government of
Korea".

The prea~bte 'was adopted by 51 'Votes to 5, with 1
abstention.
63. . The PRESIDENT (translatea from French):
In accordance with the, request of the representative
of Egypt, we shall proceed to vote paragraph by paragraph.
Sub-paragraph (a) was cuJopted by 46 'Votes to S)

nututy".

with 7 abstentions.
.
Sub-paragraph (b) was adopted by 52 'Votes to 5.
Sub-paragraph (c) was adopted by 51 'Votes to S)
with 2'abstentions.
Sub-paragraph (d) was adopted by 43 'Votes to 5)
with 4 abstenti{)ns.
Sub-paragraph,· '(e,) Was adopted by 54 votes to none)
with 5 abstentions. .

57. I am well aware that. there is a. school of opinion

64. The PRESIDENT (translated jro'n!r French) ~

56. A great war leader has somewhere inscribed, for
our guidance, the motto :which-I speak from memory
-runs: "In war, resolution; in defeat, defiance; in
victory, magnanimity; in peace, good wi11~'. It is the
third part of this inspiring appeal that has a special
app~opriateness for us· now: ,,"in victory, magna-

that generosity to a defeated enemy is at best an act
of faith and is often apt to turn out to be downright
foolishness. But let us look soberly at the facts. No
one advocates that the United Nations forces should
occupy Korea for all time or even for a long time.
Once stable unification has been achieved, they have
to withdraw. When they do withdraw, the Koreans will
be left to manage their own affairs. We must make sure
that when that time comes-and it may come 800n, they will remember with gratitude the United Nations
Organization and the countries taking part in the
present action. We must therefore take care that the
military operations do not last a day longer than is
necessary, that the conflict is kept within the narrowest
bounds possible, that there is no avoidable loss of life
or property-for even economic rehabilitation cannot

~

We shall now proceed to vote on the second part of
the operative part, which deals with the appointment
of the commission. You will recall that yesterday
[293rd meeting) we /. "~~ in the blank in the text.
Consequently the list ot ~~G seven countries which will
comprise the commission has now been oompleted by
the name of Thailand. I now put to the vote sub-para·
graph (a).
The sub-paragraph was adopted by 53 'Votes to 4,
_

'With 1 abstention. .

65. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I have before me an al11endment submitted by the
Australian delegation [A/l429] to the effect that the
first sentence of sub-paragraph ( b) should be reworded as follows:

282

General Auembly-Fifth Sel8ion-Plenary Meetings

H (b) Pending the arrival in KQrea of the United
Nations Commission for the unification and rebabiU..
·tation of Korea, governments r(~presented on the
Commission should form an interith committee com"
pos~d of representatives meetin,g at the seat of the
Umted Nations • • ."
The rest of the sub-paragraph is unchanged.
66. I shall put this amendment to the vote.
The amendment was adopted by 43 'tlotes to 4, with

2 abstentions.
67. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):

I shall put to the vote sub-paragraph (b) as amended.

Sub-paragraph (b), as amended, was adopted by 44
votes to 6, with 3 abstentions.
68. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
As a separate vote has not been requested on the re-

mainder of the draft resolution, I shall put to the vote
the part of the text beginning: 11 (c) The Commission
shall render a report to the next regular session of the
General Assembly", to the end.

The remainder of the draft resolution was adopted by
51 'Votes to 5.
.
69. The PRESIDENT (transkJted from French):
I shall now put to the vote the dra.ft resolution as a
whole.

,\"
<>"

The draft resolution as a whole, as amena{1d, was
adopted by 47 'Votes to ...i, with 7 absten~ions.
70. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
You will have noted that the Fifth Committee recom..
mends in its report [A/1424] that the General As..
sembly should take account of th~ financial implications
of the draft resolution which we have just adopted.
71. r take it that in voting on the draft resolution,
you took into consideration the financial implications
involved. It is therefore not necessary for me to put
the Fl'fth Committee9s recommendation
. to the vote.
72. r call upon the representative of Chile, who wishes
to explain hiS vote. '
~

73. ~r. SCHAULS.OHN (Chile) (translated from
S pamsh): We have Just adopted a resolution of the
utmost importance, the purpose of which is to unify
the whole of Korea and to grant the country its in..
dependence as a democratic and sovereign State. At the
same time, we have considered the rK1easures necessary
for its rehabilitation and, at the request of Chile, other
measures designed to speed the economic and social
development of the country.
74. In order to achieve these purposes, the Gener&l
Assembly has seen fit to appoint a commission composed of seven members, among them Chile. My delegation therefore feels bound to say a. 'few words about
the importance it attaches to its appointment and the
principles which will guide it .in the fulfilment of. the
task which the United Nations has assumed. '
75. In the first place, my country is greatly honoured
by this mark of international confidence.
76. Secondly, Chile is aware of the serious respun..
sibility it is undertaking: to put into effect an extremely
important decision of the United NaHons. For the first

time, our Organization bas embarked upon action for
collective defence against armed aggression" and it is
preparing to take real, tangible s~eps in order that the
principles of the Charter may prevail in a country
whose birth and independence proceed from theresolutions of the United Nations.
"77. My country does not, snrink from assumitlg, together with the other members of. the commj,ssion, the
responsibility entailed by its appointment. In international and domestic affairs, Chile has observed and
will continue to observe the principles of democracy
and peaceful community life, and" in such matters it
really practises what it preaches. In international
affairs, .it has beet~ indefatigable in its support of fundamental rights and the self-determination of peoples.
Now, in Korea, Chile will make a resolute and honest
contribution to the effective independence and unity
of this nation of Asia numbering more than 30 millio'l
inhabitants. Together with the other members pf the
commission, it will take steps to see that 'this nation
elects the government it wants freely and democratically, free from prejudices and foreign intervention,
We shall study the country's economic problems and .
play our part in rendering the United Nations assistance for rehilbilitation a,nd development truly 'effective.
78. In the past, Chile gained its independence and
now it knows what a real democratic system is, for
that is the system under which it is living. Chile knows,
therefore, what this resolution and its honest impJementation will mean for the people of Korea. Accordingly,
it will spare no efforts in furthering the interests of
Korea. It krtows that in doing so, it will be contributing to the prestige of the United Nations, and to the
establishment pf peace and security in the world.
79. ' Finally, we hope that, when our common task is
completed, the General Assembly, world public opinion
and, above all, the people of Korea will feel that we
were worthy of this great mark of confidence.
,
80. The PRESIDENT (translated fro'm, French): In
order' to avoid any misunderstanding in the future,
may I draw the Chilean representative's attention to
the fact that the statement which he has just made is
not an explanation' of a vote. As however, his name
was on the list of speakers before the vote, and as he
kindly withdrew his name from, the list in order to
help the Assembly conclude the debate more quickly,
I did not interrupt him now. I hope the other speakers
who ask for the floor to explain their votes will come
to this rostrum to make such an explanation.
81. Mr. AL..FAQIH (Saudi Arabia): 1 should like
to explain the position of my delegation on the resolution just adopted by the Assembly.

82. Our vote should not be interpreted in any manner
as implying that we are opposed to the principles and
aims which the resolution embodies. I hardly need to
reiterate the position of ~y government, which has been
made sufficiently clear. My government is unequivocally
opposed. to all forms of aggression anywhere and in any
circumstances. My delegation is in complete accord with
the basic objectives of the resolution. We welcome the
attempts to unify Korea and to estabtish there an independent and democratic government.
83. Durinfi~ the debate in the First Committee, how-

...

294th Meetin_7 October 1950

ever, several pertinent points were raised which needed
clarification and which partly explain why we supported
the draft resolution of India in committee. Unfortu..
nately, neither the Committee nor the A!Ssembly has
dealt satisfactorily with those important aspects of the
problem, such as the terms of reference of the corn..
mis,sion, the competence of and relation between the
three authorities to be functioning in Korea, namely,
the army command, the, South Korean government and
the United Nations commission.
84. For these reasons, our delegation, although sup..
parting most of the parts of the resolution, abstained
in the vote on the resolution as a whole.
85. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
call now upon the representative of the USSR, not
to explaitl his vote, but on a point of order.
86. Mr. MALIK (Union' of Soviet Socialist Repub..
lies) (translated from Russian) : The delegation of the
Soviet Union voted against the draft resolution on the
Korean question submitted by the First Committee
because if was completely unacceptable. The text pro..
vides for the occupation of the territory of Korea and
does 110t in any way contribute to a peaceful settlement
of the Korean question and the creation of a unified,
independent, democratic Korean State.
87. The USSR delegation must also point out the un..
precedented nature of such political declarations on a
resolution adop~ed by the General Assembly as that
made today by the representative of Chile after the
resolution on the Korean question had been adopted
by the Assembly. Such statements go beyond the rules
of procedure; they are contrary to the practice of the
General Assembly and are without precedent.
88. The representative of Chile made his statement in
the political and military interests of a special group
of States in the Assembly.
89. The delegation of the Soviet Union considers that
such statements on resolutions adopted by the Assembly
are unacceptable and intolerable..
90. The PRESIDENT (translation from French):
I permitted this last speech, but here is my ruling. I
shall' give the floor for an explanation of their votes
only to those members of the Assembly who did not
participate in the discussion which preceded the vote.
It is inconceivable that some delegations should wish
to speak again in order to explain their votes after
speaking. for two hours. Surely during their speeches
they had time to give such explanations.
91. If any d.elegation wishes to ehallenge my ruling,
'
I shall put it to the vote.
92. I see that my ruling is not challenged. Therefore
we shall proceed to the vote on the draft resolution put
forward by the delegations of the Soviet Union, the
Ukrainian' SSR, the Byelorussian SSR, Poland and
Czechoslovakia [4/1426]."
93. Mr. BARANOVSKY (Ukrainian Soviet SodaUst
R.epublic) (translated front Russi4n) ~ The delegation
of the Ukrainian SSR proposes that the five-Power
proposal on the independence of Korea should be put
to a roll-call vote in parts.
94. The PRESIDENT (translated front French):
In accordance with the request we have just heard, we

233

shall hold a roll-call vote, paragraph by paragraphl on
the draft resolution submitted by the five Powers
[A/1426].
.
A vote was taken by roll..call on the fir~'~ recital.
Bolivia, having been drawn by lot by the President,
voted first.
In favour.' Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia, Egypt; India, Indonesia, Iral1,
Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, Liberia, Poland, Saudi Arabia,
Syria, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union" of
Soviet Socialist Republics, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan.
Against: Bolivia, BrazU, Canada, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ethiopia, France, Greece,
Guatemala, Haiti. I-fonduras, Iceland, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Sweden,
Thailand, Turkey, Union of South Africa, United
States of America, Belgium.
.
Abstaining: Pakistan, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela,
Argentina, Australia.
The first recital was rejected by 35 votes to 19, with
6 abstentions.
A vote was taken by roll-call on the second recital.
Panama, having been drawn by lot by the President,
voted first.
In favour: Poland, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Burma,
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia,
Egypt, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq~ Israel, Lebanon,
Liberia.
Against: Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, Union of South Africa, United States of
America, Belgium, Bolivia, Canada, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Dellmark, Dominican Republic, El Sal..
vador, France, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Iceland,
Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Norway-.
Abstaining.' Philippines, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela,
Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Chile, Cuba, Ecuador,
Ethiopia, Honduras, Mexico, Pakistan.
The second recital was rejected by 27 votes to 19,
with 14 abstentions.
.
A vote was taken by ,·oll...call on the third 'recital.
Egypt, having been drawn by lot by the President,
voted first.
In favotw; Egypt, Indi3~ Indonesia, Liberia, Poland,
Syria, Ukminian Soviet Socialist RepUblic, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Re..
public, Czechoslovakia.
Against: El Salvador, Ethiopia, France, Greece,
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Luxembourg,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, Union
of South Africa, United States of America, Belgium;

,

23'

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Denmark, Dominican Republic.
Abstaining: Iran, Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, Mexico,
Pakistan, Philippines, Saudi Arabia, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela, Argentina, Australia, Cuba, Ecuador.
The third recital was fejected by 31 votes to 14, with

15 abstentions.

A vote was taken by roll-call on paragraph 1 of the
operative part.
Czechoslovakia, having been draw11, by lot by the
President, voted first.
In favour: Czechoslovakia, Poland, Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Yugoslavia, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic.
Against.' Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
'Salvador, Ethiopia, France, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Liberia, Lwcembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, Union
of South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Argentina, Australia, .Belgium, Bolivia,
Brazil, Canada) Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Cuba.
Abstaining.' Egypt, India, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia,
Syria, Yemen, Afghanistan, Burma.
PQ,ragraph 1 was rejected by 46 votes to 6, with 8

abstentions.
A 'Vote was taken by roll-call on paragraph 2 of the
operative part.
Panama, having been drawn by lot by the President
voted firJ't.
In favour: Poland, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Re-

public, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Byelorus<
sian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia.
•
Against: Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, Union of South Africa,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of Americap Uruguay, Venezuela,
Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Burma,
Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, France, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Liberia,
Lwcembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan.
Abstaining: Saudi Arabia, Syria, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Afghanistan, Egypt, Leban()n.
Paragraph 2 was rejecte'd by 48 votes to 5, with 7

abstentions.
A vote was taken by .yoll~call on paragraph 3 of the
operative part.
Patlama, having been drawn by lot by the President,
voted first.
In favour: Poland, Ul(rainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Byel()rus~
sian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia, Egypt,
Indonesia, Iran.

Against: Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,

Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, Union of South Africa,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ire..
land, United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela,
Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, France,
Greece, Guateihala, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Iraq,
Liberia, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,! Norway, Pakistan.
Abstaining: Saudi Arabia, Syria, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Afghanistan, Burma, Ethiopia, India, Israel, Lebanon.

Paragraph 3 was rejected by 42 votes to 8, with 10
abstentions.
A vote was take1~ by roll~call on paragraph 4 of the
operative part.
.
Guatemala, having been drawn by lot by the Presi·
dent, voted first.
In favour: Poland, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia.
Against: Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland>, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, Lib(!)rt;J., Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand<, N~caragua,
Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, :Pe\ru~ Philippines, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, Unitpn of South
Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain aind Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Argentina, Australia., Belgittt,n, Bolivia,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Ethiopia, France, Greece.
Abstaining: India, Saudi Arabia, Syri&\, Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Burma, Egypt.
Paragraph 4 was rejected by 47 votes to 5, with 8

abstentions.
A vote was taken by roll-call on paragraph. 5 of the
operqtive part.
Francs; having been drawn by lot by -the President,
voted first.
In favour: Indonesia, Poland, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Byelorussian Sovie'~ SOCi3list Republic, Czechoslovakia.
Against: France, Greece, Guatemala,' Haiti, Hon-

duras, Iceland, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, Liberia,
Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zeaiand, Nicaragua, 'Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, Union of
South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Vetlezu~la, Australia, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ethiopia.
Abstaining: India, Saudi Arabia$ Syria, Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Argentina, Burma, Egypt.
Paragraph 5 was rejected by 45 votQS to 6, with 9

abstentions.
A vote was taken by roll-call on paragraph 6 of the
operative part.

l

294th Meedng-7 October 1950

2S5

Chile, having been drawn by lot by the Preside1~t,

tedious and tendentious roll-call votes .on each para-·
graph of the draft resolutions submitted.

In favour: Czechoslovakia, Egypt, India, Indonesia,
Iran, Iraq, Israel, Poland, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Burma, Byelo..
russian Soviet Socialist Republic.
Against: China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, France, Greece,
Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland, Liberia, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, Union of
South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Australia, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada.
Abstaining: Chile, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Haiti, Lebanon, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Afghanistan, Argentina.
.
Paragraph 6 was rejected by 33 votes to 16, with 11
abstentions.
; ~
A vote was taken by roll-call on paragraph 7 of the
Qperative part.
New Zealand, having been drawn by lot by the
President, voted first.
In favour: Pakinstan, Philippines, Poland, Saudi
Arabia, Syria, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia, Egypt, Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Liberia, Mexico.
Against: New Zealand, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, Union of South
Africa, United States of America, Belgium, Bolivia,
Brazil, Canada, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Greece, Honduras, Iceland, Luxembourg, Netherb\Dds.
Abstaining: Norway, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Urug,ttay, Venezu1ela,
Argentina, Australia, Chile, Cuba, El S~\lvador, France,
Guatelrtala, Haiti, Lebanon.
Paragraph 7 was rejected by 2S votes to 22, with 13

98. The PRESIDENT (translated from Frenc~):
We shall now proceed to vote on the draft resolution
submitted by the Soviet Union [A/1427]. A rolL-call
vote has been requested.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
France, having been drawn by lot by the Presidentl
'voted first.
In favour: Poland, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Repilbli,,;s, Byelorus~
sian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czech('jslo~a.kia.
Against: France, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Xran, Iraq, Israel,'
Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Sweden,
Thailand, Turkey, Union of South Africa, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Urugua;y, Venezuela, Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Burma, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia.
Abstaining: Syria, Yemen, Yugoslavia.
The draft resolution was rejected by S2 vot2S to 51
'with 3 abstentions.
99. The PRESIDENT (translated from F1"ench)':
We shall now vote on the last draft resolution before
us on this subject. It is submitted by the Soviet Union
[A/1428]. A foil-call vote has been requested.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Burma) having been drawn by lot by the President)
voted first.
In favour: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Reptlblic;
Czechoslovakia, Poland, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Against: Burma, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, France, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran,
Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg, Mexico,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Saudi
Arabia, Sweden, Syria, Thailand, Turkey, Union of
South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay.
Venezueta, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil. .
The draft resolution was rejected by 55 votes to 5.

voted first.

t..

absten.~ions.

95. . The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The representative of Bolivia wishes to explain his
vote.

96. Mr. ANZE MATIENZO (Bolivia) (translated
from Spanish): My delegation voted against part of
the preamble of the Five-Power draft resolution. It
did likewise in the First Committee, together with the
Belgian delegation. It is aware that the draft enunciates
a number of basic principles and it did not intend to
commit the heresy of denying those principles, but bore
in mind the fact that principles and even extracts of
the Charter are often deliberately embodied in paragraphs of draft resolutions which are often contrary to
the true principles of the Charter. Moreover, my delegation voted thus because it considers it logical to vote
against various parts of a draft when it intends to vote
against the draft asa whole.

97. Finally, we hope that this interpretation will gain
general acceptance so that in future we may avoid these

Election of three non-permanent members of the
\ Security CouncU (continued)

[Agenda item 14]

100. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We have now completed the first ham on our agenda.
Before turning to the second: item, the report of the
Gel1eral Committee, may I suggest that the Assembly
should deal with the third. item, the election of a non-

-----...----~---~~-l
General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetin~8

236

permanent member of the Security Council. Ballot
papers will be distributed.

A vote was taken by secret ballot.
At the invitation of the President~ Paris El~Khouri
Bey (Syria) and Mr. Jocste (Union of So'uth Africa;)
acted as tellers.
Number of ballot papers:
60
Invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
60
Abstentions:
0
Number of valid votes cast:
60
Required majority:
40
Number of votes obtained:
Turkey
,.................... 33
Lebanon .
27
101. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
:tieither country has obtained the required two-thirds
majority. Before taking another vote, I give the floor
to the representative of Egypt on a point of order.
102. Mohamed SALAH-el-DIN Bey (Egypt) : After
these numerous attempts in which the results of the
balloting have shown no appreciable change, I snould
like, on behalf of the delegation of Egypt, which is
directly concerned with the matter as one of the Middle East countries, to announce, together with our
colleagues, the representatives of the Arab delegations,
who are also directly concerned with this matter, that
we shall consider the situation in the light of these
results with a view to finding a way out of the present
impasse. I therefore propose the postponement of the
balloting to give us time for this purpose. I hope that
the representative of Turkey will agree.
103. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Does the representative of Turkey accept the proposed
adjournment?
104. Mr. SARPER (Turkey): Yes, }A:r. P,resident.
105. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We shall now take up the next question: which is the
report of the General Committee.
r

•

•

•

•

•

•

• •

• •

•

•

•

• •

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

• ••

Inclusion of new items in~he agenda: report of
the General Committee (A/1430)
106. .The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The General Committee has considered the inclusion
of certain additional Items in the agenda and has
submitted a report [A/1430]. It proposes the inclusion
of five new items. In order to make our work easier,
we shall examine these one by one.
107. The first item is as follows: "The question of
Formosa: item proposed by the United States of
Am~dca." 'fhe General Committee recommends that
this matter should be placed on tke agenda and referred to the First Committee for consideration and
report.
108. Mr. l\tIALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian) : The delegation of
the Soviet Union objected to the inclusion of the
question of Formosa in the General Assembly's agenda
when this question was discussed by the General
Committee.
109. The USSR delegation continues to object to the
inclusion of this item in the agenda of the fifth session
of the General Assembly for the same reasons which it

outlined in the General Committee when the question
was examined.
110. The raising of such a question in the United
Nations is contrary to the Charter of our Organization
and is an insult to th~ great Chinese people whose long
fight for national independence and whose success in
that struggle arouse deep respect on the part of the
Members of the United Nations \lnd the peoples of the
world.
111. The question whether the island of Taiwan be~
longs to China is not a question which the United
Nations is competent to consider. The Cairo Declara~
tion of 1943 unreservedly recognized that Taiwan and
the Pescadores belonged to China in the same way as
the territory of Manchuria belonged to China. The
Potsdam Declaration confirmed those provisions of the
Cairo Declaration. The order for the surrender of the
armed forces of Japan provided that the Chinese com~
mand should accept the surrender of Japanese troops
on Taiwan, on the legal grounds that, pursuant to the
Cairo agreement and subsequent international agree~
ments cot\c1uded during the Second World War, Tai~
wan constituted an inalienable part of Chinese territory.
112. Since then no one has questioned, much less
objected to the fact that Taiwan forms part of the ter~
ritory of China. As recently as 5 January, and again on
8 February 1950, the United States Government reiterated its view that Taiwan belonged to China. Now,
however, the fact that the island of Taiwan belongs to
China is suddenly considered "not clear" by the Gov~
ernment of the United States, which demands that the
United Nations should examine the question.
113. The United Nations cannot deal with the question of Taiwan any more than it can deal with the ques~
tion of the Hawaiian islands, since the fact that Taiwan
belongs to China has already been established by wartime agreements and is not subject to review. When
the United States ceases to drag out the qUt:stion of
concluding a peace treaty with Japan, that peace treaty
will merely endorse an internatbnal act which has
already been completed and cannot be reviewed, :.md
by which Taiwan has been handed over to China.

114. Consequently it is not incumbent upon the
United Nations to consider the question of Taiwan,
that is to say the status of this Chinese island, as the
United States delegation is proposing. It is incumbent
upon the United :N~tions to consider the situation which
has arisen as a rc~ult of the invasion of Taiwan by
United States forces and which threatens the peace of
the Far East. The General Assembly should therefore
discuss not "the question of Formosa", as the United
States delegation proposes, but the question of United
States aggression against China. That question has
alr~ady been included in the agenda of the fifth session
01 the General Assembly at the request of the USSR
delegation and has been referred to the First Committee.
115. The discussion of Uthe question of Formosa"
by the United Nations would constitute an intervention
in the internal affairs of China and would be a flagrant
violation o£ Article 2, paragraph 7 of the. Charter, which
provides that nothing in the Charter "shall authorize
the United Nations to intervene in matters which are
81bid'J Gentral Committee) 69th and 71st meetings.

294thMeeting-7 October 1950
essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any
State/'
116 It would also be contrary to Article 107 of the
Ch~rter which states that nothing in the Charter shall
invalidate action-for instance, treaties and agreements
concluded during the Second 'Vorld War-in relation
to any State which during the Second Wodd War
was an enemy of any signatory to the Charter, taken or
authorized as a result of that war by the governments
having responsibility for such action.
·117. It is therefore quite inadmissible that the United
Nations should be drawn into an illegal discussion of
Hthe question of Formosa", as proposed by the United
States delegation in violation of the Charter and for
reasons which are quite incompatible with the principles
and purposes of the United· Nations concerning the
strengthening of international peace, security and
friendship among nations.
118. Mr. HAJDU (Czechoslovakia): The Czechoslo··
vak delegation is against the inclusion of this item in the
agenda. This attitude is a logical consequence of the
factual and legal position of the question of T:,J.iwan.
There is no doubt, and it has never been contested,
that the future fate of Taiwan was 'settled by the
Cairo agreement of 1943, in which it wlas stated that the
purpose of 'the rowers w~ich were .part.i~~ to that
agreement was to restore TaIwan to Chma. . nat agreement was confined by the Potsdam agreeti.~~nt of the
.three Powers, which stipulated that the three Powers
agreed that the Cairo agreement shou.ld be carried out.
This m.eans that this was a final settlement of the
question. So it was conceived by the authors of the
agreement, even the United Stattes, which at that time,
unlike now, was still keeping agrl~ements in some cases.
That this is the correct interpretation is proved by
the fact that Taiwan' was brought under the control
and legislation of Chinese authorities.
119. Therefore the argument put forward by the
United States in its explanatory note [A/138.l] to the
Secretary-General, to the effect that the transfer of
Taiwan to China was to await the conclusion of a
peace settlement with Japan or some other formal act,
is a technical, formal and futile argument, and it cannot change the final and valid character of the stipulations of the Potsdam agreement. It is natural that only
a peace treaty can formally settle a transfer of territory,
but the signatories to an agreement comprising p~rticu­
lar stipulations are bound to incorporate such stipulations in a peace treaty.
.'
120. It fenows from these undeniabl.e facts that
Taiwan has become an integral part of Ch~nese territory. Until the recent events~ nobody-not ever. . . he
United States-contested these fads. Therefore, in
tertns of international law, the action taken by the
United States in regard to Taiwan constitutes 8J1
attempt against the independence and sovereignty
of China and a violation of its territoriai Integrity.
That means that it i:onstitutes an act of aggression on
the part of the United States. At the same time, it constitutes a breach of peace and security, and necessarily
a violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
12l: What is the reason for putting this question on
the agenda when clearly it has alr(',ady been sett!ed?
The reason is obvious. The United States is trying to

237

force the General As~\embly to take a decisiQn in this
case which, first, would validate its action in violating
an international agreement and, secondly, would sanc..
don an act of aggression. In that way, the General
Assembly would be made a party to a decision which
would trample on ou~ own ~harter, the ~har~er o~ !he
United Nations. It IS OhVlOUS that such a decunon
should not be extorted from this Assembly, either by
threats or by pressure. That 'would be a mockery. of
our deliberations. Furthermore, the object of trymg
to force upon the Assembly a decision in this case is to
get carte blanche) by an international d<:cision, for an
indefinite occupation of Taiwan, that .IS to say, of
Chinese territory.
122. By doing this, the United States is pursuing
many aims. First of all, its obvious intention is to
build up there ,\1 strategic base for aggression. Then,
too the United States is trying to hinder the liberation
of this last part of Chinese territory which has not
yet been liberated from the b~nk~upt Chiang Kai-s~ek
regime and the defence of whIch IS another. of ~he ~lms
of the United States. Last, but not least, Its aIm 15 to
void the existing stipulations to the effect that Taiwan
must be regarded as an integral part of Chinese territory, so as to create .a !1ew s~tuation. in defianc~ o~ the
United States ,exlstmg mternatlOnal obbgabons,
whereby it can dispose, behind the screen ..of t~e
decision which it hopes the General Assembly will take,
of the future of Taiwan.

123. In any case, these hopes are futile, because the
unanimous will of 500 million Chinese people is mailifest as far as the liberation of this part of Chinese
territory is concerned; Nevertheless, it WQuld be against
all principles of international law if the General
Assembly were to lend itself to these manoeuvres
aimed at achieving these American objectives.
124. This reasoning emerges clearly from the very
text of the letter from the Chairman of the United
States delegation to the Secretary-General, which ex..
plains the.motives of the United States in trying to put
this question on the agenda of the General Assembly.
In this letter, the United States delegation unscrupulously passes over the fact that 'international agreements stipulating the future of 'J'aiwan are in existence
and are valid. The United States delegation gives only
one unheard-of argument for its aggressive action:
that the occupation of Taiwan by communist forces is
a direct threat to the Pacific area, and that therefore
the United States has launched a sort of preventive
aggression-something new in international law and
international relations.
125. It does not matter that this argument is a ridiculous one, but it· matters that it means a flagrant
·~·iolation of the territorial integrity of China.
126. Out of all this it foll~ws that there is not only
110 need, but not the slightest justification for the As-

sembly to deliberate <:11 the item put bef~r~ us by the
United States delegat'(n, the less so as It IS proposed
by the United States Jeh~gation with the aim of inducing us 1to approve an armed aggression and a flagrant
violation. of the Charter. For all these reasons, the
Czechoslovak delegation is opposed to the inclusion of
this item in the agenda.
. ..

238

General Assembly-Filth Session-Plenary ~rleetinge

127. Mr. TSIANG (China): On this particular
occasion I find m)rself in strange company. I only hope
that this Assembly will not condemn me on the charge
of guilt by association. The question should be decided
on its own merits. My delegatio~ is against the'inclusion of this item !in the agenda.
128. First of all:, let me state very briefly the elementary facts in regard to the island of Taiwan. It has
today a population of 8 million people. Some people
loosely speak of the Formosans. As a matter of fact,
of that population only 150,000 are what you might
call Formosmls, that is, descendants of the original
inhabitants of the island. These natives of Formosa
were head-hunt/el's centuries ago, but today they have
adopted civi1iz~~d ways of life. They have afforded
tourists much :amusement by exhibiting their dances.
The vast majo:rity of the population are Chinese, descendants of Chinese migrants. Chinese colonization of
the island bega~n in the seventh century. By the seventeenth century, at the time when the Pilgrim Fathe~s
landed 'on Plymouth Rock, Formosa was already
populated enough to serve as the base for China's
resistance against the invaders of that time, the
Manchus.
129. The national hero of China of the seventeenth
century, Chen Chen Kung, known to the world ",s
Koxinga, has his memory enshrined in many temples
on the island everi today. The island was made administratively a part of the province of Fukien. In the
nineteenth century it was made a separate province.
After the W3,r with Japan of 1894 and 1895~ the island
shared the unfortunate fate, with Korea, of Japanese
domination.
130. The post-war agreements with regard to the
island are well known to you. The Cairo Declaration
and the Potsdam Declaration, to which the head of my
government was a co-signatory~ defined clearly the
status of this island.
131. Today the island of Taiwan is the home of free
China. On that island there is a practical and concrete
demonstration to all Chinese, in fact to all the peoples
of Asia, that one has a better way of living under freedom than under totalitarian slavery.
132. In the brief period of national administration of
this islartd, economic recovery has reached its pre:.war
level. My government has carried out fundamental land
reforms of the island. Local civil government is being
promoted as fast as possible. Peace and order reign on
this island. The percentage of literacy on this island is
~s high as in any other area is Asia. Th~ standard of
living on this island today is 3,S high as in any other
part of Asia. Therefore this island today is a worthy
demonstration that human beings can achieve wellbeing better under a system of freedom than under a
system of communist slavery.
133. So long as Formosa stand~;,. ~: " I;::ommunist conquest of the mainland of China Cb,""' 1,'.£ be completed or
consolidated. So long as Formoali, ':;tands, the puppet
regime in Peiping cannot throw its resources into
adventures in Indo-China, Malaya, the Philippines,
Korea or other adjacentioegions.
134. This island is therefore the bastion of freedom
in the whole Far East. It would be dangerous if the

General Assembly o~' any delegation should do anything to undermine this bastion of freedom. Discussion
here creates uncertainty and. spreads confusion. Such
discussion calls into question the status of the island,
and that is not in harmony with the principles of the
Charter, for the basic and primary aim of this great
Organization of ours is to have regard for the political
independence and territorial integrity of its Member
States.
135. My country has suffered and is still suffering
from the same kind of aggression of which Korea has
been a victim. The United Nations has gone to the aid
of Korea. The United Nations has not come to the aid
of China. Gertainly, the least the General Assembly can
do is to refrain from taking the step which may have
the effect of pushing the 450 million people of China
into the abyss of communist. slavery and Russian domination. It is because we fear that this item will have
the effect of pushing China into that abyss that my
delegation opposes the inclusion of this item in the
agenda of the General Assembly. I urge all representatives to vote against the inclusion of this item.
136. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Three speakers have opposed ·b.~e inclusion of this item
in the agenda. Now, therefore, I can give the floor only
to speakers who wish to speak in favour of placing this
item on the agenda. I call upon the representative of
the United States.
137. Mr. AUSTIN (United States of America): I
wish to thank the President for permitting the United
States delegation to ~peak on this question of parliamentary procedure. It is quite natural, I believe, that
the United States should be called upon at this point,
because it was the United States which proposed the
inclusion
of this item in the agenda.
wrcz:-ns'"'
'iT.. ..,.....

__ ..... _.,

138. Let me say at the outset that i listened with
tremendous sympathy to the remarks of Mr. Tsiang,
who represents the sovereignty of China-the only
China that has status before the United Natiollls. I respect the status of that sovereignty in the United
Nations, but I am also moved by something very
deep within me, and that is my high regard and great
lov~ for the Chinese people. In saying this I am not
talking about Chinese govemments-one or anotheror undertaking to prejudge at all, in advocating the
inclusion of this item in the agenda, the merits of the
question of sovereignty over Formosa. I am speaking
from an experience among the people of China that was
very intimate and long enough for me to learn what a
great people they are, and long enough to make me their
advocate in the United Nations today and every day.
It is in the last resort the people of China whom the
United Nations will take into account in deciding upon
this question.
139. With all this sympathy and understanding, I
want to say to my colleagues in the United Nations
that I disagree with Mr. Tsiang p.pon what is good for
his people here at this moment. It would not be well,
I think, for action on the merits of this question to be
postponed, but that would be the effect of failing to
include the question of Formosa on the agenda. Would
it not be better to have this question placed on the
agenda and to have the friends of the people of China,

2941th Meeting-7 October 1950
regardless of governments, given the opportunity to
consider the subject?
140. I am not going to say more because I do not
want to try the Assembly's patience or violate its rules
of procedure by entering upon a discussion of the
m{)rits of the case; I shall come immediately to the
proposition before us. This case is not st1f~h as the
representatives 01 the Soviet Union claims it to be,
namely, a cas(~ which is essentially within the domestic
jurisdiction. Obviously, this should be classed as an
international issue. On what has already appeared here,
we have the issue IDf the use of the word "China." The
word "China'll means a. different thing to the Soviet
Union from what it means to China as represented by
Mr. Tsiang. Sovereignty and title to the territory is in
question, and it is a question of conflicting claims as to
which gov\~rnment represents China. That is the kind
of question which can raise the very devil with friendship between peoples and nation.s, which can cause
trouble. and even war. It is therefore a proper subject
for the United Nations to discuss calmly and serenely,
with faith in God and purity of purpose.
141. I do not believe that I need say any more. But
there is much more that could be said, for international
events have occurred since the signing of those agreements which have been relied upon. These events have
made it necessary for the United States, as a Member
of the United Nations, to adopt its present policy in the
Pacific and to protect the armies, the property and the
interests of the Members of the Organization which
are carrying the flag of the United Nations in that area,
142. The question of Forrnosaaffects those interests,
and that is why we think the item should be placed on
the agenda and the question decided, if possible, during
this session of the General Assembly.

143. Mr. CASTRO (El Salvador) (translated from
Span-ish) : I have asked for the floor to make a short
statement at this time beca,use I believe that the matter
with which we are concerned is of fundamental importance and that the divergence of views about it can
only complicate th~e work of peace with which the
United Nations is concerned.
144. The position of my government with regard to
the situation in Formosa-or Ta,iwan-has been quite
clear. The Government of El Salvador belie\Tes that
what has been called the revolution in China was not
solely the spontaneous movement of a people which,
owing to its conflicting political opinions, tried to overthrow its government. My government believes that
there was an element of foreign intervention, and consequently, although what is now known as the Government of the People's Republic of China controls the
greatel' part of the territory-the whole of what is
known as continental China-it has continued to recognize the Nationalist Government and regards Formosa
as the last bulwark of a people fighting to preserve its
independence and t.o repel foreign intervention.
145. In these circumstances, the delegation of El
Salvador finds itself in a peculiar position, which may
possibly be similar to that of many other, but not, of
c:ourse all, delegations.

146. Because of' it.s geographical position, Formosa
has become rather closely conneded with the develop.,

239

ment of United Nations military ooeratlcrls in Korea.
That alom~ would be sufficient reason for placit',g the
question of Formosa on the agenda of the G~neral
Assembly.
147. The delegation of El Salvador greatly regrets
that the delegation of the Soviet Union has opposed the
inclusion of the item, because it is precisely the differ..
ence of opinion between the ,USSR and some other
States which is the basic reason why it is essential that
the General Assembly should adopt a definite attitude
on the question of Formosa.
148. At the same time, the delegation of El Salvador
regrets that the delegation of Nationalist China is also
opposing the inclusion of the item in the agenda,
because we believe that all aspects of the problem
will have to be considered and that the legal situation
of Formosa will have to be 'studied and defined once
and for all.
149. We do not think., that there is any question of
attempting to prejudge the matte1', because if we did
so believe we should be, opposed to the inclusion of the
item in the agenda. V';le believe that the will of the
people inhabiting Formosa must be taken into con..
sideration when we take any decision which might
affect the future of that region. The delegation of,El
Salvador has always belie~;ed that the future of a tetri..
torycan never be decided without previous consultation
of the people living in it. Consequently, my delegation
cannot fail to be consistent with the views which it has
expressed previously in similar cases.
150. Obviously the United Nations cannot pass over
in silence Formosa's present ,situation in rela.tion to the
conflict in Korea, which has become a matter of con..
cern to the peace of the world. The delegation of El
Salvador,' therefore, wholeheartedly supports the inclusion of the item on Formosa in the agenda of the
current session of the General Assembly.
151. The President (translated from French) : I put
to the vote the General Committee's recommendation
that the question of Formosa should be included in the
agenda of the fifth session and referred to the First
Cotl1J.-nittee for consideration.
The recommendation was adopted by 42
7, with
8 abstentions.

to

Election of three non-permanent members of the
Security Council (concluded)
152. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I apologize for proposing an alteration in the agenda.
We had decided to postpone the election of a non-permanent member of the Security Council, but 1 have just
learned that there is now some hope of agreement.
With your permission, I shall call upon the representative of Lebanon.

153. Mr. TAKLA (Lebanon) (tfanslated from
French) : AlthOU2'h we found the results of this morning's vote encouraging, they did, nevertheless, show
that we were still in the same irnpasse as before [29Oth
and 291st meetings]. My government w\.Iuld· 'i"10t like
that situation to continue, nor would it like us to be
taxed with the slightest wish tCI obstruct a,ndimpede
the operation of the United Nations.
.

1

240

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

154. When Lebanon, with the support of all the members. of the Arab League, put forward its candidature,
my government said many times that it regarded the
election as a sporting contest which should not, whatever its r~sult, leaye any bitter feelings on either side.
155~ In these circumsta~ces, I wish to state on behalf
of my government that Lebanon withdraws its candidature. I do. not want to do this without expressing on
behalf of my country our deep gratitude to all those
delegations which honoured us with their votes, and
our thanks to the countries that they represent. I hope
very much that, two years from now, Lebanon will
again receive their votes, to which will be joined, I
hope, those of other countries' which this time have n()t
suppnrted our,application for various reasons that, I am
sure, do nof in any way'reflect on their friendship ff.:>r
Lebanon nor the friendship of Lebanon for them. I
repeat, I hope that in two years' time you will all place
your trust in us.
156. I should like once again to assure the representative of Turkey, in confirmation of what was said before, that we are retiring from this sporting contest
with no hard feelings. The future will show, I hope,
that the friendship which unites Turkey with Lebanon
and all the Arab countries is not only in no way impaired but will be maintained and strengthened.
157. Th~ PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The representative of Turkey has asked permission to
speak, but I am sure he ~ill forgive me if I do not
give him the floor until af.ter the vote.
158. I should like first to thank and congratulate the
representative of Lebanon for his fine gesture. Any
gesture of compromise made in a spirit of co-operation
will always be welcomed with the greatest pleasure in
this Assembly. I should remind you that our rules of
procedure prohibit nominations. If the representative
of Turkey were to speak now,' his statement might fall
foul of the rules. Accordingly, with his permission, we
shall first take the vote and I shall -then be glad to
allow him to speak.

A vote was taken by secret ballot.
At the invitation of the President,.Paris El-Khouri
Bey (Syria) and Mr. Jonste (Union of South Africa)
acted as tellers.
Number of ballot papers:
60
InvaUd ballots:
0
Abstentions:
3
Numbe-r of valid votes cast:
57
'Required majority:
38
Number of 'Votes obtained:
Turkey . . .
' . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Lebanon ..........................• 4
Turkey} having obtained the required two-thirds majority of the Members present and voting, was elected a
non-permanent member of the S ecttrity Council.
159. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I declare 1 urkey to have been elected to the Security
, Council.. On this occasion, I should like to congratulate
the three States, Brazil, hte Netherlandsand Turkey,
'on having been elected non-pertrtan.ent members of the
Security Council for two years.
160, I call upon the representative of Turkey;

161. Mr. SARPER (Turkey) : My delegation appreciates this realistic and constructive decision of our:
Lebanese friends. When I asked permission to speak'
before the elections, it was to convey that view to the.
Lebanese delegation as soon as possible.
162. I am sure that the question of the pre$ent elections will in no way affect the friendly relations among
the countries of our region in.general and our relations
with Lebanon in particular. I further express the hope
that in matters relating to the eleci~,.:m of non-permanent
members of the Security Council, the principles embodied in Article 23 of our Charter, especially its
provisions concerning an equitable geographical dis-,
tribution, shall in the future be considered as the only ,
approach.
163. Before concluding, I should like to extend, in the
same sp?rtsmanlik~ spirit with which the L~banese rep- '
resentatlve was ammated, the warmest thanks and gratitude of myself and of my country to the delegations.
which have voted in our favour, and also to those which'
have not, for their willingness to give so much of their
valuable time to this matter.
Inclusion of new items in the agenda: report of
the General Committee (A/1430) (concluded)
164. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): .
We shall now resume our examination 'of the General '
Committee's report. We have reached item 2: "Duties ,
of States in the event of the outbreak of hostilities:
item proposed by Yugoslavia". The General Committee
decided unanimously to recommend that the item should .
be included in the agenda and further decided by 10
votes to none to recommend that it should be referred
to the First Committee.
'
.
165. If there is no objection, I shall consider that'
there is agreement on the inclusion of this item in'
the agenda.
j

It was so decided.
166. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Item 3 reads: "Establishment of a permanent commis- :
sion of good offices: item proposed by Yugosla.via".
The General Committee deCided unanimously to recommend that the Assembly should include this item in '
the agenda and that it should be referred to the First
Comm~ttee for consideration and report.
167. If there is no objection, I shall consider that there.
is agreement on the inclusion of this item in the agenda.
I

It was so decided.
168. The PRESIDENT (tra'iJslated from French):'
Item 4 reads: Provision of a United Nations distinguishing ribbon or other insignia for personnel which:
has participated in Korea in the defence 'of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations: item pro"
posed by the Philippines". The General Committee de-'
cided by 12 votes to 2 to recommend that the Assembly'
should include the item in the agenda and refer it to
.
the Sixth Committee for consideration and report.
169. Mr. ARUTIUNIAN (Union of Soviet Socialist·
Republics) (translated from Russian): The USSR
delegation protests against the inclusion in the agenda
or the fif.th session of the General Assembly of the, ques- ,
tion proposed by the Philipph1es concerning the provi-

r t._-.. . . ,

~

.

2~94_t_h_M_ee..:...ti_·n,,_g_.-_7_ _0_c_to_b_e_r_1_9_5"'-~......"'""'

I Ski~l'O~ cl Unite9 Nations ~f\stinguishin~.rib1:-on.or .other
! insignIa for person.nel Whlf.:h has particIpated m l~orea

I aUep'edly in the defence of: the principles of the United
I Nations Charter.
l 170. As the Gov.ernrnent of the Soviet Union has
l

1 stated repe~~tedly, the Security Council resolutions of

25 and 27 June ana 7 July 1950 4 on the Korean question, which the Government of the TJnited States is
'using to. justify its armed intervention in Korea, were
I adopted illegally by the Security Council and constitute
. cl flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter.
171. As we all know, only three of the five permanent
members of the Council, namely, the United States, the
United Kingdom and France, were present at the meetings of the Security Council at whi(~h those resolutions
were adopted. The two other perman,~nt members of the
Council, the USSR and China, were not present at
those meetings of the Security Council. Thus those
resolutions were adopted at private meetings of certain
members of the Securiqr Council and are not legally
binding. ,
172. In those circumstances, it is clear that these decisions of the Security Council and, in particular, the
decision to use the United Nations flag in the course
of military cperations in Korea, cannot have any legal
force.
17.3. In its reply I) to the telegram in which Mr Trygve
Lie communicated to it the text of the resolution adopted by a group of meJ.1?bers of the Security Council at
the meeting of 7 July 1950, the Government of the
Soviet Union pointed out that the purpose of the resolution was to permit the illegal use of the United NaHons flag as a cover for the military operations of the
United States in Korea, operations which constituted
open aggression by the United States against the
Korean people, and that that decision of the Security
Council was illegal and tantamount to direct support
of armed aggression against the Korean people.
174. It is absolutely clear that the military operations
~n Korea are conducted not by the armed forces of the
United Nations, whatever words may be used to conceal this fact, but by the armed forces of individual
States which, in contravention of the Charter, are usurp! ing the name and flag of the United Nations. It is
~ equally clear that the participation of those States in
the Un!ted States aggression against the Korean people
~ not only does not constitute a defence of the principles
I of theUnited Nations Charter, but is a flagrant violatiOll of those principles.
~ 175. The USSR delegation therefore objects to the
! inclusion of the aforementioned item in the agenda of
~ the General Assembly and to consideration of the draft
. resolution [A/1421] submitted by the Philippines on
this question.
. 176. Mr. ROY (Philippines): The delegation of the
, Philippines has taken the initiative in proposing- a United
Nations distinguishing ribbon or other insignia for personnel which has participated in Korea in the defence
of the principles of the United Nations, because it believes that it is proper that the soldiers of peace should

I

!

I

4

I·

I

See Official Records of the Security Cmmcil, fifth year, Nos:
15 16 and 18.
See document 5/1596.
I

-24r_l

be given a distincHve mark to' distinguish them as such.
We do llot need to elaborate 0);'1 this point. The need is
evident, and no doubt those serving under- the United
Nations flag will Welcm1'1e some such insignia whicb
they can wear to distinguish them as the guardians of
the peacean~ security of the world.
177. Such references as have b,~en made here by the
representative ot the Soviet Union, denying the existence of the United Nations fl:>rces, have already been
answered by this General Asscembly by its overwhelming approval of the resolution cm Korea.
178. In behalf of the Philippine deleg-ation, therefore,
I ask that the General Assembly should support the
inclusion of this item in the agenda and that the item
should be referred to the Sixth Committee for consideration and
report.
.
179. Mr. MICHALOWSKI (Poland) (translated
from Russian) : We are considering a rather' unusual
question today. In accordance with the proposal of the
Philippine representative, General Romulo, the United
Nations is called upon to establish a kind of decoraHon
to be granted to participants in the Korean war who
are fighting in the ralLks of the United States army.
180. General Romulo wants this decoration to De given"'''
to persons who are· intervening in a civil war and who
are fighting, in the interests of American imperialism,
against the Korean national movement, against those
who are struggling for their independence and freedom and for the unificntion of Korea. It would appear
from the proposal th~at this decoration would also be
awarded to soldiers of the South Korean forces.
181. I should like to draw your attention to the absurdities to which this might lead. The result would be
that we, the United Nations, would be giving decorations for political convictions, that is to say, for convictions which are shared only by certain representatives
and certain governments and which are foreign and
hostile to hundreds of millions of people. We cannot
and we h~ve no right to decorate anyone for any political convictions. The Philippine delegation seems to
have forgotten this fundamental principle. We know
that g'enerals are 1rery fond of decorations, and that
they hike to put mu~ticoloured ribbons on tneir chests,
but I do not think that this prC'posal will beautify General Romulo.
.
182. This proposal would lead t.lS along a dangerous
path. Today the Organization will decorate the troops
of Syngman Rhee and MacArthur; tomorrow someone
will propose a decoration for the tr~ops of Chiang Kaishek; and so it will go on.
183. Not so long ago nearly all of us, nearly all of the
States Members of the United Nations, were combating
fascism; millions of people perished while defending
their countries in the struggle for the realization of our
common aims. And evert then, although at that time
there were no differences of opinion as to who was right
and who was wrong, who was the aggressor and who
was the victim of aggression, even then no one proposed
that the soldiers of the United Nations should be rewarded. That was perfectly understanqable. The Untted
Nations has no rig-ht to reward anyone. The United
Nations has no right to give orders, medals or ribbons.
That right is reserved exclusively for States and ~ov­
ernments, and we must leave it to them. Such actiVities
'

242:..

----.:G=.e=n=e=~=al:....:As=8e=m==b.:=11:...._ _=F..:if.:. :t.h__:.::...Se_8_8_io_D..:...-_P_l_eD_8_ry-=-_M_e_e_ti_D.::,g_8
....

by our Organization are authorized neither by the
Charter, by the rules of procedure, by precedent nor
by common sense.
184. There is yet another fact that we should remember. The armies of aggression in Korea include persons,
especially among the airmen, who have taken part in
barbarous air raids against the civilian population,
have bombed towns and villages and have machinegunned the peaceful population, women. and children.
The decoration of such persons with any kind of ribbon
would represent a cynicism borde!ing upon cri!De.
Such a decoration would become a sign of opprobrIUm
in the eyes of the majority of honest people, and our
Organization would have to hang its head in shame for
instituting such a decoration.
185. For those reasons, and taking into consideration
-the fact already mentioned by the USSR representative,
namely, that the decisio~ to cal~ the aggr~ssivc .forces
of certain States the Umted Nations forces was Illegal,
since it was adopted by six members of the Security
Council in the absence of two permaI\ent members of
the Council, our delegation considers the proposal of
the Philippine representative to be wrong and ~ontrary
to the principles of the United Nations and mternational practice.
186. The Polish delegation will ther~fore vote against
the inclusion of this item in the agenda.
187. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) :
Two speakers have already spoken against the inclusion
of this item in the agenda. I can give the floor only to
one more, but I saw the delegations of the Ukrainian
SSR and Czechoslovakia raise their hands almost simultaneously and I cannot say which of the two asked to
speak first. If they would like to come to an agreement
and appoint the speaker who will say least, I should
be glad to call upon him.
188. Mr. BIHELLER (Czechoslovakia): I shall be
extremely brief; as a matter of fact, I shall say only a
few words.
•

189. The Czechoslovak delegation objects most emphatically to the inclusion of the proposed item in the
agenda of !he General Assembly. My Goyernment considersas It has declared a number of times, that the
decisi~ll taken by some members of the Security Council
by which the intervent~o1}ist aggression of the Un!ted
States in the Korean CIVtl war was declared a Umted
Nations action, is void of legality and therefore not
valid. Consequently all and whatever actions, resolutions or reccom~:":'2::..jations are based on that decision
must be considered as not legal and void of validity.

Printed in U.S.A.

---.,

190. Hence the proposal that a ribbon or o~her in~
signia of the United Nations should be provided for
the participants in that aggression committed by the
United States and the countries which associated them~
selves with it in that venture should be rejected and
its inclusion in the agenda voted down by the General
Assembly, the more so because the mere discussion of
the matter in itself or even its inclusion in the agenda
of the General Assembly must be considered by the
Korean people, as well as by all people fighting for
their liberation from colonial oppression and against
aggression, as an impudent provocation. Such a deci~
sion would be a means of letting the participating sol~
diers forget that they took part in an unjust war, a war
for the subjugation of the Korean people in the interests
of United States imperialist expansion.
191. The Czechoslovak delegation therefore opposes
the inclusion of this item in the agenda and will vote
against it.
192. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I shall put to the v.ote. the General Co~mittee's ~ecom~
mend,ation that thiS Item should be mcluded m the
agenda ~lnd referred to the Sixth Committee for con~
sideration and report.
The General Committee's recommendation was
adopted by 45 votes to 5, with 6 abstentions.
193. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We shall now go on to the consideration of the last
item recommended for inclusion by the General Com~
mittee namely, "Complaint by the Union of Soviet S~~
cialist 'Republics regarding the violation of Chinese air
space by the air force of the United States of America
and the machine-gunning and bombing of Chinese ter~
ritory by that air force, and against the bombardment
and illegal inspection or a merchant ship of the Peo~le's
Republic of China by a military vessel of the Umte~
States".
194. The General Committee recommends by 11 votes
to one that the General Assembly should include this
item in the agenda and by 8 votes to 2 that the item
should be ref~rJ.·ed to the Ad Hoc Political Committee
for consideration and report...
.
195.. I put the inclusion of this l~st item in the agenda
to the vote.
The General Committee's recommendation was
adopted by 43 'Votes to one, with 2 abstentions.
196. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The agenda of the' fifth session of the General Assembly
is now complete.
The meeting rose at 2.25 p.m.

A-40464--0ctober 1950-3,600
