S/PV.9064

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9064

th meeting
Wednesday, 15 June 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Xhaçka/Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Biang
Ms. Osei-Asare
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Haugsbakken
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Keeping the promises: the role of regional organizations in implementing the
women and peace and security agenda in the face of political turmoil and
seizures of power by force
Letter dated 4 June 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Albania to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/457)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-38341 (E)
*2238341*

S/PV.9064

Women and peace and security

I would like to warmly welcome the SecretaryGeneral and the Ministers and other high-level
representatives present today. Their presence
underscores the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Keeping the promises: the role of regional
organizations in implementing the women
and peace and security agenda in the face of
political turmoil and seizures of power by force
Letter dated 4 June 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of Albania to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2022/457)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Austria,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Croatia, the Czech Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Italy, Indonesia, Jordan, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Malta, Morocco, Namibia, Poland, the
Republic of Korea, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
South Africa, Switzerland, Thailand, Türkiye, Ukraine,
Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Sima
Sami Bahous, Executive Director of UN-Women; Her
Excellency Ms. Helga Maria Schmid, Secretary-General
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe; Ms. Bineta Diop, Special Envoy on Women,
Peace and Security of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission; Her Excellency Ms. Stella RonnerGrubačić, European Union Ambassador for Gender
and Diversity; and Ms. Haifa Abu Ghazaleh, Assistant
Secretary-General, Head of Social Affairs Sector at the
League of Arab States.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/457, which contains the text of a letter
dated 4 June 2022 from the Permanent Representative
of Albania to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.
2/31

15/06/2022

I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Mr. António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: Gender equality offers a
path to sustainable peace and conflict prevention, and
yet we are moving in the opposite direction. Today’s
conflicts are amplifying gender inequality, poverty,
climate disruptions and other forms of inequality.
Women and girls are affected differently and
disproportionately by the violence and by the longterm social and economic impacts of those cascading
crises. Millions of girls are out of school, with no
prospect of training, a job or financial independence.
Rising numbers of women and girls are suffering from
violence in the home.
In some countries, extremists and military actors
have taken power by force, cancelling previous
commitments on gender equality and persecuting
women for simply going about their daily lives.
Around the world, the recent shift away from
inclusive politics shows once again that misogyny
and authoritarianism are mutually reinforcing and are
antithetical to stable, prosperous societies.
We meet several times a year on this issue. There
is consensus among Member States on the importance
of this agenda. I issue regular reports; the Security
Council has adopted several resolutions. But on the
ground the situation is going backwards. The reason
is simple.
Women’s equality is a question of power. Today’s
political deadlocks and entrenched conflicts are just the
latest examples of how enduring power imbalances and
patriarchy are continuing to fail us.
In Afghanistan, the Taliban appointed a Government
of men, closed girls’ schools, banned women from
showing their faces in public and restricted their right
even to leave their own homes. Nearly 20 million
Afghan women and girls are being silenced and erased
from sight.
In Myanmar, a large proportion of women’s
organizations have been forced to close since the
military coup. Offices were raided and ransacked;
activists were detained. Many fled the country. Women
22-38341

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

cannot express themselves openly and have no route to
political participation.
In Mali, women are becoming poorer and
more marginalized as the country goes through
successive military coups and extremists pose an even
greater threat.
The Russian invasion of Ukraine has forced
millions of women and children to flee their country
overnight, putting them at high risk of trafficking and
exploitation of all kinds.
Last week, the Security Council heard that, as
of 3 June, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights had received 124
reports of conflict-related sexual violence across
Ukraine, mostly committed against women and girls.
We know that for every woman who reports those
horrific crimes, there are likely to be many more who
remain silent or unrecorded.
Women refugees are taking on leadership roles
and supporting the response in host countries. Inside
Ukraine, women who chose not to evacuate are at
the forefront of health care and social support. It is
important that Ukrainian women fully participate in all
mediation efforts.
In the Sudan, two years after women’s role in the
revolution was celebrated, another coup interrupted the
transition and dashed those hopes. Alleged perpetrators
of human rights violations remain in power; key reforms
are delayed; and violence against women continues.
In all those conflicts, we have men in power
and women excluded, their rights and freedoms
deliberately targeted.
When conflict erupts, neighbouring countries and
regional organizations can make a significant difference
to the women and peace and security agenda by ensuring
that commitments are implemented. I am therefore
pleased that we are joined today by representatives of
the European Union, the African Union, the League
of Arab States and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. Our collaboration on the women
and peace and security agenda with those organizations
is reflected not only in joint statements and resolutions,
but also in our daily work on the ground.
In the Sudan, for example, we are working closely
with the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, through a trilateral
mechanism, to steer the political process back to an

S/PV.9064

agreed and legitimate constitutional order. As they
launched intra-Sudanese talks, all three envoys asked
every delegation to ensure that at least 40 per cent of
participants are women.
We have also supported the formation of a standalone group of women from all regions of the Sudan
with a background on gender equality and experience
working on women’s rights at the local level to bring
women’s perspectives to the political talks. I urge
regional organizations to strengthen their engagement
with that group.
In West and Central Africa, we are working
closely with both the Economic Community of West
African States and the Economic Community of
Central African States. Our collaboration on women
and peace and security extends to joint planning and
programming and joint engagement with civil society
platforms to ensure that women are involved in early
warning and mediation.
We have also been deepening our collaboration
with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations on
such issues over the past five years. That will be crucial
to finding a solution to the crisis in Myanmar that
reflects the needs of all the country’s people, including
women in the diaspora and in Rohingya refugee camps
in Bangladesh.
(spoke in French)
The United Nations continues to demonstrate
its commitment to supporting women and civil
society organizations working for peace through its
peacebuilding and political missions around the world.
In Afghanistan, we are unequivocal about the
fundamental rights of women and girls, including their
right to complete their education and pursue a career.
I commend the Security Council for its unanimous
support in that regard.
In all our peacekeeping and political missions, we
continue to support survivors of sexual violence and
invest in partnerships with local women leaders and
peacebuilders, including by increasing the number of
women personnel at all levels.
At the most senior level, we are in particular
working to maintain the parity achieved among Heads
and Deputy Heads of Missions since early 2021.
Supporting survivors of sexual violence, as well
as women peacebuilders and activists, is key. There

22-383413/31

S/PV.9064

Women and peace and security

is increasing evidence that ensuring women’s rights,
including their right to equal participation at all levels,
is essential to building and maintaining peace.
The participation of women in mediation and
decision-making processes is vital to conflict
resolution. Their analysis is critical to understanding
conflict dynamics and building effective response
and prevention strategies. Studies also show that the
active engagement of women peacebuilders increases
the chances of lasting peace. That is why we need full
gender parity across election monitoring, security
sector reform, disarmament, demobilization and justice
systems, including by setting quotas.
That is one reason that my proposed New Agenda
for Peace, included in my report Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982), puts women and girls at the centre of
security policies. But, despite all the evidence, the
women and peace and security agenda continues to be
challenged, and even reversed, around the world. I urge
Council members and all Member States to consider
why that is.
I urge participants to reflect on the fact that,
despite general agreement on the value of women
at the negotiating table, there is still such a huge
gap in their participation and in the implementation
of commitments to their protection, human rights
and dignity. I encourage participants to commit to
increasing support to women’s civil society, conflict
prevention and peacebuilding work.
At this time of proliferating crises, the
international community must pursue proven strategies
for maintaining peace and stability. Protecting and
promoting women’s rights is such a strategy. The
women and peace and security agenda is one of our
greatest assets in building a more peaceful future on a
sustainable planet.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bahous.
Ms. Bahous: As we just heard from the SecretaryGeneral, our world is facing the highest number of
violent conflicts since 1945. By some estimates,
democracy around the world has been backsliding
for 16 consecutive years. Climate change is further
increasing inequalities and fuelling tensions. As with
all crises and conflicts, drought and desertification are
directly increasing gender-based violence.
4/31

15/06/2022

Those inter-related facts hold us all back from
achieving our aspirations, and women and girls are
bearing the brunt of descent into conflicts or coups.
That cannot continue. It is contrary to everything
that has been agreed and decided in this Chamber,
starting with resolution 1325 (2000). It is contrary
to our collective promise in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and a more sustainable and
peaceful future.
It was also committed to in March this year at the
sixty-sixth session of the Commission on the Status
of Women (CSW), which resulted in the first-ever
agreed conclusions focusing on gender equality and
the empowerment of women and girls in the context of
climate, environment and disaster risk reduction. We
must all work together to realize the promises made at
the CSW.
War and conflict impact the entire life cycle of
women and girls — from disrupting education to early
forced marriage, sexual and gender-based violence,
insufficient livelihoods, food insecurity and lack
of access to shelter, sanitation and dignity. It sets us
back decades.
Look to Ukraine, where the war has now surpassed
100 painful days. Reports of sexual violence are
increasing, human trafficking is increasing and
millions — mostly women, children and older
persons — have fled their homes. Look to Syria,
where 11 years of conflict has led to a surge in early
forced marriage, gender-based violence and mass
displacement. Look to the Sahel, where growing violent
extremism is driving inequalities, food insecurity and
violence. In all those conflicts, women face additional
threats to their bodies, their livelihoods and their
safety. Nevertheless, women are risking their lives as
leaders in their communities, heads of households,
peacebuilders and mediators.
In the year 2000, through resolution 1325 (2000),
we agreed to protect women and girls in situations of
conflict and to ensure that women are front and centre
in peace efforts. We have further sharpened those
commitments through nine subsequent resolutions.
Many in this Chamber have made national
commitments as well, notably through national action
plans on resolution 1325 (2000). We now have 100
national action plans globally. I applaud that historic
figure. Even during the trials of the past years, Member
States managed to continue that work. The United
22-38341

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

Arab Emirates, Malawi and Morocco are among the
countries that announced their first national action
plans on resolution 1325 (2000) in the past year.
Most regional organizations have also committed to
that path. Twelve regional organizations have adopted
action plans on women, peace and security — up from
five when we celebrated the resolution’s fifteenth
anniversary in 2015. We applaud regional organizations
for their efforts.
What we have seen is that, when Member States
get together and make commitments in the halls of
regional organizations, national actions often follow.
For example, once the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) committed to that goal, 12
out of the 15 countries in that region followed suit. The
African Union committed to ensuring that half of its
members would adopt plans by 2020 and has surpassed
that target.
Regional organizations have also played a key role
in the development of networks of women mediators.
Nearly every region and subregion now has at least
one such network. The Association of Southeast
Asian Nations has had a registry of women experts in
peace and mediation since 2018. The African Women
Leaders Network has 29 national chapters now, and
FemWise-Africa regularly deploys its members to
peace processes and national dialogues led by the
African Union.
More recently, networks were launched that cover
the Southern Cone in the Americas and the Arab States
region. The Arab Women Mediators Network is the
first of its kind, bringing together Arabic-speaking
women leaders to be deployed to local and regional
mediation processes. I encourage all Member States to
utilize these networks.

S/PV.9064

often see that the analysis and inputs from the platform
are not adequately reflected in political updates.
In the Great Lakes region, there is significant
investment in mobilizing women and peace and
security actors. The ministers of the member States of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
just adopted a new plan, and we have the Regional
Women Forum and the Advisory Board for Women,
Peace and Security in the Great Lakes Region.
But those activities seem separate from the political
talks to bring about a solution to the rising violence in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, where
an increase in attacks by the Mouvement du 23 Mars
and the Allied Democratic Forces and the growing
influence of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham has
led to the killing, rape, abduction and displacement of
so many Congolese women once again.
We must ensure that women’s networks and tracks
are part and parcel of the political tracks, that women
are equally included and that their voices and solutions
are heard and included. I ask that the multilateral
system — all of us — defend our values with the same
determination as the women’s movement does. I ask
that we all be undeterred by the current challenges
and negative developments. If we are to do that, we
must honour our commitments and ensure that all
response efforts fully include the voices of women
leaders. We must ensure that women are part and parcel
of finding peaceful solutions and of recovery and
prevention mechanisms.
When regional organizations convene negotiations,
they must ensure that they do not have to ask where
the women are. They must make sure that the women
are there — in their own right, with their own lived
experiences, knowledge and vision for their future.

Yet, with all this institutional progress, almost
every time there are political negotiations or peace
talks, we still have to ask, “where are the women?”
The reason is simply that we have not fully honoured
our commitments.

As was confirmed in the recent evacuation of
human rights defenders and others from Afghanistan,
we must all do a better job to provide support, protection
and, in many cases, asylum, temporary relocation or
protected status to people in harm’s way facing genderbased persecution.

Take the Sahel, where we have the Group of Five
for the Sahel Women’s Platform, the Network on Peace
and Security for Women in the ECOWAS Region, the
West African Network of Young Female Leaders and
others. Many in the Security Council are members of
the Group of Friends of Women in the Sahel, co-chaired
by the African Union and the European Union. Yet we

Regional organizations can spur those reforms in
both legislation and administrative procedures among
their membership. Less than a month ago, the Council
of Europe adopted a new recommendation to protect the
rights of migrant, asylum-seeking or refugee women
and girls in the wake of the displacement of millions
of Ukrainians.

22-383415/31

S/PV.9064

Women and peace and security

Let us also recall that civil society is our vital partner
in such situations, yet often pays a heavy price when
conflicts begin and its funding becomes jeopardized.
Last year, the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian
Fund supported 215 civil society organizations,
reaching 10.6 million people directly and indirectly,
including forcibly displaced women, women and girls
with disabilities and survivors of sexual and genderbased violence. The Fund also facilitated the evacuation
of several Afghan women and dependents after the
Taliban takeover, providing vital one-off emergency
funds. The Fund is also providing life-saving support
to women’s organizations in Ukraine that stay and
continue to deliver services.
In Mali, the Fund directly supported young women
with income diversification, entrepreneurial and
business opportunities. By investing in livelihoods,
we invest in the future and in an inclusive and
sustainable recovery.
In conclusion, I hope those examples inspire us all.
For our part, as UN-Women and partners, we plan to do
much more. But we need the international community,
including all regional organizations, to stand in
solidarity with us and fully honour the commitments
we have made to women and girls in conflict situations.
That is how we restore the balance, gain a chance
of peace and stand up, together, for our shared values.
The peace and security to which we aspire will only be
possible when women play a central role.

15/06/2022

consequences on the poorest households, many of
which are actually headed by women. Communities
in Ukraine are not only exposed to violence and
destruction, but also to air and water pollution, and to
hazardous-waste contamination, including radioactive
pollution that does not stop at the border.
Women are often the primary managers of their
households, and they rely on natural resources. However,
they face persistent barriers to meaningful participation
in natural-resource governance mechanisms and
decision-making processes. In addition, we continue
to bear the consequences of the coronavirus disease
pandemic that has increased gender inequalities as
well as the impact of climate change, to which the
previous speaker rightly referred. In these challenging
times, it is critical to ensure the role of women not just
in peacebuilding and conflict resolution but also in
decision-making in general.
The OSCE is playing a vital role in this regard.
Our approach is a holistic one. We support women’s
leadership and their direct participation in peace
processes and post-conflict reconstruction and
reconciliation. Together with UN-Women Moldova, we
provided targeted capacity-building support to women
negotiators from the Republic of Moldova on both sides
of the Dniester River. The OSCE Mission to Moldova
continues to liaise closely with United Nations on the
ground to establish a women’s advisory board to the
Transnistrian settlement process.

Ms. Schmid: I thank the Security Council for
this opportunity to address today’s open debate on the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda, which is a top priority for the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and for
me personally.

I am a huge believer in networking. We support
women networking. In 2021, I launched the OSCE
Networking Platform for Women Leaders including
Peacebuilders and Mediators. This platform includes
women from Ukraine and Afghanistan, and let me
just say — and previous speakers have also referred to
this — the situation of women and girls in Afghanistan
is particularly appalling, and I could not agree more
with the Secretary-General on his appeal in this respect.

We are living through extremely challenging times.
Russia’s war on Ukraine is having a devastating impact
on innocent civilians and infrastructure and is in direct
contradiction to the core principles that underpin the
European and global security order. Women and girls
have been the victims of rape and are at high risk of
trafficking and violence. The consequences of the
war against Ukraine are also threatening food and
energy security. The prices of food and basic goods are
increasing with disastrous economic and humanitarian

What we try to do with our network is support
women who are involved in peacebuilding activities
and allow them to share experience and practices in
a safe space. We amplify women’s voices. Recently,
I convened a special meeting with women from
Ukraine, including women peacebuilders and frontline humanitarian workers. We discussed the impact of
war on their daily lives, learned about their concrete
needs and heard their recommendations for possible
actions for the OSCE and its participating States. The

The President: I thank Ms. Bahous for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Schmid.

6/31

22-38341

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

recommendations will not only inform our future work
in Ukraine, but also support dialogue at the local level.
We support survivors of gender-based violence. We
do so by strengthening the capacity of service providers,
networking women’s resource centres and developing
police- and justice-sector training curricula to deal
with domestic-violence cases. We provide assistance
to prevent trafficking of human beings, including by
issuing specific recommendations to States to address
the risks of online exploitation.
We strengthen women’s participation and leadership
in the security sector, in particular in the areas of
conflict prevention, arms control and disarmament.
To date, over 320 young women from across the OSCE
region have participated in our Scholarship for Peace
and Security Programme’s training programme, which
is a joint initiative with the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs, to deepen their knowledge on
conflict prevention, arms control and disarmament.
In the OSCE, we also strive to lead by example.
Over two thirds of the participating States have adopted
action plans to implement resolution 1325 (2000),
and over 40 per cent of leadership positions in the
organization are held by women.
These are just a few examples of contributions
that regional organizations, such as the OSCE, are
making. As ever, more needs to be done to achieve full
cooperation at the international and regional levels. To
keep our promises to advance gender equality, we need
to go even further, working together to ensure that the
needs of women in conflict are adequately addressed,
and that women are part of the decision-making
processes at all levels, which also includes the very
important legislative dimension.
The OSCE is committed to gender equality. We
are committed to our close cooperation with the United
Nations. And we are committed to working together
across our region and with our partners around the
world to advance peace and security, and gender
equality is critical to that.
The President: I thank Ms. Schmid for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Diop.
Ms. Diop: Allow me, Madam President, to
congratulate you and, through you, the Republic of
Albania, for steering the work of the Security Council
in the month of June 2022, and for making sure that
we devote this meeting on women, peace and security

S/PV.9064

to the role of regional organizations in implementing
the women and peace and security agenda in the face
of political turmoil and seizures of power by force.
This is a timely topic indeed, especially now that
unconstitutional changes of Government, including
the resurgence of military coups, have accelerated on
the African continent, with dire consequences for the
human security of women and girls, including access to
socioeconomic services and rights.
Let me just emphasize the situation in the Sahel
region, where terrorists attacks continue to prevail.
The women themselves say that they are doubly
affected — not just by coups, but also by terrorist attacks.
As we know, frequently, the condition that leads
to a military coup is gender exclusion and gender
inequality, where one half of humankind constantly
endures economic and social exploitation, deprivation
and political disenfranchisement. Indeed, violence
against women, gendered poverty, the exclusion of
women from decision-making in politics and economics
are not only examples of gender inequality, but also
indicators of poor undemocratic governance that
disrespects people’s human rights. We could therefore
say that a coup d’état does not redress a situation such as
the one I have just described, but rather, it exacerbates
such a situation.
We know that research has proved that gender
inequality is the number one form of inequality, that
it is the number one predictor of the fragility of peace,
and that full participation of all citizens, both men and
women, is the best way to build sustained democracies,
reduce conflict and achieve human development. That
is what the women and peace and security agenda stands
for and, if it is fully implemented, it will contribute to
addressing the devastating situation.
In Africa, we have continued to advance the women
and peace and security agenda despite the emergence
of coups and the deterioration of the security situation.
Right now, 58 per cent of our member States have
adopted national action plans — many of them will be
addressing this open debate.
Let me also emphasize that the African Union
has strong instruments at its disposal, including the
African Governance Architecture, which is the core
organ mandated to promote good governance, as well
as the African Peace and Security Architecture. Their
full implementation is essential, and we therefore
need to focus on how the United Nations could work

22-383417/31

S/PV.9064

Women and peace and security

with the AU to implement those two architectures. I
think that will help to prevent the situation that we
are experiencing today by ensuring good governance,
access to resources and the prevention of conflict
through dialogue and inclusion.
In particular, the need for the participation of
women in decision-making and leadership roles must
be recognized. I applaud the efforts made by the
Secretary-General to work closely with the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat, to make sure that we implement the two
agendas in Africa. We also thank the United Nations for
its support on the women and peace and security agenda.
In our recent report issued in 2022, my Office
conducted a study in the Sahel with the support of
Luxembourg. The study provided evidence of the
multiple impacts of coups and related insecurity,
climate change and the pandemic on the situation of
women in the Sahel, where women’s fundamental
rights and freedoms, service delivery, access to food,
livelihoods and protection from violence and abuse
have deteriorated.
Therefore, in order to promote the inclusion of
women in peace and security efforts, we have deployed
several tools, of which I shall name a few.
First, we are conducting a solidarity mission
with the African Women Leaders Network to go on
the ground and talk to the women who are affected.
As I speak now, a technical team with support from
UN-Women is in Mali to follow up on our previous
solidarity mission, which we undertook with the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed. The team
is supporting women peacebuilders and leaders in their
efforts to advocate for women’s inclusion in the ongoing
negotiations and the process for a return to political
stability, the holding of elections and the drafting of
the new constitution. As the Executive Director of UNWomen said, the FemWise-Africa Network is another
platform through which women are participating in
mediation and negotiation efforts in various regions.
The African Union has maintained cooperation with
the regional economic communities, which have served
as useful platforms for building the capacity of various
actors. My Office, the Office of the Special Envoy, is
working with member States, women’s organizations,
think tanks and centres of excellence dealing with
women and peace and security, building their capacities
8/31

15/06/2022

to enhance accountability and, in particular, countering
violence and abuse against women and girls.
Last year, we launched the first men’s conference on
positive masculinity in leadership for the elimination of
violence against women and girls, to address impunity
and to call for accountability. It was attended by more
than 15 Heads of States from our continent, who took the
floor to address those issues and made the commitment
to fight against violence against women.
We are also deploying a continental results
framework to track the delivery of the commitments
made by our member States to end violence against
women and girls and to provide quality and efficient
responses. So far, 20 African member States have
reported back, and those results were issued in a report
of the Chairperson of the AU Commission last year. We
are also working on ensuring that we complement the
reports of the Secretary-General on women and peace
and security in that regard.
As I conclude, let me congratulate the Security
Council on its numerous initiatives to promote the
women and peace and security agenda, including
through its dedicated rotating presidency focused on
women and peace and security. What we need now
is to make sure that we take action together with
regional organizations such as the African Union,
as well as regional economic communities. While
women welcome the debate, they are asking for action,
deliverables and impact.
The President: I thank Ms. Diop for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ronner-Grubačić.
Ms. Ronner-Grubačić: With the return of war
in Europe and against the backdrop of increasing
pushbacks on women’s rights and gender equality, it
is more important than ever to safeguard and promote
our shared values, as well as to uphold international
commitments and a rules-based multilateral order with
the United Nations at its core. That holds true for the
women and peace and security agenda, adopted with
resolution 1325 (2000), and for any other international
instrument or Security Council resolution.
The Albanian presidency of the Council is right
to point out in its concept note (S/2022/457, annex)
that regional organizations have a critical role to play.
It is also right to draw our attention to the fact that,
in times of turmoil in particular, it is all too often
the case that commitments on women and peace and
22-38341

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

security are interrupted and women — whether they be
journalists, peacebuilders, members of parliament or
representatives of civil society — see their work, safety
and security threatened, or worse. Unfortunately, as
the European Union (EU) Ambassador for Gender
and Diversity, I have witnessed that happening on
several occasions. I can testify, on the basis of my own
experience, how difficult it is to ensure women’s full,
equal and meaningful participation, despite the positive
messages of intent shared by all.
Even in times of immediate crisis and political
turmoil, women continue to be left out of the political
dialogue on their country’s future, as we are seeing now
in Afghanistan, Myanmar, the Sudan, Yemen and Syria,
inter alia. When decisions need to be made, including
in this Chamber, women remain underrepresented. We
need to start discussing that reality.
We are currently standing at a crossroads, with
different directions to choose from. I see that we have
two options. We can continue on the road of more
talk than action, or we can agree to accelerate our
action, including in times of immediate crisis and the
unlawful takeover of countries, to guarantee women’s
participation in all our diplomacy and political dialogue.
We can do our utmost so that gender equality and the
role of women are part of the immediate response and
not deprioritized, as is so often the case.
As a concrete example of support for women’s
empowerment, the EU launched the Afghan Women
Leaders Forum in March. The Forum provides a
platform for Afghan women from diverse backgrounds
within and outside Afghanistan to contribute to the
political dialogue of the EU and the wider international
community on the future of Afghanistan. Therefore,
the Forum presents an alternative space to express their
views for women who are not included in the political
dialogue in their own country and see their rights
violated in all imaginable and possible ways.
Today we are also confronted with the crimes
committed by Russian armed forces in Ukraine. The
EU continues to support Ukraine, in close coordination
with the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict. There too, in
that war waged by Russia on Ukrainian territory, we
see that women’s dignity and rights are being trampled
on. The war in Ukraine is another example of how we
need to pay particular attention to working together
with local and regional organizations to make sure that
our understanding of the situation — and therefore our

S/PV.9064

action and approach — are based on reliable information
and facts on the ground.
It is because of the appeal of such
organizations — women’s organizations that have
started to collect evidence and document cases of
conflict-related sexual violence — that the mandate of
the EU’s civilian Common Security and Defence Policy
Advisory Mission to Ukraine was amended to support
the Ukrainian authorities in investigating international
crimes, including conflict-related crimes of sexual
violence. We have also taken steps to address the
increased risks of trafficking facing those fleeing the
conflict, especially women and children, through the
adoption of a common anti-trafficking plan. Without
the role of regional organizations, we would not have
been able to take that important step.
Just as is the case in Afghanistan, where we have
women representing various kinds of local and regional
networks and organizations, the situation in Ukraine
shows the way that we should go about it. We have to
listen, we have to pay more attention and, above all,
we must make sure to feed the views and positions of
women into our political dialogue and decision-making.
And we must do so promptly. That means not waiting
to deal with that issue until the other so-called more
important issues have been dealt with first.
I have just given two examples of how it actually
can be done — how we can bring women into our
political discussions and dialogue and have them
participate meaningfully in them. It can be done. It
just requires a deliberate effort and a consistent and
continuous banging on the door of those places where
conflict and peace are being addressed. The Security
Council is such a place. Actually, it is the highest-level
organ for the discussion of peace and security. That is
why I am grateful to Albania for having put this issue
on the agenda.
The EU is fully committed to doing its part, in
line with its action plan on women, peace and security
and as demonstrated by our actions, both internally
and externally. Gender mainstreaming is a guiding
principle of our 18 civilian and military missions and
operations and a priority of our external action. We
have committed to ensuring that 85 per cent of all
EU external action will have a gender dimension by
2025. In all regions, from the Sahel to the Middle East,
Central Africa and Asia, we support capacity-building
and monitoring actions for women’s leadership, we
contribute to women’s networks, and we work closely

22-383419/31

S/PV.9064

Women and peace and security

with civil society, grass-roots organizations and UNWomen.
I would like to conclude by saying: Let us do this
much more often; let us get together and discuss how
we can and how we need to make sure that women are
offered a chance to participate meaningfully in our
discussions. As a concrete outcome of today’s meeting,
I propose relaunching the Regional Acceleration
Resolution 1325 mechanism, a platform to facilitate the
exchange of best practices and lessons learned among
the United Nations, the EU, the African Union, NATO
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. We welcome additional partners, such as the
League of Arab States. Let us do whatever it takes
because it is 2022. Our daughters and sons will not
understand why we were not capable of doing that.
The President: I thank Ms. Ronner-Grubačić for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Abu Ghazaleh.
Ms. Abu Ghazaleh: I wish to congratulate Albania
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of June and to thank the President of the
Council for convening this open debate on women and
peace and security.
This invitation comes in the framework of
consolidating the exciting cooperation between the
Council and the League of Arab States (LAS) in the
area of maintaining international peace and security,
which culminates in the annual meeting held by the
Council to discuss cooperation with LAS, with the
participation of His Excellency Secretary-General
António Guterres and His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ahmed Aboul Gheit.
That growing cooperation resulted in the adoption
of presidential statements S/PRST/2019/5 under the
presidency of Kuwait in 2019, S/PRST/2021/2 under
the presidency of Tunisia in 2021 and S/PRST/2022/1
under the presidency of the United Arab Emirates in
March. All three statements focus on women and peace
and security as one of the main axes of the growing
cooperation among the LAS, the United Nations and
other regional organizations, especially the African
Union, which put this issue before the Council at the
initiative of Namibia, resulting in the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000).
Twenty-one years later, the Arab region continues
to witness crises and conflicts, while women’s potential
10/31

15/06/2022

to build peace remains untapped in the region.
Sporadic progress has been seen. In order to pursue
an end to the conflicts, calls are being made for the
de-escalation of conflicts and for women’s equal and
meaningful participation in their peaceful resolution.
The League of Arab States, in line with its mandate,
has been supporting efforts to reach political solutions
and broker ceasefires initiated at the national level that
allow parties to establish legitimate, accountable and
effective Governments.
In 2015, the LAS formulated a regional strategy for
women and peace and security in support of its member
States’ efforts to develop national action plans to
implement resolution 1325 (2000). In that framework in
2019, the LAS established the Arab Women Mediators
Network as a regional mediation instrument, in line
with resolution 1325 (2000). It is made up of highlevel diplomats from the Ministries for Foreign Affairs
of member States of the region. It has established a
strategy and action plan, which provide a framework to
guide the establishment of national mediation networks.
The LAS also initiated the establishment of the
Emergency Committee for Protection of Women during
Armed Conflicts in the Arab region, in response to
the efforts made by the women of the region. In that
context, several related strategies have been adopted
to support, strengthen and protect women in peace
and security initiatives, such as the Arab strategy for
prevention and response to combat all forms of violence
in refugee situations, especially sexual violence against
women and girls, and the strategy of the Arab Women
Mediation Network. Moreover, in cooperation with
UN-Women, the League of Arab States has developed
Women, Peace and Security in the Arab Region, an
initiative aimed at providing the technical assistance
and political guidance needed for every aspect of the
commitments related to women and peace and security.
Its first and second synthesis reports were issued at the
regional level on the progress made in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) after 15 years in the Arab
region, and to monitor progress in implementing our
regional strategy and executive action plan, Protecting
Arab Women: Security and Peace 2016-2018, as well as
a guide for preparing national plans for women, peace
and security.
I would like to end by suggesting that the
Secretary-General appoint a special envoy for women
and peace and security. Moreover, since we now also
22-38341

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

have Ms. Bahous here, we call on the Security Council
to adopt a new resolution on women and mediation.
The President: I thank Ms. Abu Ghazaleh for
her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of Albania.
I would like to sincerely thank all the briefers and
the Secretary-General for their statements and the very
valuable information they provided at this meeting.
We heard important, accurate and first-hand accounts
from them, from different perspectives and regions,
which feed into the collective efforts to implement the
women and peace and security agenda. Yes, the right
word is the implementation of a very robust normative
framework. We have the resolutions. We need action.
And we need more concrete and tangible results.
We know that regional and subregional
organizations have continued to play pivotal roles
in their respective regions in the areas of peace and
security and human rights and development, including
in the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. The role of regional organizations in
matters related to the women and peace and security
agenda has become increasingly important, given the
magnitude and complexity of the challenges facing
the international community today. Recent events
in various countries and regions, such as Ukraine,
Afghanistan, the Sudan, Myanmar and Mali, to name
only a few, have shown how fragile the progress we
have made in the field of women and peace and security
continues to be.
Because of the war in Ukraine, as the Council has
heard many times, including on Monday last week
(see S/PV.9056), the substantive gains in the area of
women’s rights and gender equality made in recent
years have been put under immense pressure, if not
entirely undone. Today Ukrainian women and girls
are facing what may be the biggest challenge of their
lives. Unlawful attacks on civilian facilities, including
schools and hospitals, are depriving them of access to
education and essential health services. The women
and girls who have been forced to flee their homes
have found themselves in situations that exacerbate
inequality and vulnerability and have been confronted
by sexual and gender-based violence. We are appalled
by the reports of alleged sexual violence, which should
be fully documented and properly investigated.

S/PV.9064

In Afghanistan, since the violent takeover
of the Taliban in August 2021, women have been
systematically erased from public life, and those who
have protested have been violently repressed, abducted,
killed or subjected to other forms of reprisals.
It is deeply worrying that despite promises and
commitments, girls continue to be denied an education.
That is unacceptable.
In the Sudan, Myanmar and Mali, the violence that
has erupted has threatened not just the fragile gains of
the women and peace and security agenda, but the very
lives and work of women peacebuilders themselves,
and has also tested the ability of the international
community to fulfil the mandate of the Council in
maintaining international peace and security.
As we heard today, a large number of regional
organizations, including the European Union, the
African Union, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the League of Arab
States have adopted or are about to adopt dedicated plans
and strategies to implement and prioritize the agenda
for women and peace and security. That is a wonderful
development. Regional organizations are often the first
to react in crisis response and to engage with the parties
concerned to ensure the protection of civilians. They
are uniquely placed to build trust and promote dialogue
among the parties involved, as well as to offer support
in mediation and reconciliation, and can be influential
in advocating for women’s full, equal, meaningful and
safe participation in all aspects of peace and security.
We must strengthen the partnerships and coordination
with such regional organizations and make their voices
heard in the Security Council and in the broader United
Nations system. In many ways, regional organizations
have unique and complementary capacities, which
when properly coordinated with the United Nations
system can produce good, fast and effective results in
preserving and or accelerating the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda, especially
in contexts of political turmoil and the seizure of power
by force.
While many regional organizations already
cooperate closely with each other, it will be important
to intensify that cooperation and gradually build a
network of regional organizations aiming to improve
data disaggregation, produce gender analyses, share best
practices and coordinate gender-responsive and human
rights-based approaches to ensure the meaningful
inclusion of women, especially those from traditionally

22-3834111/31

S/PV.9064

Women and peace and security

marginalized groups, in political and peace and security
processes. It is crucial for regional organizations to
work closely with civil society and especially womenled organizations at the grassroots level. Regional
organizations must be able to support safe and enabling
environments for women peacebuilders, human rights
defenders and civil-society activists. In coordination
with the United Nations system, with Member States
and with one another, regional organizations can
provide rapid, flexible funding to women human rights
defenders and women-led organizations operating in
conflict and post-conflict settings. To that end, we
must ensure that all regional organizations prioritize
the women and peace and security agenda and
develop action plans and strategies to implement it,
in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000) and other
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Through its participation within several regional
organizations, such as the OSCE, NATO and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), Albania
is committed to fulfilling its duty regarding the
acceleration and full implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. The women and peace and
security agenda was integrated as one of the priorities
of Albania’s OSCE Chairmanship in 2020, injecting
new momentum into its work in promoting the role of
women in conflict resolution and peace processes. We
are happy to see that the OSCE continues to prioritize
women and peace and security. As a member of NATO,
Albania is working tirelessly to reduce barriers to
the active and meaningful participation of women in
security institutions at the national level and within
the Alliance. Women today constitute almost 20 per
cent of Albania’s total armed forces personnel. In the
OIC, Albania is fully engaged and very supportive of
every initiative that aims to strengthen the meaningful
participation of women at all levels, and to accelerate
the women and peace and security agenda and the
normative framework adopted by the Security Council
over the years.
I am very happy to report on some real, bold and
significant achievements on the meaningful participation
of women in important decision-making processes in
my country. Albania currently ranks among the top five
most gender-balanced Governments in the world, with
women making up 75 per cent of its ministers. Some
of the top public positions in Albania — including in
independent institutions, agencies and departments
in key areas of the State — are successfully held by
women. Albania has taken important steps towards
12/31

15/06/2022

officially embracing gender-responsive budgeting at
both the central and local levels.
It is time to engage in a new level of cooperation
with regional organizations. Only by working together
at the various levels can we close the huge gap between
what has been achieved on paper and the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda on
the ground. Such cooperation is especially vital in the
context of recent military coups and seizures of power
by force, as a result of which we have witnessed abrupt
interruptions to national commitments on women and
peace and security.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Permanent Representative of the United
States and member of President Biden’s Cabinet.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank you, Madam President, for convening
today’s vital debate. I also thank Secretary-General
Guterres for participating today.
I would also like to express my appreciation to
all the briefers and to the representatives of regional
organizations who have joined us today. The role of
regional organizations is critical to elevating the women
and peace and security agenda, and we welcome their
willingness to do more and the critical role that they all
play in their respective organizations.
We have seen the disproportionate threats women
and girls face in countries and conflicts around the
world, including in Mali, Afghanistan, Myanmar,
Ukraine, Ethiopia and elsewhere. I would like to point
out that several United Nations sanctions regimes,
such as those for South Sudan and Yemen, include
designation criteria for those who perpetrate violence
against women. We encourage the Security Council to
continue to use those tools, as it did for Osama Al Kuni
Ibrahim, a notorious human trafficker in Libya.
In Afghanistan, the Taliban has constrained — and
in many areas eliminated — women’s participation in
political, economic and social spaces. They have made
no less than a dozen formal announcements since last
September restricting the rights of women and girls.
Once again, we reiterate our call on the Taliban to
reverse those restrictions on education, employment
and movement. We urge the Taliban to allow women to
fully and meaningfully participate in Afghan society.
The contributions of women will allow Afghanistan to
22-38341

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

prosper in the years ahead, but the exclusion of women
and girls will erase the possibility of stability and
economic gains in Afghanistan.
Furthermore, we cannot talk about the women and
peace and security agenda without reflecting on the
consequences of Russia’s horrific invasion of Ukraine
and the disproportionate impact that it has had on women.
As we made clear earlier this month, we continue to
see mounting credible reports of atrocities committed
by Russia’s forces against civilians, including horrific
accounts of gender-based violence and conflict-related
sexual violence. There must be accountability for those
atrocities, as well as those committed by others against
women and girls. Perpetrators cannot act with impunity.
Regional organizations must also play a role in that
regard, and we are committed to working with them.
As we use every tool at our disposal, we must also
look together to strengthen prevention efforts, promote
justice in its various forms and provide trauma-informed
support services for survivors in the near and longer
terms. However, one thing that I would like to make
clear is not lost on us is that women are not passive
victims. They are survivors. They are courageous and
are consistently on the front lines of peacebuilding, at
both the grass-roots and the national levels. Women
actively take steps to protect their communities from
conflict. They bring a unique understanding of local
and regional dynamics to the peace processes that are
necessary for establishing sustainable agreements.
Prioritizing the women’s peace and security agenda
will not just change the lives of women and girls; it will
also plant the seed for a more peaceful future for them,
which is why we must make meaningful and lasting
progress in addressing gender inequality at all levels of
our society. As several speakers stressed, we must take
action in addition to words. We must address harmful
gender and societal norms. We must not, as a Syrian
woman told me during my recent visit to Turkey, stop
feeling a sense of outrage at the violence and atrocities
committed against women.
We must continue to promote the full participation
and inclusion of women in decision-making roles at
all levels of conflict prevention, conflict resolution
and peacebuilding processes. For our part, through the
passage of the Women, Peace and Security Act of 2017,
the United States became the first country in the world
to codify its commitment to advancing resolution 1325
(2000) by enacting a comprehensive women and peace
and security law. The 2019 United States Strategy

S/PV.9064

on Women, Peace and Security seeks to close the
gender gap in leadership by mobilizing United States
diplomacy and programmes, while engaging partners,
investing in women’s safety and rights and amplifying
the voices of women leaders and organizations.
We look forward to releasing our second report
on Government-wide women and peace and security
implementation efforts at the end of this month and
continuing to engage with civil society in that work. We
encourage all States Members of the United Nations to
adopt and implement action plans on women and peace
and security. To that end, I congratulate the regional
organizations, including those represented here today,
such as the African Union and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, that have adopted
women and peace and security strategies. Now they
must be translated into action.
Regional organizations also play an essential role in
encouraging countries to adopt and implement national
action plans on women and peace and security. Their
regional leadership in promoting women’s full, equal
and meaningful participation in peace and security
processes is invaluable. It is also a powerful signal for
individual countries to do the same.
One area in which regional organizations can truly
make a difference is in creating a safe space for women
peacebuilders, journalists and civil society. We must
all work together to empower those actors and prevent
acts of violence against them, including through the
misuse and exploitation of digital technologies for
online harassment and abuse and the spread of gender
disinformation by State and non-State malign actors.
The United States remains fully committed to
advancing resolution 1325 (2000) as a matter of
peace and security for everyone. Our responsibility
is immense, but our opportunity to change lives, if
we were to fully commit to the women and peace and
security agenda, is even greater.
Ms. Haugsbakken (Norway): I would like to thank
Albania for convening today’s timely debate. Protecting
women’s rights and participation has certainly not
become less important against the backdrop of violent
takeovers and militarized responses.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Guterres, Under-Secretary-General Bahous and the
representatives of regional organizations for sharing
their insights and lessons learned.

22-3834113/31

S/PV.9064

Women and peace and security

Norway sees three ways in which regional
organizations can approach this subject.
First, they can lead by example. For decades,
the African Union has demonstrated leadership in
addressing military coups and takeovers through
its quick and decisive responses. That is truly a
best practice that reminds us all of the value of
principled cooperation.
We also commend the creation of regional
action plans on women and peace and security by
organizations, such as the African Union (AU) and the
Economic Community of West African States, and we
encourage the strengthened implementation of those
plans. Joint statements such as the one issued by the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation on Afghan girls’
right to education are also important political signals
that should not be underestimated.
Nonetheless, the real test is in translating our
general policy commitments into concrete action when
conflicts arise. Regional organizations should insist on
women’s full, equal and meaningful participation in all
mediation efforts towards local and national conflict
resolution and in rebuilding from political crises. They
should also insist on including women in regional
organizations’ own mediation teams. The Regional
Women Mediator Networks has a wealth of experience
and expertise that can be drawn on in that regard.
Secondly, regional organizations can partner for
change. After a military coup or violent takeover,
national women and peace and security commitments
and the work of civil society are often also interrupted.
That contributes to further marginalization of women
leaders from political spaces and formal processes at
both the national and the local levels.
In Afghanistan and in Myanmar, we have heard
repeated calls from women peacebuilders and civil
society representatives, including those in exile,
for formal and informal platforms to ensure their
continued and direct engagement with those who have
taken power.
In the Sudan, the AU, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
have supported the creation of a group of non-partisan
women from across the country that will promote
women’s participation in the political process, building
on the key role played by women in the 2019 revolution.
14/31

15/06/2022

Thirdly, regional organizations can support
accounting for justice. Organizations like the AU,
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the
European Union have long-standing commitments to
promoting gender equality. As institutions, and through
their members, they have numerous levers at their
disposal to reduce barriers to both women’s protection
and participation. That includes coordinating regional
approaches and joint messaging to revoke laws and
policies that restrict the rights of women and girls
and, equally, promoting policies tailored to protect,
including against reprisals.
Regional support for investigations, information­
sharing and the capacity-building of national
institutions are also ways to strengthen the prevention
of, and response to, sexual and gender-based violence
and other human rights violations and abuses. When
all else fails, the rulings of the Inter-American Court
of Human Rights have shown that there can also be
regional tools for course correction and accountability.
Regional organizations carry the weight of many
and diverse voices. They are uniquely placed to facilitate
dialogue and rebuild broken relations between those
in power and their populations. Their engagement in
peace diplomacy is critical, and they are key actors and
partners to the United Nations in translating our women
and peace and security ambitions into actual impact.
The authority, advisory and convening roles
of regional organizations can also be entry points
for dialogue on upholding the rights of women and
girls, re-enabling an environment for engagement
by women human rights defenders and civil society
and strengthening protection and accountability, all
of which we can, and should, draw on, especially in
contexts of violent takeovers.
Ms. Osei-Asare (Ghana): Since the unanimous
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), more than two
decades ago, discourses and efforts geared towards
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women
in peace and security have received unprecedented
international momentum and yielded positive outcomes,
with significant promise for increased success if we all
commit to that important global objective and keep
the promises.
Ghana welcomes the emphasis of this high-level
open engagement on the role of regional organizations
in implementing the three main thematic tracks of
the women and peace and security agenda in the face
22-38341

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9064

of political turmoils, and commends the Albanian
delegation, led by you, Your Excellency, for directing
our collective attention towards that aspect. I also wish
to express my appreciation to all the briefers for their
rich perspectives, which rightly point us to the need for
action on the commitments that we all made.

2000s. In that regard, we recall the critical role that
the Mano River Union Women’s Peace Network played
in getting women represented in the peace processes
of Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea, as well as the
roles that others play in facilitating the participation of
women in political activities.

The African story cannot be recounted without
highlighting an essential component of the continent’s
political and economic reality, which is the progressive
quest for a deepened regional integration, marked
by economic prosperity and sociopolitical cohesion.
Africa’s regional economic communities, such as
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Southern African Development
Community, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the East African Community, which
serve as building blocks for continental integration,
have had a long history of engagement with the
aspirations of the people of the continent, even though
the recurrence of sociopolitical conflicts has led to the
erosion of some gains in several instances.

The adoption in 2010 of the ECOWAS regional
action plan for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and related resolutions has also seen the
inclusion of women and peace and security elements in
initiatives, such as the regional early warning systems,
the development of a gender and elections plan and
the training of women mediators to support peace
initiatives in the region. Through those initiatives,
ECOWAS continues to work towards inclusive and
participatory governance processes, including the
rights and roles of women in peace and governance
processes. Such initiatives, which have the primary
intention of enabling the integration of women into the
mechanisms of preventive diplomacy and mediation,
deserve full support.

In moments of social and political unrest in
several places in the world, women and peace and
security agents, against the odds of severe reprisals,
marginalization and outright hostility, continue to
work towards the advancement, progress and stability
of their communities.

In addressing more specifically the focus of today’s
engagement, Ghana will make four points.

It is also encouraging to observe the fervour
and attention that the women and peace and security
agenda has generated within regional and subregional
organizations. The African Union (AU) and ECOWAS
have incorporated crucial aspects of the agenda into
their strategic objectives and operations. We commend,
in particular, the efforts that are being made to nurture a
culture of fervent national and regional implementation,
backed by political will, as well as the desire to protect
women and give them a voice in society.
In West Africa, for instance, in acknowledgement
of the contributions of women in building peaceful
and stable societies, ECOWAS has developed legal
frameworks to assure the role of women in governance,
electoral processes and conflict prevention and
resolution, as well as peacebuilding. The region is both
mindful of the need to protect the rights of women
and girls from conflict-related sexual violence and
deeply appreciative of the role that women groups
at the national and regional levels have played in the
resolution of conflicts, such as those that occurred in
Liberia, Sierra Leone and Côte d’Ivoire in the early

First, there must be a concerted effort to improve
on our collective resilience against conflict by diverting
some of the global military expenditure towards
investment in human security. In that way, we can
channel much-needed funds into women and peace and
security initiatives aimed at conflict prevention.
Secondly, we must encourage cross-collaboration
on the women and peace and security agenda among
regional organizations. That would ensure the effective
exchange of best practices across regions and deepen
the partnerships to bridge knowledge gaps required to
support women’s empowerment initiatives.
Thirdly, we urge the Security Council to request the
Secretary-General to ensure the allocation of targeted,
practical and rapid resources to facilitate responses
to threats against women peacebuilders or avert the
dangers that they may face, especially in the context of
military coups. The Council can also ensure that peace
operations are adequately resourced to address the
challenges encountered by United Nations entities and
Member States in monitoring, reporting and providing
support to women peacebuilders.
Finally, we urge that regional organizations, in
collaboration with the United Nations, actively promote
women’s participation in mediation through training

22-3834115/31

S/PV.9064

Women and peace and security

programmes and the creation of a database of women
mediators at the regional level. Organizations should
also take special measures to ensure full participation
by actively employing women as special envoys and
senior mediators.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
Ghana remains fully committed to the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women in peace processes,
especially in the context of conflicts, where their
interventions matter most. Through our membership of
the AU and ECOWAS, we will continue to contribute
to building a robust regional women and peace and
security framework, characterized by tangible actions
leading to the attainment of desirable outcomes.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): The
United Arab Emirates would like to thank Albania
for organizing today’s open debate and to thank you,
Minister Xhaçka, for presiding over this meeting and
being such a champion of the women and peace and
security agenda. We continue to support increased
Security Council engagement on the women and peace
and security agenda. We thank Albania for being a
strong partner in our shared commitments in that regard.
When conflict breaks out, it rarely affects only
the groups or States directly involved. Regional
organizations are closest to the situation, with a deep
understanding of conflict dynamics and its spillover
effects. Their role is essential throughout the conflict
continuum. They are also key to addressing crossborder issues, including refugee flows and internal
displacement, terrorist attacks and food insecurity — all
of them, sadly, issues that we face across the globe today.
As the Council engages with regional organizations
in conflict prevention and resolution, we must also
amplify their critical role in implementing the women
and peace and security agenda. Regional action
plans are important because regional organizations
publicly commit to the women and peace and
security agenda and provide tangible accountability.
Moreover, when they convene negotiations, facilitate
peace processes and deploy observers, they can
substantively increase the alarmingly low number of
women negotiators — currently only 13 per cent, on
average. That number is unacceptably low, but can
easily be addressed. We need to focus on three main
areas — strengthened networks, localized security and
gender-responsive leadership.
16/31

15/06/2022

First, we stress the need for benchmarks and
targeted funding for women’s organizations and
networks at all levels before conflict erupts. Deepening
partnerships between regional organizations and local
women leaders can promote their roles in conflict
resolution, preventive diplomacy, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. As of 2018, women’s organizations
received only 0.13 per cent of total official development
assistance, despite countless appeals as to the centrality
of women’s participation to sustainable peace. Strong
partnerships are the backbone of the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women and can help
women and girls build greater resilience when military
coups and seizures of power occur. We echo the call of
UN-Women Executive Director Sima Bahous to fully
utilize those networks.
Secondly, regional security frameworks should
systematically include diverse local and religious
nuances in order to guarantee that they are widely
accepted, trusted and implemented. That means
not only consistent investment in training women
peacekeepers, observers and protection officers from
their regions, but also the embedding of local dynamics
into the design and implementation of security sector
reform. Coupling specific knowledge of local conflicts
with international security training can help shape
comprehensive conflict resolution frameworks and
respond to all groups affected by a conflict, particularly
women and girls.
Thirdly, we need to strengthen gender-responsive
leadership, including by appointing women to highlevel positions. That should include targeted positions,
where they can advocate for the women and peace and
security agenda, as well as overall leadership positions,
like those of the extraordinary women we heard from
today in our briefings. This is an issue that the entire
international community should work on. As of 2020,
almost half of the world’s 30 major international
organizations have never been led by a woman, and
in 2021 only 18 out of 194 heads of delegations at
the high-level week of the General Assembly at its
seventy-sixth session were women. If we do not achieve
gender-responsive leadership, we will not succeed in
institutionalizing gender equality and the women and
peace and security agenda — and may as well stop
paying it lip-service in the Council. Albania’s numbers
shared by you, Madam President, are a fantastic global
benchmark to aspire to.
22-38341

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

Although we believe these rights and truths to be
universal, we must in parallel embrace local nuances
and work within them. Last fall, like many gathered
here, I met with a remarkable group of Afghan women.
One of them, a former journalist, explained to me that
one of the most powerful arguments against the ongoing
assault on the rights of women and girls is the example
set by Muslim-majority countries where women are free
and equal agents of their lives. She gave the example
of a country like my own, the United Arab Emirates,
as an aspirational model. That courageous woman was
speaking to the power and importance of relatability,
affiliation and nuance — the very same strengths that
regional organizations bring to this agenda. Properly
empowered and supported, regional organizations can
expand and complement international practices that
may overlook contexts and identities of a conflict.
Regional agents uniquely respect, reflect and represent
their audience. That is invaluable for all the dimensions
of this work, but perhaps nowhere more so than for
the women and girls who bear the brunt of conflict
worldwide. We should reflect that fact in our support
to them.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I thank you, Madam President, for convening this
important debate, and through you I thank the valuable
expert briefers and regional organizations that we heard
from today.
In April, during our presidency of the Security
Council, Lord Ahmad of Wimbledon and Nadia Murad
launched the Murad Code (see S/PV.9016) — a landmark
code of conduct for safely and effectively gathering
information from survivors. We ensured that the Code
was translated into Ukrainian so that it could be used,
now, with the aim of holding perpetrators to account for
their crimes. The Secretary-General set out very clearly
the many serious issues facing women in conflict areas
all over the world — from Afghanistan to Ukraine to
Myanmar. We need action to address this if we are to
prevent the disproportionate suffering of women in
those crises.
That is why we, as the United Kingdom, are
particularly focused on the threat of sexual violence.
In November, London will host an international
conference on preventing sexual violence in conflict,
the centrepiece of a global campaign launched by
Foreign Secretary Truss last year. For us, all options are
on the table to strengthen international prevention and
response to the heinous crimes of conflict-related sexual

S/PV.9064

violence, which remain one of the many horrifying
consequences of Russia’s illegal war in Ukraine.
Turning to the role of regional organizations, in
many contexts they have unique influence in advocating
for the rights of women and girls — for example, in the
case of Afghanistan and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation. We join others in reaffirming our support
for all efforts to remove the wholly counterproductive
restrictions imposed by the Taliban on women and girls.
For our part, the United Kingdom supports and
funds the regional Women Mediators across the
Commonwealth network, an experienced group of
women who stand ready to support our collective
efforts for peace at the community level. Members
have resolved electoral conflicts in Uganda, mediated
the political conflict in Myanmar and bridged divided
communities in Northern Ireland and Cyprus.
The United Kingdom also supports regional
collaboration to drive change on the ground — for
example, through our work with institutions of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations and Member
States on capacity-building. We have also supported the
development of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s
first policies on sexual exploitation and abuse and on
conflict-related sexual violence.
Looking forward, there are further practical
actions that regional organizations and Member
States can take to support women’s full, equal and
meaningful participation.
First, as others have said, Member States can
ensure that women are at the heart and forefront of
organizations in leadership and decision-making roles.
Secondly, they can actively promote the agenda
through communications and dialogue.
Thirdly, Member States can develop regional
action plans, toolkits and strategies on women, peace
and security, which are then fully implemented.
Finally, Member States can share learning
experiences and expertise among organizations to
strengthen the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda rather than duplicating efforts.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to welcome you, Madam
Minister, as you preside over this meeting on the
very relevant and important topic of women, peace
and security. We thank the Secretary-General for his

22-3834117/31

S/PV.9064

Women and peace and security

assessments, and we have listened with interest to the
briefings by today’s briefers.
The proposed topic for discussion, namely, “Keeping
the promises: The role of regional organizations in
implementing the women, peace and security in the
face of political turmoil and seizures of power by force”,
has been formulated vaguely, but in many ways, it can
be projected onto the developments in Ukraine. The
deterioration and disintegration of that State began in
February 2014, when an anti-constitutional coup d’état
was organized in Kyiv. The removal of the legitimate
president of Ukraine, Viktor Yanukovych, and the
seizure of power by radical nationalist forces was
carried out with the very active contribution of Western
States. The forces that came to power as a result of these
events began to engage in the forcible Ukrainization
of the country, the destruction of everything Russian,
repression of political opponents and the fight against
dissidents. They banned opposition parties and shut
down opposition media, while at the same time and
with the support of the West, presenting modern
Ukraine as a model of democracy and pluralism of
opinion. The authorities in Kyiv unleashed a civil war
against the Donbas region, the Russian and Russianspeaking population of which refused to recognize the
coup and stood up for their right to communicate in
their native language and live in peace with Russia.
The Kyiv regime tried to drown dissenters in blood.
On 2 May 2014, at the Trade Unions House in Odesa,
Ukrainian nationalists burned participants in a peaceful
protest, including women, alive. On 9 May 2014, the
Azov Battalion, some members of which recently
surrendered at the Azovstal plant, shot at peaceful
protesters in the city of Mariupol. On 17 August 2014, a
Ukrainian fighter jet struck the regional administration
building of Luhansk, again killing people. Then for
eight years, Kyiv shelled the peaceful cities of Donbas
and established a complete blockade of the region.
As a result, 3,300 civilians in Donbas, including 152
children, were killed.
Ukraine has since established a regime of strict
censorship. Undesirable mass media and Internet
websites are being shut down. Independent journalists
are persecuted, opposition parties are being banned,
and local security services have detained and abducted
representatives of the press and media dozens of times,
including female correspondents Valentina Solovieva,
Olga Yureva, Alina, Yepremyan, Evgenia Koroleva,
Elizaveta Khramtsova. Natalia Kalesheva, Yelena
Makarova, Ksenia Kolchina, Alexandra Tcherepnina,
18/31

15/06/2022

Ekaterina Voronina, Maria Knyazeva, Tamara
Nersesian, Anna Kurbatova and Natalia Goncharova,
for carrying out their professional activities.
The National Union of Journalists of Ukraine
has recorded dozens of attacks on media workers
annually: 77 people attacked in 2020, 75 in 2019, and
86 people in 2018. In 2015, Olga Moroz, editor-in-chief
of the Neteshinskiy Vestnik newspaper was killed in
the Khmelnytskyi region. She had been preparing a
story on illegal logging before her death. Some time
ago, human rights activist and anti-fascist Elena
Berezhnaya was arrested by the Ukrainian security
services on absurd charges of treason. We wrote about
this egregious case in a letter that was disseminated as
a Security Council document (S/2022/253). Even before
the start of the special military operation, in 2015,
the Ukrainian Special Services repeatedly — at least
twice — blocked the website of the Soldiers’ Mothers
Committee of Ukraine.
Today the civilian population of Donbas is being
subjected to constant indiscriminate and deliberate
shelling by the Armed Forces of Ukraine, including
with the use of artillery and ammunition supplied to
Kyiv by its Western sponsors. NATO member States led
by the United States, which are supplying weapons and
ammunition to Ukraine, are direct accomplices in the
killing and wounding of women in Donbas. A glaring
example is the unprecedented shelling of Donetsk
using rocket systems and artillery on 13 June. More
than 350 rockets and shells, including French cluster
munitions, which had allegedly been destroyed in 2016,
and American weapons, were fired on a peaceful city.
As a result of this barbaric and essentially terrorist act,
six people died, including a child and a woman, and
33 persons were injured. The total number of Donbas
residents who have been killed since the beginning of
the special military operation is much higher.
The maternity hospital in Donetsk, where three
newborns on the fifth floor were on oxygen, was also
shelled. One child was brought down to the basement
by doctors because he no longer needed oxygen. By
pure chance, these children, doctors and nurses in the
hospital survived. However, no condemnation of this
inhumane crime was heard in the West. By contrast,
Council members may recall how emotions ran high
when the Ukrainian side and Western journalists
tried in March to organize a provocation and spread a
story about an alleged Russian attack on the maternity
hospital in Mariupol. That shameful provocation was
22-38341

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

convincingly exposed, but Western pseudo-defenders
of women still recall periodically the maternity hospital
in Mariupol. Will they be talking about the maternity
hospital in Donetsk, which, unlike the one in Mariupol,
was not turned into a gun post?
My dear Western colleagues will also not be able
to exploit the topic of acts of sexual violence allegedly
committed in Ukraine by Russian military personnel.
Fakes and lies are all that they have — not a single fact,
not a single shred of evidence. Of course, they will
certainly not be able to surpass the former Ombudsman
for Human Rights in Ukraine, Ms. Denisova, in their
lies. Everyone was surprised by her incomprehensible
focus on numerous details in her claims of sexual
crimes and rapes of children in the occupied territories,
which could not be confirmed by any evidence. Later
on, she admitted that she had blatantly lied to the whole
world in order to convince Western partners of the
need to swiftly deliver weapons to Ukraine. She was an
unusual ombudsman, indeed.
In the territories of Ukraine liberated from
Ukrainian nationalists together with the Donetsk
People’s Republic and the Luhansk People’s Republic,
work is currently under way to bring to light cases and
evidence of crime committed by Ukrainian groups,
including crimes of a sexual nature. They are being
documented and investigated by the investigative
authorities of Russia and the Donbas Republics, as well
as the inter-agency commission to search for missing
persons and burial sites of bodies of the dead in zones
of armed conflicts in Donbas.
The Armed Forces of Ukraine continue to utilize
the terrorist tactic of human shields, placing heavy
equipment under the cover of civilians in urban and
residential areas. Just recently, an adviser to the Office
of the President of Ukraine, Mr. Polodyak, told The
New York Times that the Ukrainian army will be using
urban-warfare tactics. In other words, it will continue
using people — civilians — as shields, and it will be
destroying civilian infrastructure. Our armed forces
are making every effort to preserve the lives of civilians
and reach agreements on opening humanitarian
corridors for the evacuation of civilians from combat
areas. Saving the lives of civilians in Ukraine and the
Donetsk People’s Republic and the Luhansk People’s
Republic is our absolute priority.
With regard to the general women and peace and
security agenda, we would like to draw attention to the
importance of taking additional measures to enhance

S/PV.9064

the role of women in the socioeconomic development of
States and situations of armed conflict or post-conflict
settlements. It is necessary to strengthen women’s
economic capacity, create favourable conditions for
women’s entrepreneurship and expand women’s access
to financial and material resources, markets, modern
technologies and intellectual property. Unfortunately,
the topic of expanding women’s participation in social
and economic cooperation as an essential element of
peacebuilding is unjustly glossed over by Western
partners who, without any basis whatsoever, have
proclaimed themselves champions in the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda. The most
important areas for international cooperation should
be overcoming poverty, women’s development and
expanding access to education and decent employment.
The practice of applying unilateral coercive measures
against States is absolutely unacceptable. It is clear
that the impact of such measures falls first and
foremost on the interests of women in the social and
economic arenas.
The challenge that many Western States in
particular face in terms of eradicating racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and intolerance of women
and people of African and Asian descent has not lost
its relevance. The colonialist policies that they pursued
for centuries are deeply rooted and have now been
transformed into neo-colonialism. Such practices must
be completely eradicated, and women must play a
leading role in the process.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than three minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collars of the
microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
remarks to a close after three minutes.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): We thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important meeting. We
are grateful to the Secretary-General for his insights
and appreciate the insights provided by all of the other
briefers today.
Discriminatory social and political structures have
made violence against women systemic and deeply
entrenched. Women have therefore always been easy
targets in situations of armed conflict. More often than
not, they have found themselves on the receiving end of
peace and development processes.

22-3834119/31

S/PV.9064

Women and peace and security

India’s political and development trajectory has
navigated several complex challenges through its
women-centric initiatives. From women’s development
to women-led development, women in India are driving
India’s development in general. Our governance has
been transformed from being Government-led to a
multi-stakeholder, inclusive governance model. As the
world’s largest democracy, India offers a unique template
for gender-sensitive governance. More than 1.3 million
elected women representatives, who constitute nearly
44 per cent of the total number of elected representatives,
are leading political decision-making at the grass-roots
level. All-women panchayats — village-level local
elected bodies — are playing a defining role in grassroots policymaking in India. Twenty Indian States have
made provisions to reserve 50 per cent of seats for
women in legislative bodies.
Our actions are driven by a deep conviction that an
environment conducive to the participation and inclusion
of women in political processes is indispensable for
peace. A democratic polity, pluralism and the rule of
law are essential prerequisites for fostering this type of
enabling environment. With the aim of ensuring stability
in our region, we have therefore been underlining the
importance of inclusive and representative governance
in Afghanistan, with the meaningful participation of
women, in accordance with resolution 2593 (2021). We
are particularly concerned about the discriminatory
inferior status imposed on women in Afghan society,
which among other things has had an adverse effect on
the education of Afghan girls.
India’s development processes are guided by the
principle of “participation by all, prosperity for all”.
Several citizen-centric initiatives have been taken to
ensure that women are full participants and beneficiaries
in India’s development story. We have leveraged digital
technologies to provide greater access for women
to finance, credit, technology and employment. To
that end, we have opened online bank accounts for
more than 445 million people, with more than 55 per
cent of the account holders being women. During the
coronavirus disease pandemic, that initiative helped
nearly 200 million women via direct benefit transfers.
With regard to conflict situations, the United
Nations, regional organizations and the international
community have a special responsibility towards
women. Checking impunity and stopping violence
and exploitation in conflict situations are crucial.
The nature of peacekeeping and peacebuilding has
20/31

15/06/2022

changed to accommodate those imperatives. In that
regard, it is important that we factor in growing
concerns emanating from misuse of new and critical
technologies. The Internet and social media networks
have the potential to augment women’s voices and
increase their participation. However, extremist groups
and terrorists have increasingly exploited those tools
to women’s detriment. They have threatened women
who are active in public life, muzzled their voices,
amplified discriminatory ideas and promoted violent
radicalization. To counter such misuse, we require a
non-discriminatory and collective effort through a
whole-of-society approach.
Terrorism and violent extremism continue to be the
biggest violators of human rights and persistent threats
to global peace and security. Needless to say, women
and girls invariably suffer disproportionately from acts
of terror. Such acts deserve strong condemnation and
demand the adoption of a zero-tolerance approach. The
Council must focus its attention on the consequences of
terrorism for the rights of women.
Women police officers and peacekeepers have
played a critical role in preserving the women and peace
and security agenda. Having women peacekeepers is
crucial to the success of peacekeeping missions. It also
improves access to civilians and other stakeholders, as
well as bringing additional skill sets to peacekeeping
teams. Women peacekeepers serve as powerful
mentors and role models for women and girls in postconflict settings. They inspire grit and resilience in
female victims and encourage them to champion their
own rights and pursue non‐traditional careers. India
welcomes the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy for
increasing the number of women peacekeepers. We also
support increasing the deployment of women protection
advisers for effective monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements on sexual violence in conflict.
India stands ready to engage with its partners to
work towards mainstreaming the women and peace
and security agenda with a view to building inclusive,
peaceful and resilient societies. Just as a bird cannot
fly with one wing, durable peace cannot be achieved
without the active participation of the other gender. Our
collective commitments and actions towards global
peace must be anchored in that premise.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening this meeting on a topic
as important as women and peace and security. I would
also like to thank the briefers for their contributions.
22-38341

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

Resolution
2242
(2015)
recognizes
the
complementary role of regional organizations in
the implementation of the body of Security Council
resolutions on women and peace and security. In recent
years, the Council has done a good job of strengthening
dialogue with regional organizations by holding annual
meetings that have resulted in outcome documents
that recognize their relevance to women and peace
and security.
Initiatives such as the African Union’s regional
review on the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda in Africa and the 20152030 executive action plan for the protection of Arab
women of the League of Arab States have contributed
to efforts to ensure that the objectives of the women and
peace and security agenda are translated into regional
specific contexts. Conversely, regional practices
can also help the Council in its continuous efforts to
advance the agenda.
In all cases of sexual violence in conflict, we must
continue to demand that all parties adopt commitments to
preventing and addressing sexual violence, developing
a victim- and survivor-centred approach and holding
perpetrators to account. Humanitarian actors must also
be able to support survivors. Not only must we recognize
the problem, but we must also strengthen, wherever
appropriate, the mandates of peacekeeping operations
and special political missions to better respond to
such violations of international humanitarian law. The
presence of women peacekeepers on the ground has
also proven helpful and should continue to be pursued.
On many occasions women briefers to the Council
have called for more financing for women’s organizations
to enable them to exercise their unique potential to
support women and girls. UN-Women has also reminded
us that project planning and financing often neglect the
specific needs of women. Underinvestment in women’s
empowerment hampers progress on women’s rights
and gender equality and leaves women less resilient in
cases of conflict and seizures of power by force. Brazil
will continue to take a gender-sensitive approach to
international humanitarian assistance. We believe
that international financing should aim at promoting
gender equality as a catalyst for lasting peace, as well
as focusing on financing initiatives to ensure women’s
long-term economic security and well-being. We can
also continue to update peacekeeping mandates so
that they are more explicit in their role of promoting

S/PV.9064

women’s economic inclusion and empowerment, in line
with resolution 2242 (2015).
We must condemn all actions that hinder the
meaningful and purposeful participation of women in
peace processes and in society in general. The Council
must work not only to bring women to the table at
peace negotiations, but also on ways to protect those
invited to the table and those working on the ground
from direct violence and intimidation. By protecting
the women already trying to make a difference in their
communities, the Council is also making it clear that
without the participation of the female population,
there can be no prospects for lasting peace, let alone
economic development. Normalizing the participation
of women in peace processes and upgrading their role is
a very concrete way to implement the women and peace
and security agenda.
More than 20 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), women are still facing the grave security
and humanitarian consequences of actions decided
primarily, if not exclusively, in decision-making
processes in which they did not take part. Women and
girls must finally be systematically and meaningfully
included in the decisions that affect their daily lives and
economically empowered so that they can face the dire
consequences of conflicts and seizures of power that
often bring violations of their rights. Brazil will continue
to support inclusive democratic political processes,
with the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women, and constructive processes promoting an end
to hostilities, as well as stability, national reconciliation
and lasting peace.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I commend
your leadership, Madam President, and I thank the
Albanian presidency for taking the initiative of
convening this important debate, which reminds us
of the persistent shared challenge resoundingly felt
within the Security Council — promoting the women
and peace and security agenda in situations that hardly
lend themselves to its effective implementation. It is a
challenge that demands a renewed approach and calls
on us to unite our efforts at the national, regional and
international levels in order to expedite the fulfilment of
our commitments. I thank Executive Director Bahous,
Special Envoy Diop, Ambassador Ronner-Grubačić,
Secretary-General Schmid and Ms. Abu Ghazaleh for
their contribution to this debate.
In Beijing in 1995, the women of the world were
promised that concrete action would be taken in

22-3834121/31

S/PV.9064

Women and peace and security

12 critical areas, including decision-making, violence,
human rights, health and armed conflict. Those promises
were reaffirmed on 31 October 2000 by the unanimous
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), which was a historic
milestone in the efforts to ensure that women and girls
are systematically and sustainably included in peace and
security processes and mechanisms. Despite progress
in the promotion and protection of the rights of women
and girls in many parts of the world, there continue to
be gaps and delays with regard to political, social and
economic inclusion, and deep concerns persist in terms
of equal economic opportunities and their inclusion in
decision-making.
Despite the momentum of the efforts of the
international community in acknowledging women
as key actors in peace processes, it must be noted
that almost 22 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), women and children continue to be the
primary victims of States’ fragility, crisis situations
and upheavals. That disheartening state of affairs is
exacerbated during periods of unrest in the aftermath
of unconstitutional transitions of power, which embody
instability and the negation of the rule of law. Special
Envoy Diop underscored the breadth of the damage
that coups d’état, extreme violence and other such
transitions have done to the peace and security agenda
in Africa. In such situations where there is a break with
the constitutional order, which many countries have
experienced at some point in their history, women have
unfortunately often paid an extremely heavy price. Let
us be clear. Women must no longer be systematically
left to become the victims of violence and basic rights
violations during political unrest. On the contrary,
they must be enabled to participate fully in all peace
and decision-making processes, especially given the
well-known fact, as we have seen from experience,
that women’s participation at all stages of conflict
prevention and resolution processes contributes to a
more sustainable peace.
Through the African Union, Africa has taken the
appropriate measures and shouldered its responsibilities
in addressing the issue of the seizure of power by force
in its adoption of a bold legal instrument, the African
Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance.
The most recent Extraordinary Summit of the African
Union, held in Malabo, devoted its agenda to the issue,
as we are concerned about the resurgence of the problem
and its impact on regional governance.
22/31

15/06/2022

Today in some conflict-ridden regions of the world,
women of all ages are showing that they have a critical
role to play in conflict prevention and the promotion
of lasting peace. However, in formal negotiations and
transitional processes, those heroic peacemakers are
often sidelined. What they have to say is not given its
due, and their contributions are undervalued. Executive
Director Bahous laid out several regional response plans
regarding women’s resilience in situations of unrest,
including in Afghanistan, the Sahel and the Great
Lakes region. This stark reality is a sufficient reminder
of what we expect from the international community
in terms of action to strengthen the leadership roles,
participation and inclusion of women in all peace and
decision-making processes.
Under the leadership of President Ali Bongo
Ondimba, Gabon, which is one of the few African
countries that have never undergone an unconstitutional
change of power, is pursuing a policy that places women
at the heart of shaping its society’s destiny. Women are
the major assets of the stability that results from lasting
peace, which accounts for the allure of Gabon. Based
on our experience, it is obvious that acknowledging the
key role that women play in peace activities is a catalyst
not only for their empowerment but for invigorating our
socioeconomic and political landscapes, while ensuring
women’s facility in the area of the peaceful settlement
of potential disputes.
Gabon remains consistent in its international
advocacy for women’s inclusion, participation and
resilience-building in fragile and conflict-affected
contexts, while recognizing the leading role that women
are called on to play at every level of peace processes,
regardless of their sociopolitical backgrounds, from
conflict prevention to post-conflict recovery, mediation,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts.
My country is once again pleased to see that
the African Union has fully recognized its role as a
regional matrix for the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda, as evidenced by the
increased actions of the African Union Commission
aimed at promoting women’s participation in conflict
prevention, mediation and resolution.
In that regard, the joint efforts of the African
Union Commission and the United Nations, through
UN-Women and the Special Envoy on Women,
Peace and Security of the African Union, led to the
establishment of a network of African women leaders,
whose role was recognized in resolution 2457 (2019).
22-38341

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

It is important that those valuable initiatives, which
include networks of women peacebuilding leaders,
receive financial, logistical and technical support that
is stable and predictable, as well as regular capacitybuilding support.
We call for increased national, regional and global
efforts for the inclusive and efficient implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). That will inevitably require
strengthening the partnerships between the United
Nations and regional organizations, particularly in
terms of coordinating their actions on the women and
peace and security agenda.
In conclusion, it is up to us as members of the
Security Council, regardless of the sociopolitical
situation, to promote, through regional and subregional
organizations, the strengthening of resilience,
leadership and participation of women in peace- and
decision-making processes, not only to keep our
promises and respect our commitments but also, above
all, to provide an effective, comprehensive and inclusive
response to the challenges facing international peace
and security today.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Albania for convening today’s debate. Your
commitment, Madam President, to upholding women’s
rights in the Security Council is remarkable.
It has been recalled by all speakers that conflicts,
coups d’état and political unrest cause serious setbacks
for women and girls. In those situations, women’s
voices are silenced and their rights are reduced.
In Afghanistan, the Taliban continues to drive half
of their population into obscurity. In Ukraine, women
are suffering the consequences of the Russian army’s
aggression. Many women human rights defenders and
peacebuilders around the world are being attacked and
threatened, including women who have spoken before
the Security Council.
The Council has set up a robust framework to address
that, which is in no way reversible. The Council must
step up its efforts to specifically implement the women
and peace and security framework in the situations on
its agenda, from the Sahel to the Middle East and from
the Great Lakes region to Haiti and Myanmar.
Regional organizations have a decisive role to
play in advancing the women and peace and security
agenda. France welcomes the strategies and action
plans that have been adopted. We welcome the

S/PV.9064

establishment by the African Union of the Pan-African
Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention and
Mediation in the framework of the African Peace and
Security Architecture.
We also commend the efforts of organizations
not represented today, such as the International
Organization of La Francophonie, and the efforts of the
Economic Community of West African States, which
the Ghanaian Minister discussed in detail.
France supports partnerships between the United
Nations and regional organizations and among regional
organizations themselves, in particular the partnership
between the European Union and the African Union for
women’s inclusion in peace negotiations. We call on all
regional organizations to step up such initiatives and
share their good practices.
We must also strengthen synergies with civil
society. In that regard, we recall the innovative
framework of the Generation Equality Forum, which
was organized with UN-Women and Mexico in 2021.
The Forum mobilized $40 billion in funding to support
a global plan to accelerate progress towards equality.
We call on all Member States to join the Compact on
Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action
and to adopt national action plans in that regard.
For its part, France will continue to promote an
ambitious and determined feminist diplomacy. It
will continue to place women’s full participation and
inclusion at the heart of its cooperation projects. France
will make the implementation of its third national
action plan a priority.
Finally, following the example of our Albanian
presidency, France is pleased to announce today
its endorsement of the shared commitment of the
presidency of the Security Council to the women and
peace and security agenda.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
you, Madam President, for convening this debate. It is
one that, as you know, is very important to Ireland.
As many speakers this morning recognized, this is
a very apposite debate. The world is experiencing an
unprecedented proliferation of conflicts. Alongside
a global pandemic, we know that we are seeing an
epidemic of coup d’états, seizures of power and territory,
and indeed outright disregard for human rights and the
rule of law.

22-3834123/31

S/PV.9064

Women and peace and security

In some cases, gains made for women in peace and
security matters have been slipping away — we need
only to look at Afghanistan. To echo the statement
made by the Secretary-General earlier today, in many
cases we are going in the opposite direction. As he said,
we are going backwards.
We have faced such times of crisis before, and we
know too well that disregarding gender and women
results only in certainly ephemeral and often illusory
peace and stability.
The international community has the responsibility
to work for the prioritization of the women and peace
and security agenda, not to oversee its marginalization.
We bear that responsibility in this Chamber.
Today we had the honour of hearing from UNWomen Executive Director Sima Bahous and our
briefers from the African Union, the European Union
(EU), the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the League of Arab States.
I will not repeat the shameful figures about the
shortfalls in the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda, or dwell on the yawning
chasm of financial support and resources dedicated
to women’s organizations worldwide. They are the
shameful facts. The Security Council knows that grand
statements, commitments and resolutions are far from
being matched by results on the ground.
Women, in all their diversity, continue to be
sidelined, tokenized and, frankly, too often completely
forgotten about at the negotiating table. Often, women
are not even in the room, let alone heard. We are making
the same mistake over and over again.
To echo the statement made by the Executive Director
of UN-Women this morning, we are not living up to our
commitments. Horrific conflict-related sexual violence
continues to be waged as a weapon of war, something
that we were starkly and graphically reminded of at last
week’s briefing on Ukraine (see S/PV.9056).
What I would like to focus our statement on today
is how we can change the trajectory and harness the
collaborative nature of regional organizations in order
to advance the urgent and long-overdue delivery of
our precious women and peace and security agenda.
How can we ensure that women’s participation and
the inclusion of their voices become standard practice
rather than an afterthought? That is a minimum — a
baseline — as far as we are concerned.
24/31

15/06/2022

There are more than 11 regional organizations
with action plans or dedicated strategies on women
and peace and security. A twelfth is on the way in
the Regional Plan of Action on Women and Peace and
Security of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN). Ireland would like to commend ASEAN for
its prioritization of that work, coming as it does at a
critical time in the context of the deteriorating situation
in Myanmar. We know women need our urgent support.
Such action plans are invaluable; but putting them
into practice and ensuring the necessary spending is
essential to reaping the results.
As a member of the European Union, Ireland is
working to advance the EU Action Plan on Women and
Peace and Security and the third Gender Action Plan.
Ireland knows the benefits of working collaboratively,
including in our efforts through the EU Informal Task
Force on Women, Peace and Security, which enables
us to share experiences and support one another in
furthering this critical agenda.
The African Union’s leadership in advancing
the women and peace and security agenda, including
through the role of the Special Envoy, is highly
commendable. Ireland directly supports the vital
work being done by the African Union, the Office of
Special Envoy Bineta Diop and the African Women
Leaders Network. We salute their work. The African
Union’s Continental Results Framework should also be
recognized. It is an example not just of good practice but
of a unique women and peace and security framework.
Ireland promotes the regional acceleration of resolution
1325 (2000) to support and learn from women and peace
and security initiatives across regional groups and
organizations. Sadly, as we watch hard-fought gains on
peace being diminished by tyrannical and patriarchal
forces, we are deeply concerned about the rollback of
this agenda. Nowhere is that more evident than in the
abominable Taliban edicts in Afghanistan, which, as
the Secretary-General said, have put nearly 20 million
Afghan women and girls in a situation of being silenced
and erased from sight, which is simply unacceptable.
As we see violence, including conflict-related
sexual violence, proliferate in other contexts, such as
Mali, Myanmar and Ukraine, we know that women
and girls are often targeted and that they suffer
disproportionately from the effects of war. As co-Chair
with Mexico of the Informal Expert Group on Women,
Peace and Security, we have worked hard over the past
18 months to ensure that the women and peace and
22-38341

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

security agenda remains at the forefront of the minds
of the members of the Council, as we collectively try
to work towards peace and security. Enhanced regional
cooperation is one of many tools that we should wield
to stop the rollback on these issues. In order to halt what
the Executive Director of UN-Women described earlier
today as backsliding and to advance the agenda, Ireland
has a number of recommendations.
First, in addition to adopting specific regional
action plans on women and peace and security, we need
to ensure that all of the peace and security initiatives
deployed by regional organizations are actually genderresponsive. That means action, not rhetoric. More
important, we must support their implementation. Put
simply, we must deliver on them concretely, day by
day. Regional organizations are also well positioned to
engage with troop-contributing countries to promote
the inclusion of women peacekeepers in United Nations
missions. That is a critical step as far as Ireland
is concerned.
Secondly, we must think beyond our tired old silos.
The Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian
Action Compact that emerged from the Generation
Equality Forum has a wealth of knowledge for its
members, and we commend the African Union for
joining it. We encourage regional organizations to be
creative and even risk being innovative in advancing
the women and peace and security agenda in this way.
In the Security Council, Ireland, together with Kenya
and Mexico, kick-started a set of women and peace and
security commitments during our presidencies. They
include striving to ensure women’s participation and
civil-society representation in our Security Council
discussions. Having women in the Chamber and at this
table matters. How can we bring such commitments to
the regional level and ensure that they become the norm?
Thirdly, regional organizations often have unique
access to emerging conflicts in their neighbourhood.
We need to use that to respond rapidly, react in a
robust way and immediately take gender-responsive
approaches, not as an afterthought to be applied post
facto. We applaud regional organizations for standing
up against atrocities happening in their regions and urge
those that have been silent so far to find their voice.
Ireland is deeply aware of the benefits of
international and regional cooperation. We ourselves
are beneficiaries. Before our accession to the United
Nations in 1955 and to the European Union in 1973, we
were a nation still regaining its voice after centuries

S/PV.9064

of colonization. In the almost 50 years of our EU
membership, we have come through conflict on the
island of Ireland, in which women had to fight for
their right to have a say in peace and in shaping our
collective future. We know from first-hand experience
that without the participation of women, we simply
would not have gained the peace and prosperity we
enjoy in Ireland today. However, that was not simply
a national or bilateral effort. We are grateful for the
support and the instrumental role played by our
European and international partners in the peace
process, both then and now. We thank the women who
pressed forward to be in the room and at the table,
where and when it mattered. We know the importance
of such collaboration in delivering inclusive peace, and
we wish it for others. There is an Irish proverb that
says we live in each other’s shelter. Let us step up to
that aspiration.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
you, Madam, for presiding over today’s meeting. I am
grateful to Secretary-General Guterres for his remarks
and to Executive Director Bahous and the other briefers
for their briefings.
China has always been a supporter, advocate for and
practitioner in the international cause of women, and
has always actively supported the United Nations and
regional organizations in strengthening cooperation
on the women and peace and security agenda. In
connection with the theme of today’s meeting, I would
like to share the following three points.
First, the advancement of the cause of women is
inextricably linked to a stable political environment.
Since last year, a number of countries, from Asia
to Africa, have experienced changes in the political
scene — some as part of a chain reaction triggered
by the hasty withdrawal of foreign troops and others
resulting from an outbreak of conflict caused by illsuited foreign governance models. While of course we
must remain concerned about the erosion of women’s
rights and interests and the rollback of gender equality,
among other things, the international community
must realize that giving support to countries that are
exploring a development path that suits their national
conditions is the only way they can maintain political
stability. It is imperative to respect the sovereignty
and leadership of all countries and to oppose external
interference and the imposition of external solutions.
We must encourage regional programmes
that are based on regional contexts, support the

22-3834125/31

S/PV.9064

Women and peace and security

African Union, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the
Economic Community of West African States and
other organizations in fully leveraging their roles and
provide constructive assistance to encourage political
transition and dialogue in those countries. We must
support local women and local women’s organizations
in participating in peace processes, taking into account
their specific conditions. We must ensure that women
are represented and that their voices are heard in peace
negotiations and political arrangements.
Secondly, achieving peace is the best protection
for women. The victims who bear the brunt of armed
conflict are members of vulnerable groups such as
women. Efforts to deal with such situations must not
end with crisis response and humanitarian assistance.
The international community must remain focused
on the path to political settlement, work to eliminate
the root causes of conflicts and step up efforts to
promote peace.
The killing of the Al Jazeera journalist Shireen Abu
Akleh has once again highlighted the long-standing
plight of Palestinian women. In the final analysis, if
we are to prevent such incidents from happening again,
we must implement a two-State solution and restore
the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. China
appreciates the just stance of the League of Arab States
and its member States on the Palestinian question. The
international community should work with the League
in coordinating efforts to bring about peace based
on the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Arab
Peace Initiative and other international agreements and
advance the Middle East peace process with a greater
sense of urgency.
Amid the fighting in Ukraine, the plight of women
and children has caused widespread concern. We
encourage the European Union (EU) to play its role
and create the conditions for direct talks between
the parties to restore peace. We support the United
Nations in coordinating efforts with the EU and other
countries in the region to ensure the safety of the lives
and property of Ukrainian citizens, including women
and children, meet their basic humanitarian needs
and effectively crack down on human trafficking and
the sexual exploitation and abuse of refugee women
and children.
Thirdly, the primary goal of the women and peace
and security agenda is the comprehensive advancement
of women. The challenges facing women’s advancement
26/31

15/06/2022

have been mounting, given the coronavirus disease
pandemic and geopolitical conflicts that are compounded
by persistent global food, energy and financial crises.
The United Nations and regional organizations should
prioritize development, make greater efforts to address
poverty, underdevelopment and other issues that
affect women, help more women escape poverty and
hunger and achieve economic autonomy, and create
favourable conditions for their effective participation
in peace processes.
Women in regions such as the Horn of Africa and
the Sahel continue to face an increasing risk of food
insecurity. The international community should speed
up the provision of emergency food aid and targeted
assistance. Developed countries should honour their
commitment to dedicating 0.7 per cent of national
income to official development assistance. Tens of
millions of Afghan women are also facing the challenges
of hunger and poverty. Regional initiatives such as
the coordination and cooperation mechanism among
neighbours of Afghanistan are taking active steps to
help Afghanistan improve its humanitarian situation
and stabilize its economy. The countries involved in
the economic blockade and unilateral sanctions against
Afghanistan should end them immediately and return
frozen Afghan assets to the Afghan people as soon as
possible, in full and without conditions.
In March, the Security Council issued presidential
statement S/PRST/2022/1, on cooperation between the
United Nations and the League of Arab States, calling
for the promotion of women’s economic empowerment
and poverty reduction in the Arab region. United
Nations development agencies should increase the
resources available to provide stronger support for
Arab countries in accelerating their development and
achieving Sustainable Development Goal 5, related
to women.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): Kenya commends
Albania’s efforts to advance the shared commitments
of the women and peace and security agenda. I
thank the Secretary-General, the Executive Director
of UN-Women and the representatives of regional
organizations for their insights and recommendations
on this important topic.
We
welcome
the
linkage
between
the
implementation of the Council’s normative framework
on women and peace and security with regional and
subregional commitments and instruments, including
those of the Africa Union (AU). They form part of our
22-38341

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

implementation framework, alongside gender strategies,
gender policy frameworks and regional action plans
such as those spearheaded by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the East
Africa Community. Kenya commends the SecretaryGeneral’s Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative,
his Call to Action and the partnership between UNWomen, the Department of Peace Operations and the
Peacebuilding Commission. Within the women and
peace and security agenda, they all prioritize the need to
enhance collaboration and planning between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations.
We note that in general there is still much work
to be done to overcome the challenges of aligning
institutional bureaucracies with partnerships with
regional organizations. However, when those efforts
combine with political will, they can contribute to
mainstreaming gender perspectives in multidimensional
peacebuilding efforts and peace support operations.
That is evident in the expansion of the political space
for women in the Central African Republic, the
inclusion of women in mandate implementation and key
political processes in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and women’s representation in decision-making
and governance in the joint efforts between the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, the AU and IGAD
to support the transitional Government of South
Sudan in implementing the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan.
It is notable that Africa is a global leader in the
development of national action plans on women and
peace and security. In particular, gender mainstreaming
is a key element of Agenda 2063 of the African Union,
the Silencing the Guns initiative and the joint United
Nations-AU Framework for Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security. Kenya continues to report on its
women and peace and security national implementation
plan through the AU’s Continental Results Framework
on the Implementation of the Women, Peace and Security
Agenda in Africa. Acknowledging the presence here
today of Special Envoy Diop, my delegation reiterates
Kenya’s call on the Council to support the outcomes
and resultant communiqué of the African Union Peace
and Security Council ministerial-level meeting held
on 22 March last year under Kenya’s chairmanship
on the theme of “Women, Peace, Culture and Gender
Inclusivity in Africa”. The communiqué emphasized
the importance of adopting a comprehensive approach

S/PV.9064

to the four pillars of the women and peace and security
agenda — prevention, protection, participation and
recovery and relief. It also noted that the full and
effective implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda should take into consideration the
unique contexts of countries in armed conflict and
those emerging from it. In that regard, I would like to
highlight two points.
First, partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations imply meaningful partnerships with
regional women’s networks, which play a key role in
contextualizing solutions, broadening action points
and identifying informed and practical implementation
opportunities for the women and peace and security
agenda, based on proximity. That is particularly crucial
in fragility and conflict situations, where peace must be
planted more deeply and sustained from the grassroots.
The Council should therefore leverage the
comparative advantage of the AU Network of Women in
Conflict Prevention and Mediation — FemWise-Africa,
the African Women Leaders Network and related
women’s networks and women’s rights organizations.
Their inclusion will enhance mapping, prevention and
response strategies and advance women’s empowerment,
participation and leadership in Africa, including in
peace and political processes. We also encourage the
Council to continue supporting the translation of the
objectives of the Photoville exhibition “In Their Hands:
Women Taking Ownership of Peace”, launched during
Kenya’s presidency of the Council in October last
year. The stories of women peacebuilders, mediators,
peace signatories and parliamentarians from various
countries, including the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, South Sudan,
Lebanon, Yemen and Colombia, revealed the benefit of
having functional and well-resourced regional women’s
networks to anchor their work.
Secondly, crafting practical and sustainable
regional partnerships means early investment in
participation and protection. In that regard, we
recognize that coups d’état and military takeovers
further compound the challenge of protecting women
peacebuilders, journalists, civil-society representatives
and activists. There is therefore a need for sustained
and early investment in women in peacebuilding and
peacekeeping through regional networks, before such
conflicts arise. It is important to ensure that regional
women’s networks have sufficient financial and human
resources, which should trickle down to national

22-3834127/31

S/PV.9064

Women and peace and security

15/06/2022

capacity-building, research and data analysis, training
in mediation, negotiations and advocacy.

resources to support women human rights defenders,
who contribute to a stable community environment.

In conclusion, it is also important to set up justice
and accountability infrastructure that can provide
legal, medical and psychological care to survivors of
reprisals and sexual and gender-based violence in
conflict settings.

Secondly, capacities should also be strengthened
to provide assistance in political electoral processes,
including promoting women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation in public life and decision-making
processes at all levels, ensuring their participation as
candidates and voters and supporting national earlywarning and accountability mechanisms for sexual and
gender-based violence.

Mr. De La Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I welcome the Minister for Europe and
Foreign Affairs of Albania and thank her delegation for
convening today’s debate. I also thank the briefers for
their briefings this morning, with all protocols observed.
My country, whose foreign policy is feminist,
accords high priority to the women and peace and
security agenda, including its implementation with
a comprehensive approach, particularly on the
ground, just where the role of regional organizations
is fundamental in closing the gap between rhetoric
and reality.
The framework that we have been able to build for
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women
in sustainable peacebuilding since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) is complemented by the role
of regional and subregional organizations in conflictaffected countries. Such organizations have been
crucial in promoting political dialogue by having firsthand knowledge of local actors, as well as in advancing
respect for human rights, including gender equality and
the empowerment of women and girls.
Mexico is convinced that, in times of political
turmoil and in contexts of takeovers by force, the
involvement of regional organizations is even more
important, particularly if they work hand in hand
with women leaders, peacebuilders and human
rights defenders, while prioritizing their substantive
participation to achieve the re-establishment of
constitutional order.
We have seen the speed with which the human
rights situation of women in various parts of the world
has deteriorated. Sexual and gender-based violence is
exacerbated when there is a breakdown of constitutional
order. We believe the following points to be appropriate.
First, action plans on women and peace and
security need to be updated, with the participation of
women’s organizations, in all their diversity, and local
feminist movements, ensuring sufficient flexibility to
adapt them to each context and channelling adequate
28/31

Thirdly, there should be collaboration, in
coordination with the Secretary-General’s mediators
and special envoys, across peace operations and
civil society, including victims and survivors of
sexual violence, to ensure that peace agreements
include specific provisions on care and redress for
sexual violence.
Fourthly, women’s leadership skills need to be
promoted through digital technologies, particularly
among young women and traditionally excluded groups,
such as indigenous, Afro-descendant, refugee, disabled
and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
women, in key areas, such as mediation and conflict
prevention and resolution.
Fifthly, the exchange of good practices among
regional and subregional organizations in relation
to the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda should be further promoted — and we
have been trying to promote that in partnership with
Ireland — with a special focus on capacity-building for
the collection of relevant disaggregated data, gender
analysis and the building of synergies with other actors
in order to foster knowledge and multidimensional
research on conflicts using a gender perspective.
Sixthly and lastly, it is necessary to promote the
establishment, or strengthening, of inclusive networks
of women mediators in the various subregions, ensuring
the representation of women from diverse backgrounds
and specializations, for example, human rights,
humanitarian affairs, communications, advocacy and
negotiation, and to encourage mentoring schemes for
younger women.
On that last point, we acknowledge the work of
the various networks of women mediators that already
exist in different regions, and we are pleased to briefly
report that Mexico is working with other countries
in the Latin American region to establish a network
of women mediators, which will seek to increase the
22-38341

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

number of women involved in conflict prevention and
mediation, as well as in peace processes within and
outside the region.
In conclusion, we kindly request UN-Women to
strengthen the Compact on Women, Peace and Security
and Humanitarian Action, emanating from the Equality
Generation Forum, as a platform for the implementation
of the activities described above, given its diverse
and multiple membership, which includes numerous
regional organizations, as well as networks of women
mediators and civil society organizations.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than three minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collars of the
microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
remarks to a close after three minutes.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Development
Cooperation and Foreign Trade of Finland.
Mr. Skinnari (Finland): I thank Albania for
organizing this very timely meeting. I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the Nordic
countries — Denmark, Iceland, Norway, Sweden
and Finland.
Despite the significant progress made in advancing
the women and peace and security agenda, there
continues to be a huge gap between what has been
achieved on paper and on the ground. In Ukraine,
we see mass displacement, the indiscriminate killing
of civilians, attacks on civilian infrastructure and
shocking reports of sexual and gender-based violence
and trafficking. The ongoing conflicts in Afghanistan,
the Sudan, Myanmar and Mali, to name only a few
places, threaten the fragile gains of the women and
peace and security agenda and the lives and work of
women peacebuilders. We need to drastically accelerate
our efforts to bridge the widening gap. The role of
national Governments and regional and subregional
organizations will be crucial in that regard.
We warmly welcome the participation of regional
and subregional organizations in this open debate and
call for a continued, regular exchange of views and
better coordination between our actions.
In the context of military coups and takeovers,
regional and subregional organizations are often
instrumental in developing context-specific and
tailor-made approaches. They are often the first to

S/PV.9064

react in crisis response and to engage with the parties
concerned to ensure the protection of civilians. They
are uniquely placed to build trust and promote dialogue
among the parties concerned, as well as offer support
in mediation and reconciliation. They can be influential
in advocating for women’s full, equal, meaningful and
safe participation in all aspects of peace and security.
The work of regional women and peace and
security special envoys should be adequately
supported, and women and peace and security experts
need to be systematically and firmly involved on all
levels and stages of planning and leadership of United
Nations missions.
We all need to further step up our interaction
with civil society and our support for local women’s
organizations and women peacebuilders. Their
contextual, local expertise is crucial for our success.
The Women, Peace and Security Focal Points Network
provides an important platform for interaction
and sharing of best practices. Investing in better,
coordinated data collection, gender analysis and
systematic monitoring of results across all peace
efforts is key to enabling a radical shift on women’s
meaningful participation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Ms. Shoman Khot (Jordan): At the outset, allow
me to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting. I wish you every success in your presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I would also
like to thank the all-women briefers, change-makers
and women-empowerment advocates for their
invaluable input.
Today’s meeting is about keeping the promises and
pledges we made 22 years ago when Member States
committed to enhancing the full, active and meaningful
inclusion of women in processes to prevent, mitigate,
resolve and recover from conflict or disaster. Nine
resolutions later, we have adopted policies and taken
ambitious strides towards the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda — and yet, we
are still facing challenges in realizing our goals.
Jordan, committed to advancing the women and
peace and security agenda, is in the process of drafting
its second national action plan aimed at promoting
coordinated and holistic efforts to integrate women
and their perspectives in matters of peace and security.
As host to a large number of Palestinian and Syrian

22-3834129/31

S/PV.9064

Women and peace and security

refugees, we have also included the most vulnerable in
our action plan.
A critical tool in advancing national responses,
Jordan’s national action plan has strengthened
prevention and protection mechanisms, which have
provided prevention and protection services on genderbased violence to more than 12,000 vulnerable women
and girls. Despite the exceptional circumstances due to
the coronavirus disease pandemic, significant progress
has been achieved in the implementation of our national
action plan.
We are building on lessons learned, knowledge
acquired and challenges and opportunities that have
emerged from Jordan’s first national action plan, with
the aim of setting new goals to increase the full, active
and meaningful participation of women in public life
and increase support to Jordan’s peace and security
efforts through a gender-responsive approach.
Supporting civil society organizations, women
human rights defenders and, especially, women’s
organizations operating in conflict regions is pivotal.
They are armed with extensive knowledge and the
expertise needed to build sustainable peace. They also
play a central role in conflict prevention, including in
early warning, and in forging peace processes.
It is not enough to strengthen bilateral relationships
with regional partners; collective regional efforts with
international partners to reinforce the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda are needed.
A shared vision that respects the characteristics of
each State and ensures a flexible and sustained flow of
funding is crucial to arriving at optimal results.
We are proud to be part of the Regional Action Plan
of the League of Arab States for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). The Plan accelerates the efforts
of Arab States to advance the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda.
In conclusion, empowerment is contagious. Hope
exists in the spaciousness of uncertainty. And the
Middle East is a region with a youthful population
determined to drive the wheel of positive change. Lift
up one woman, teach another girl, and the reverse
domino effect is activated.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Ms. Oehri (Liechtenstein): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s debate on an agenda
30/31

15/06/2022

that is particularly dear to us and that has had immense
impact on the ground since its inception more than two
decades ago. In many parts of the world, women have
been key agents of political change and contributed to
sustainable peace as peacekeepers, mediators, lawyers,
journalists and human rights defenders, among other
roles. Yet their full, equal and meaningful participation
remains the exception rather than the rule. All too
often, women and girls continue to face threats, attacks
and retaliation when standing up for peace, democracy
and the rule of law — from Belarus to Afghanistan and
elsewhere. Protecting women’s rights goes hand in hand
with enabling them to be agents of change themselves,
including by eliminating patriarchal systems and
harmful gender stereotypes.
The situation of women and girls in Myanmar
remains of grave concern, especially since the military
coup of 2021, with increased risks of trafficking, child
marriage and sexual violence, as the Special Envoy
reported to the General Assembly earlier this week. In
its resolution 75/287, the General Assembly condemned
the use of lethal force and violence by the armed forces
of Myanmar and called for the prevention of the flow
of arms into Myanmar. We urge all Member States to
implement its provisions as a matter of priority, and
the Security Council to take complementary action in
support of the call from the General Assembly. The
Association of Southeast Asian Nations also plays a
critical role in efforts towards a peaceful future for
Myanmar and stability in the region, including through
its five-point consensus adopted last year.
The aggression against Ukraine and the systematic
violations of international humanitarian law by the
Russian armed forces, including the use of sexual
violence as a weapon of war, are causing immense
suffering. Millions of women and children fleeing from
Ukraine are particularly vulnerable to exploitation
and human trafficking. We support the focus of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in
that respect and welcome its practical recommendations
to prevent the current humanitarian crisis from turning
into a human-trafficking crisis. An effective response
to human trafficking must also include private- and
financial-sector actors, as called for in resolution 2331
(2016). The Liechtenstein Finance against Slavery and
Trafficking initiative, or FAST for short, has undertaken
activities with respect to the risk of these crimes as a
result of the massive refugee flows from Ukraine, both
in the area of prevention and financial inclusion.
22-38341

15/06/2022

Women and peace and security

In conclusion, we remain concerned about the
high occurrence of sexual and gender-based violence
against women and girls, men and boys, as well as
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex
persons, as documented by the All Survivors Project
in Afghanistan and Syria, among other situations.
International criminal justice mechanisms have
significantly advanced our efforts to fight impunity,
including through groundbreaking verdicts by the
International Criminal Court. The pioneering role of
the Rome Statute, with its gender-sensitive approach,
can serve as a source of inspiration for national and
regional courts, as well as special tribunals. Next month
we will be celebrating the twentieth anniversary of its
entry into force.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rae (Canada): I am pleased to speak on behalf
of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security,
an informal network of 66 Member States, representing
all five regional groups of the United Nations and
the European Union. I want to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your country, Albania, on convening
this important debate.
I want to emphasize three points.
First, we must continue to take swift and concerted
action to fully implement resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent resolutions on women and peace and
security. Otherwise, we will find ourselves in a situation
where women and girls, in very diverse situations and
conditions, will continue to be sidelined from political
and peace processes, live in fear for their safety, face
reprisals for raising their voices and be subjected to
violence, including sexual and gender-based violence.
While Member States are expected to implement women
and peace and security resolutions, I want to emphasize
the role that regional and subregional organizations
play. In conflicts and crises, including in contexts of
seizures of power by force, regional organizations and

S/PV.9064

networks provide much support in conflict prevention,
mediation and resolution. We urge them to promote
women’s full, equal and meaningful participation in all
aspects and at all levels of peace and security processes.
Secondly, we are encouraged that we are actually
making quite a lot of progress, and we commend
initiatives already taken to strengthen collaboration,
including with the United Nations, in order to improve
data disaggregation and gender analysis, share best
practices and coordinate gender-responsive and human
rights-based approaches so as to ensure the meaningful
inclusion of women, in particular those from
traditionally marginalized groups. We believe that the
Peacebuilding Commission’s advisory and convening
role can also play an important role in supporting
those efforts.
Finally, it is critical that regional partners
support safe and enabling environments for women
peacebuilders, human rights defenders, activists and
gender equality advocates. We call on partners to join
us in providing rapid, flexible funding to women and
women-led organizations at the front lines of peace
and security.
I want to say briefly, in my national capacity, that
in Ukraine and Myanmar — as has been stated by
others, including the representatives of Ireland and
Liechtenstein today — we cannot deny the fact that
there is evidence that gender-based violence is being
used as a deliberate weapon of war. That is not only
disturbing, but it sets us back — not just a few years
but, frankly, centuries.
The President: There are still a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting.
Given the lateness of the hour, with the concurrence
of the members of the Security Council, I intend to
suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1 p.m.

22-3834131/31
