S/PRST/2016/5

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 April 2016
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7676th meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 April 2016, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Middle East”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls its resolutions 2014 (2011), 2051 (2012),
2140 (2014), 2201 (2015), 2204 (2015), 2216 (2015), and 2266 (2016) and
presidential statements of 15 February 2013, 29 August 2014, and 22 March
2015.
“The Security Council recalls that the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)
Initiative and Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the comprehensive
National Dialogue conference, and relevant Security Council resolutions
provide the basis for inclusive negotiations for a political settlement of the
crisis in Yemen.
“The Security Council welcomes the commencement of a nationwide
cessation of hostilities in Yemen which began at midnight on 10 April 2016,
and the launch of Yemeni-Yemeni peace talks, hosted by Kuwait, led and
facilitated by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Ismail
Ould Cheikh Ahmed, which commenced on 21 April. The Council urges the
parties to comply fully with the cessation of hostilities and exercise restraint in
response to any reports of violations. The Council welcomes the establishment
of a De-escalation and Coordination Committee in Kuwait to bolster
adherence to the nationwide cessation of hostilities, and calls on the parties to
work with the De-escalation and Coordination Committee to resolve any
reports of violations to the cessation of hostilities. Furthermore, the Council
reiterates its call to all parties to engage in peace talks in a flexible and
constructive manner without preconditions, and in good faith.
“The Security Council further notes the importance of reaching
agreement on a framework of principles, mechanisms and processes for the
conclusion of a comprehensive agreement which will bring about a permanent
end to the conflict.
“The Security Council also calls on all Yemeni parties to develop a
roadmap for the implementation of interim security measures, especially at the
local level, withdrawals, handover of heavy weapons, restoration of state
institutions, and the resumption of political dialogue in line with relevant
Security Council decisions, the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Initiative and
16-06777 (E)

250416

*1606777*

S/PRST/2016/5

Implementation Mechanism, and the outcomes of the comprehensive National
Dialogue conference.
“The Security Council notes that in line with UN Security Council
Resolution 2216 (2015) and the outcomes of the comprehensive National
Dialogue conference, the Parties should commit to ensure that security
mechanisms, including the formation of security committees, facilitate and
oversee the negotiated withdrawal of militias and armed groups and provide
for the orderly handover of heavy and medium weapons to state control.
“The Security Council recalls the importance of the full participation of
women and civil society in the peace process (including on security
arrangements), in line with the outcomes of the National Dialogue conference.
“The Security Council expresses its strong concern about intensified
terrorist attacks, including by Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (also known as Da’esh), and encourages
all Yemeni parties to avoid any security vacuums that can be exploited by
terrorists or other violent groups. The Security Council stresses that a political
solution to the crisis is essential to address, in a durable and comprehensive
manner, the threat of terrorism in Yemen.
“The Security Council stresses the importance of the restoration of
government control over all state institutions, including respect for the legally
established lines of authority in state institutions; removal of any hindrance or
obstructions to proper functioning of state institutions; and changes to ensure
inclusivity in political institutions.
“The Security Council reiterates that resuming Yemen’s peaceful
political transition to a democratically-governed State, in line with the GCC
initiative, should be guided by a new constitution and the holding of
parliamentary and presidential elections, and conducted in an inclusive manner
involving the full participation of all of Yemen’s diverse communities,
including all regions of the country, youth, and the full and effective
participation of women.
“The Security Council notes the devastating humanitarian impact of the
conflict on the Yemeni people and emphasises that the humanitarian situation
will deteriorate in the absence of a political solution. The Security Council
calls upon all sides to comply with international humanitarian law, including
to take all feasible precautions to minimize harm to civilians and civilian
objects, in order to prevent any further suffering for the people of Yemen. The
Security Council further underlines the need to ensure the security of
humanitarian and United Nations personnel. The Security Council further calls
on all parties to respect and protect medical facilities and personnel. The
Security Council calls on all parties to take proactive steps to protect civilians
and civilian objects, in order to prevent any further suffering of the Yemeni
people. The Security Council further calls on the parties to allow the safe,
rapid and unhindered access for humanitarian supplies to all affected
governorates and to facilitate access for essential imports of food, fuel and,
medical supplies into the country and their distribution throughout. In this
regard, the Security Council calls upon all States to respect the mandate and
processes of the United Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism

2/3

16-06777

S/PRST/2016/5

(UNVIM), based in Djibouti, and facilitate the full implementation of its
mandate without any further delay.
“The Security Council recalls its resolution 2266 (2016) which expressed
the Council’s support for and commitment to the work of the Special Envoy
for Yemen to the Secretary-General Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed in support of a
Yemeni-led transition process.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to present a plan to
the Security Council, within 30 days, outlining how the Office of the Special
Envoy could support the next phase of its work with the parties, in particular
to support the elements set out in paragraph 5 above.
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong commitment to the unity,
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Yemen.”

16-06777

3/3
