United Nations

S/PV.6569

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6569th meeting
Tuesday, 28 June 2011, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Messone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Briens
Mr. Eick
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Assaf
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Laher
Mr. Quarrey
Mr. Grant

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in that country
(S/2011/370)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-39059 (E)

*1139059*

S/PV.6569

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in that country
(S/2011/370)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Guinea-Bissau
to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Aristides Ocante da Silva, Minister of
Defence of Guinea-Bissau.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Joseph
Mutaboba,
Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, to
participate in this meeting.
At this meeting, Her Excellency Ambassador
Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Permanent Representative
of Brazil, will give a briefing, pursuant to rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, in her
capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Manuel
Domingos Augusto, Secretary of State for Political
Affairs at the Ministry of External Relations of Angola
and Chair of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/2011/370, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on developments in
Guinea-Bissau and on the activities of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in that
country.
I now give the floor to Mr. Joseph Mutaboba.

2

Mr. Mutaboba: It is a privilege to present to the
Security Council the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations
Integrated
Peacebuilding
Office
in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) (S/2011/370). I also
welcome this opportunity to have an exchange of views
with Council members on the most recent
developments in Guinea-Bissau, where, despite
positive developments contributing to an improved
political and security environment, a great deal remains
to be done by the national authorities to consolidate the
gains made since the end of 2010 in terms of political
dialogue, economic reforms and improving civilmilitary relations at the highest level.
Since we last met (see S/PV.6489), several
encouraging developments have taken place in the
country, in particular with regard to the reform of the
security sector and regional efforts to stabilize State
institutions. The progress report before the Council is
self-explanatory with regard to the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP)
road map for security sector reform, which was
adopted by the Guinea-Bissau Council of Ministers on
15 March and endorsed by the heads of State and
Government of ECOWAS on 24 March. In addition,
the report of the joint security sector reform assessment
mission conducted in close collaboration with the
CPLP and ECOWAS, as well as national and
international partners in Guinea-Bissau, as requested
by the Security Council in resolution 1949 (2010), was
presented last week to the Security Council at the
expert level. I will therefore limit my observations on
this issue to new developments that have taken place
recently.
Immediately after the conclusion of the
assessment mission, the Government convened a
meeting in Bissau, from 28 April to 3 May, to prepare a
memorandum of understanding to govern the
implementation of the partnership between the three
entities on the ground. The next step will be the signing
of the memorandum of understanding between the
CPLP,
ECOWAS
and
the
Government
of
Guinea-Bissau in the coming weeks. Meanwhile,
following the selection of the Banco da Africa
Ocidental to host and manage the pension fund for the
retirement and reintegration of members of the defence
and security forces, the Government has opened a bank
account with the bank. A first list of up to 1,400

11-39059

S/PV.6569

elements to be retrenched on the basis of age limit or
voluntary departure criteria was being finalized when I
left Bissau last week. I trust that the Minister of
Defence, who is here with us today, will elaborate
further on that effort. It is expected that, with these
steps concluded by the national authorities in
consultation with the CPLP and ECOWAS partners, the
process for jump-starting the implementation of the
pension fund will be launched through the
disbursement of the $63 million pledged by ECOWAS
heads of State in March, including some $45 million
for the fund.
Significant progress has also been made in recent
weeks with regard to the coordination of international
partners involved in the security sector reform process.
In that regard, the deployment of the Angolan technical
mission in the first quarter of 2011 was complemented
by the recent deployment of a military assistance
mission from Brazil, which intends to refurbish the
former army headquarters, where an academy for the
training of army officers will be set up during the
course of 2012. For its part, the Angolan mission is
already improving the working and living conditions of
the military through the refurbishment of barracks and
police training, notably on protective operations. These
developments have undoubtedly contributed to the
increased stability that we have felt in the country in
recent months. At the same time, of course, we believe
that the earlier ECOWAS can be on the ground, the
more sustained the international support to key reforms
will be.
UNIOGBIS will continue to enhance its support
for strengthening the capacities of national partners to
ensure proper coordination of the efforts in the area of
security sector reform. It will also pursue its work in
the area of police reform, in particular for the
establishment of model police stations — the first one
was launched on 24 June — and the ongoing vetting,
certification and training of police personnel.
Moving on to the issue of political dialogue, our
efforts have focused on preparations for the national
conference and high-level dialogue involving the
political leadership and paving the way for a
consensual revision of the Constitution. Following the
recent conferences held in Dakar and Lisbon in May
for the Guinea-Bissau diaspora living in Africa and
Europe, the regional conferences, which are the final
leg of the preparatory phase, were launched on 24 June

11-39059

in Buba, in the south, and are expected to conclude at
the end of July.
The preparatory conferences will culminate in a
national conference, which the organizing committee
believes will take place in late November or early
December. Let me stress here that the conferences with
the diaspora were important in obtaining significant
support for the process from the Guinea-Bissau
communities abroad, in particular the diaspora
professionals, with a view to advancing ongoing
institutional reforms, including the constitutional
review process, which the Parliament aims to
undertake before the next legislative elections, in 2012,
with the continued support of UNIOGBIS and other
partners.
The focus of UNIOGBIS, in coordination with
partners, is to ensure that the national conference is
more than just an event and lives up to its promise of
bringing about change, reconciliation and national
consensus on critical changes in society. The mission is
working with the national organizing commission to
design an appropriate process for the national
conference and follow-up. It is also working to foster a
common understanding among all State institutions of
the implications of such a process and the imperative
necessity to take on board the findings from the
diaspora and the regional conferences, and to mobilize
the commitment of State institutions to the national
conference and post-conference processes.
In particular, the follow-up mechanisms will be
required to ensure that the results of the conference are
consolidated and acted upon. UNIOGBIS is also
working with the committee to correct gender-related
participation weaknesses, as were noted during the
Dakar and Lisbon diaspora sessions, and to guarantee
the widest possible participation of all stakeholders,
including women, in the regional conferences.
Regarding the political dialogue at the top level
of Guinea-Bissau’s leadership, while there have indeed
been signs of improvement in recent months, it has yet
to be established if the President, the Prime Minister
and their respective advisers and teams have reached a
sufficient level of confidence to address critical aspects
of stability, such as how to handle the issue of the
military leadership and how to fight impunity through
decisive measures. These latter issues are not only
critical for the rule of law but are among the
benchmarks set by the European Union (EU) for the

3

S/PV.6569

full resumption of assistance within the framework of
the consultations under article 96 of the Cotonou
Agreement, which were launched in March this year. In
this regard, we look forward to the results of the new
round of consultations with the EU held on 24 June in
Bissau. We understand that the two parties will meet
again soon in Brussels to further review progress on
major aspects.
With regard to impunity, I wish to recall that the
Government recently accepted and pledged to comply
with the Geneva universal periodic review
recommendations,
including
those
referring
specifically to the need to conduct credible and
transparent investigations into the March and June
2009 political assassinations. Regrettably, and despite
significant interactions among the Prosecutor-General,
several key ambassadors in Bissau and Dakar and
myself, on ways of ensuring a credible and transparent
investigation process consistent with the provisions of
resolutions 1876 (2009) and 1949 (2010), the
Prosecutor-General recently rushed a decision to
transfer the case of the June 2009 killings to the
military court. That decision appeared to most
observers to be an attempt to contravene the relevant
Security Council resolutions, since the investigation
team had not exhausted all avenues for interviewing
some witnesses. The decision also constituted a setback
given the serious challenges posed to the constitutional
order by the military in recent years, and the major
concerns about the independence and ability of the
military justice system to oversee and complete this
process in a credible fashion.
Drug trafficking also continues to pose a major
challenge to the country’s stability. There is a need for
the national authorities to demonstrate a firmer
commitment and determination to mobilize national
resources to address this scourge. Recent progress on
the establishment of police coordination mechanisms
and the launching of the Transnational Crime Unit
project are positive signals that must be built upon and
complemented by additional support from international
partners. The adoption on 15 June by the Government
of Guinea-Bissau of the 2011-2014 national
operational plan to combat drug trafficking, organized
crime and drug abuse in Guinea-Bissau, established by
the Government with the assistance of UNIOGBIS and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), is yet another encouraging step in the
context of the increased commitment by the national

4

authorities to fight this phenomenon as a matter of
priority.
The United Nations structures in Guinea-Bissau
will continue their support for national authorities for
the implementation of such plans. I wish to commend
recent initiatives, such as the G8+ meeting held in May
in France and the transatlantic partnership meeting held
in Lisbon, which are forums that could help support
subregional and national plans to fight transnational
crime, drug trafficking and money laundering.
However, we believe that additional efforts could be
made by expert agencies in the area of appropriate
information-sharing, including trend analyses and
comparative studies among countries in the subregion.
Currently, the debate swings between the national
authorities claiming that this phenomenon is not as
widespread as depicted, with qualified sources stating
the opposite, without, however, providing concrete
evidence to the authorities.
Here I would like to inform the Council that
Ambassador Fedotov, the head of UNODC, will be
joining us in Bissau, in the region, in October to be
able to work together on this exercise.
In conclusion, the increased stability and the
more positive political climate in the country remain
fragile. Consolidating them must continue to be the
focus of our concerted efforts. The context in GuineaBissau is mixed: on the one hand, the political and
security situation is improving; but on the other hand,
the economic reforms have yet to be sustained by other
key reforms, notably in the defense and justice sectors.
Without justice reform, we will always have problems;
and without a functioning justice system, we cannot
carry out proper investigations. Therefore, we have to
direct our efforts at justice reform.
In addition, serious concerns remain regarding
the lack of commitment by the national authorities to
address impunity, drug trafficking and organized crime,
despite the potential devastating impact of those
phenomena on the country’s stability.
The country is indeed at a crossroads. With the
support of international partners, all basic conditions
are in place for genuinely advancing the national
dialogue, the security sector reform programme and
other key socio-economic reforms. Nonetheless, the
authorities of Guinea-Bissau should remain mindful of
their obligations, with a view to sustaining a longerterm commitment on the part of their international

11-39059

S/PV.6569

partners in support of the initial, timid steps taken so
far, and to demonstrate their ownership of the process
by addressing the key outstanding issues that still
render the progress made vulnerable and reversible.
We believe that only a firm commitment at this
stage by the national authorities to address key issues
such as the rejuvenation and restructuring of the army,
including its leadership, as well as the fight against
impunity, will result in a more flexible stance on the
part of all international partners and help jump-start
major aspects of the reforms, including with respect to
the crucial issue of the pension fund for the retirement
and reintegration of elements of the defence and
security forces.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Mutaboba for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Viotti.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I am pleased to brief the
Security Council in my capacity as Chair of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Aristides Ocante da Silva, Minister of
National Defence of Guinea-Bissau, and to His
Excellency Mr. Manuel Domingos Augusto, Secretary
of State for Political Affairs of the Ministry of External
Relations of Angola and Chair of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP). I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, for his briefing and for his work
as head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS).
Since I last briefed the Council (see S/PV.6489),
the configuration has continued to closely follow
political developments in Guinea-Bissau and has
directed its efforts towards generating synergies that
could be instrumental to security sector reform. The
configuration also continues to support the country’s
efforts to consolidate the rule of law, to combat drug
trafficking and impunity and to address social issues, in
particular concerning youth and women. We have not
lost sight of the importance of encouraging job creation
and of promoting a more vigorous economy as crucial
elements of an integrated peacebuilding strategy.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau has improved in
many areas, as we have just heard from the briefing by
Mr. Mutaboba. On the political side, it is important to
note that stability has taken hold. The current

11-39059

Government has been the most stable and long-lasting
since 1997. The Government continues to show
commitment to security sector reform. After the
endorsement of the road map of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP)
in March, a task force was created to oversee its
implementation. The basic legislation setting the
structure of the armed forces has been approved.
The configuration acknowledges the initiatives
taken by international partners to support security
sector reform and encourages further external
assistance to ensure the successful implementation of
the road map in Guinea-Bissau. In that connection, the
launching of a pension fund for the military is certainly
one of the main security sector reform priorities in
Guinea-Bissau. In that regard, at yesterday’s meeting
of the configuration, we welcomed the announcement
by Minister Aristides Ocante da Silva that the
Government of Guinea-Bissau will allocate financial
resources to the fund in the amount of $4.5 million.
That is a clear indication of the political will to move
forward on the reform. We also welcomed the pledge
of $63 million to security sector reform in GuineaBissau during the ECOWAS summit. It is important
that international partners come together to build upon
those pledges and to make the fund operational as soon
as possible.
There have also been positive developments in
the fight against drug trafficking. The Government of
Guinea-Bissau has implemented its commitments
under the West African Coast Initiative by appointing
the Management Board and the Chair of the
Transnational Crime Unit (TCU). The TCU in Bissau is
expected to move into its new premises by the end of
the month. Another positive step was the adoption by
the Council of Ministers of the 2011-2014 operational
plan to fight drug trafficking and organized crime,
conceived by the Ministry of Justice with the support
of UNIOGBIS and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime.
It is now essential that the international
community provide timely and steady support in terms
of technical expertise and financial resources to make
the TCU operational so as to ensure tangible progress
on the basis of common and shared responsibility,
whereby the countries of origin, transit and final
destination join efforts in the fight against the scourge
of drugs.

5

S/PV.6569

On the economic side, the implementation of
public administration and public finance reforms,
including efforts to improve fiscal discipline, have
yielded positive results. A growth rate of
approximately 4 per cent is forecast for 2011, which is
also due to the positive prospects for cashew nut
exports and public infrastructure works. After a visit to
Bissau last March, the International Monetary Fund
noted that the country’s performance had been
satisfactory and that the prospects for compliance with
benchmarks in the Extended Credit Facility programme
for January to December 2011 were promising. In
addition, under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Debt Initiative, the Paris Club creditors announced
$283 million in debt relief for Guinea-Bissau last May.
The international community needs to encourage
and to support such positive developments, which
reflect a clear political commitment on the part of
Guinea-Bissau to the implementation of the necessary
measures to consolidate peace in the country. In that
context, we welcome the approval by the
Peacebuilding Fund Joint Steering Committee of the
revised version of the 2011-2013 Peacebuilding
Priority Plan for Guinea-Bissau. We expect the timely
disbursement of up to $16.8 million in support of
security sector reform, political dialogue and
reconciliation, as well as job creation as a peace
dividend, with particular attention to women and
youth.
We must take advantage of the positive
momentum and persevere in our collective efforts to
support Guinea-Bissau as it addresses key
peacebuilding challenges. National authorities must
steadily pursue efforts to fully restore international
confidence. In turn, international partners should look
beyond the setbacks of the past and should support
long-term political and economic stability in the
country. We call on all stakeholders to take advantage
of the progress made so far and to lend enhanced
support for sustainable peace and development in
Guinea-Bissau.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mrs. Viotti for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Aristides Ocante da
Silva, Minister of Defence of Guinea-Bissau.
Mr. Da Silva (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French):
I would first of all like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the President, Mr. Nelson Messone of

6

Gabon, a country with which Guinea-Bissau has good
friendly relations, on his assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. I would also like to extend our
warm greetings to the members of this important
international body that oversees peace and security in
the world. I thank them on behalf of the Government
and the people of Guinea-Bissau for having given us
this opportunity to speak at this meeting about
developments in our country’s political, institutional
and socio-economic situation.
Similarly, I would like to thank His Excellency
the Secretary-General for his efforts to stabilize the
political and social situation of our country, in
particular through strong and fruitful cooperation
between our national authorities and the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNIOGBIS) and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) as regards their
involvement in Guinea-Bissau.
I would also like to welcome the presence among
us of the Secretary of State for Political Affairs of the
Ministry for Foreign Relations of Angola — the
country currently chairing the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP) — as well as of
the Executive Secretary of the CPLP. I wish to
underscore the unfailing support of the CPLP, and in
particular that of Angola, for the speedy provision of
resources to begin the restructuring process of our
country’s defence and security forces.
Last February, His Excellency Prime Minister
Carlos Gomes Júnior was here in the Chamber (see
S/PV.6489) leading an important governmental
delegation, of which I was part, in order to share with
the Council developments in the political and socioeconomic context in Guinea-Bissau. We believe that it
is our duty to come here once again today to share with
the members of the Council information on the
situation in Guinea-Bissau and on the short-, mediumand long-term prospects that could put my country on
the path to political stabilization, and in which lie the
groundwork for socio-economic development and for
respect of our international commitments, in particular
towards the Millennium Development Goals.
Following the recommendations of the Security
Council, in particular with regard to the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)-CPLP
road map, the Government Council of Ministers met
and agreed on the actions outlined in that road map. At

11-39059

S/PV.6569

the same time, it underscored the importance of taking
into account political developments subsequent to the
creation of that road map, with a view to ensuring
complementarity and effectiveness in its implementation.
ECOWAS heads of State and Government
subsequently held a summit-level meeting in Abuja on
24 March, where they adopted the road map. In doing
so, they paved the way for the plan’s implementation
by allocating $63 million in support of priority reform
programmes, such as those relating to the pension
fund, demobilization and recruitment, reintegration,
institutional training and support and the setting up of
the technical assistance mission.
At the initiative of the Steering Committee for
defence and security sector reform, ECOWAS and the
CPLP were invited to send experts who would help to
establish a task force charged with implementing the
road map. That was accomplished between 28 April
and 3 May, with the involvement of the African Union,
and resulted in the formulation of relevant
recommendations on an organizational chart for the
mission, the composition of civilian, military and
security components and a proposed schedule for
implementing the various actions outlined in the road
map. The plan for the task force will be submitted to
the Steering Committee and will subsequently include
multilateral partners, such as UNIOGBIS, UNDP and
the European Union, as well as bilateral partners.
In terms of our political agenda, the Prime
Minister noted here that we were holding consultations
with the European Union under article 96 of the
Cotonou Agreement. That Agreement is the legal
framework underpinning cooperation between the
European Union and the African, Caribbean and
Pacific States (ACP) and is aimed at furthering
political dialogue, in particular on respect for human
rights, democratic principles, the rule of law and good
governance.
My Government agreed with the outcome of
those consultations, which was the result of some
preparation and understanding among the main
national institutions, which met with President Malam
Bacai Sanhá, in the presence of the President of the
Parliament, the Prime Minister and the President of the
Supreme
Court,
to
reassert
Guinea-Bissau’s
commitment to dialogue and to restoring its close
relations with the European Union, our country’s
largest economic partner.

11-39059

Following those consultations, which took place
in Brussels on 29 March, and after preliminary
meetings with the ACP secretariat and Committee of
Ambassadors — and we believe that those results were
very encouraging — my Government undertook a
number of commitments. Through a decree issued by
the Prime Minister, a follow-up committee was
established in late in April. I myself chaired that
committee, whose members included representatives of
various institutions, ranging from the country’s
presidency to civil society, the armed forces and the
judiciary. A number of working meetings have since
been held within the committee and between it and the
European Union. On Friday, 24 June, we concluded our
second working meeting with the delegation of the
European Union and ambassadors of EU member
States accredited to Guinea-Bissau. That meeting
assessed my Government’s progress in executing its
commitments, with the results deemed satisfactory by
both parties.
I wish to take the opportunity of being here today
with the members of the Security Council to emphasize
some important aspects of the defence and security
sector reform process, including judicial reform as well
as civil service and public finance reforms. In passing,
it is worth recalling that the very reason for the reforms
stems from the fact that these sectors have witnessed
repeated episodes of conflict, in particular towards the
end of the 1990s, in what was a very difficult economic
situation. The public administration was plagued by
poor management, crumbling and sorely lacking
infrastructure, disturbing health and education
indicators, a faltering judicial sector and the ineffective
fight against criminality and organized crime. In
addition, there was a general feeling, which we shared,
that the link between this reform and the economic
development of our country was very strong indeed,
given that defence and security sector reform,
including of the structural elements of the State, is
itself a prerequisite for development.
Our army and security forces, which we inherited
from the war of independence, were no longer adapted
to the new demands created by the new approach to
national defence following independence. That is why
we experimented with a series of reforms, in particular
during the post-conflict period. However, they did not
produce the desired results. The army and the security
forces were still heavily overstaffed, with significant
imbalances in the number of officers, sergeants and

7

S/PV.6569

soldiers. For instance, officers now account for 70 per
cent of our army, while soldiers account for 30 per
cent. There is insufficient re-enlistment owing to the
failure to apply the mandatory military service law.
This situation demands change. The legal framework
for police and security forces was virtually
non-existent, and the army was rife with deficiencies,
not to mention its undertrained troops and lack of
training programmes.
Under those circumstances, defence and security
sector reform was imperative. That effort has already
led to encouraging changes and progress. For instance,
on the legal front, beyond the certifications for the
army, the security sector and the judicial sector that
were approved last year by the Government and
Parliament and enacted by our country’s President,
other legislation has recently been adopted, in areas
such as those mentioned by Mrs. Viotti.
For instance, the organic law on the basic
organization of the armed forces was approved by the
President and subsequently passed by the Parliament,
on 16 June. The new law created the post of an army
deputy chief of staff. Approval was also given for a
political declaration on combating drug trafficking and
organized crime, which includes a national operational
plan for the period 2011 to 2014, as well as an
operational plan for security sector reform that
includes a very precise implementation timetable.
We have also received a contribution of $16.8
million from the 2011-2013 Peacebuilding Priority
Plan for Guinea-Bissau, disbursed through the
Peacebuilding Fund. We have developed plans, at no
additional cost, to rehabilitate prisons and military
barracks and expect to launch those projects in July.
We have created a national guard as a new
component of Guinea-Bissau’s security apparatus. That
was done by means of an organic law that was
approved by Parliament, enacted by the President and
published in the official gazette. Six-week training
sessions have already been held for several groups of
former police forces. However, the only difficulty
facing the national guard is the establishment of its
headquarters and command centre.
We have expanded model police stations
throughout the country. Progress has also been made in
humanitarian demining operations and in the
destruction of explosive devices. There are good
prospects for building new and more secure weapons

8

depots, with support from the Republic of Angola and
the United States.
Four working teams have been established to
provide technical advice to the Steering Committee on
programmes involving demobilization, the pension
fund, reintegration, recruitment, military training,
infrastructure and equipment and legal and institutional
management. The teams are composed of civil servants
from the army, the police, the justice sector,
UNIOGBIS, UNDP, the European Union, the African
Union and ECOWAS, as well as the Angolan and
Brazilian military missions.
We have also conducted a bidding process based
on specifications prepared with the European Union
delegation and selected a bank — namely, the Banco
da Africa Ocidental in Bissau, which has just been
mentioned — to manage the pension fund. An account
has already been opened for the disbursement of funds.
The first payments have been proposed by the road
map task force for next September, although that has
not yet been decided.
With regard to departures due to retirement, the
timetable for the following numbers: 1,320 people in
2009, 153 in 2010, 157 in 2011, 169 in 2012, 133 in
2013, 138 in 2014 and 108 in 2015. The number of
early voluntary departures is estimated in the hundreds.
In addition, my next trip to Timor-Leste next August as
head of a military delegation to the official ceremony
for demobilizing former guerrilla fighters will be an
opportunity to draw lessons and learn from the
experience of the Timorese people.
In connection with that task, on 16 June the
Government approved a payment scale for the pension
fund that takes into account two other aspects other
than age-based retirements. The first pertains to the
retirement of military personnel who are veterans of
the war of independence, while the second has to do
with early voluntary retirements for those who have
not reached the age threshold.
With regard to the first category, retirees will
receive pension payments of 100 per cent of their
current salaries, in accordance with the law adopted
following independence. As for the second category,
the Government had to resort to new arbitration, which
set the pension at between 60 and 100 per cent of
current salaries. This applies to soldiers and corporals
whose present salaries are, respectively, approximately
$60 and $67.

11-39059

S/PV.6569

Furthermore, the total cost of the pension fund
will be accordingly reassessed by 15 July. Additional
measures are planned, such as the establishment of a
pension fund for the defence and security forces,
following a specific regime, which will be integrated
into the civil service pension fund in a general system
for all of the State’s civil servants. Through these
savings and staff assessments, we will be able to
ensure the continuation of the pension fund beyond
2015.
There is therefore agreement that the pension
fund is a necessary, albeit insufficient, element in
reconfiguring the defence and security forces that will
have a very positive effect on the health of public
finances by reducing the total wage bill and improving
the social profile of these forces. The fund is thus of a
strategic nature in terms of both short- and mediumterm reforms.
The revitalization of the military hierarchy as
provided for in the road map entails proceeding with
gradual departures. With an army made up of 70 per
cent officers, it is clear that a good part of the military
hierarchy has reached the age limit and, under the
terms of the law, should retire. The retirement age is
between 48 and 64 years of age, based on categories.
Those between 40 and 59 years of age will therefore
gradually be prepared for retirement, while those
between 18 and 49 years will receive training to enable
them to reach higher ranks in the army. At the same
time, measures for redeployment are planned for
general and higher officers for posts such as
ambassadors, defence attachés, military advisers and
international civil servants, based on the level of each.
Given that the pension amounts they are to
receive may not encourage them to retire, it will be
crucial to set up a reintegration programme for
volunteers and those who depart early. This could be
done by first using funds already available under the
road map and the Peacebuilding Priority Plan. I would
like to take this opportunity to express my
Government’s desire that the international community
consider holding the high-level meeting on the priority
reform programmes that was postponed indefinitely
owing to the events of 1 April 2010.
With respect to the staff of a reconfigured
army — whose number should not exceed 4,000 and
who must undergo training and certification similar to
that now being provided to the police forces — only 30

11-39059

per cent will be permanent. The others will form the
army’s non-permanent ranks. The reform for this sector
accordingly provides a broad range of projects for
these men. In the short term, however, the Ministry has
already been given a legal decree on the activities of
the Government and the armed forces in the productive
sector that provides for the establishment of a military
production centre with agricultural, agro-industrial,
manufacturing, military engineering and sanitation
units, aimed at maximizing the enormous potential of
the resources made available to the army by the
Government. In addition, early this month we put in
place a new mechanism for distributing supplies to the
army that aims at improving the quality of services and
access to resources.
Before I conclude, allow me to report on other
important progress in the area of consolidating the rule
of law and improving the macroeconomic business
environment in our country.
Reform is under way in the public administration
with the establishment of a single payroll, which is
something new that makes it possible to monitor the
State’s salary spending, as well as the setting up of a
database and an integrated human resources
management centre for the civil service. This system
followed a biometric census of civil servants, which
revealed the existence of about 4,000 bogus civil
servants. That enabled the State to reduce current
spending by 12 per cent. Only the armed forces are
currently not part of the payroll. However, following a
meeting in May with the latest mission from the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), a commitment was
undertaken by the Government to begin payments to
personnel present beginning in July, followed by the
integration of army staff under a single payroll. This
approach aims to improve the administrative
management of human resources in the army and to
ensure transparency of the payroll.
All these reform efforts are in the context of the
IMF’s latest assessment that the role played by the
Government in the framework of the three-year
agreement under the Extended Credit Facility had been
satisfactory. Having reached the completion point of
the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative, and
given the successful outcome of the Paris Club
meeting, which forgave 90 per cent of the external debt
of Guinea-Bissau — a step later followed by Brazil,
Portugal and Angola — we can affirm that there is new
momentum in the pace of economic reform. The

9

S/PV.6569

Government is now establishing measures to increase
revenue and improve the management of public
finances and structural reforms.
With an economic growth rate in Guinea-Bissau
of 3.5 per cent in 2010, the IMF and the Government
predict an increase to 4.3 per cent for this year. That is
thanks to the increase in the production of and sale
price of cashew nuts, as well as the reconstruction of
infrastructure. The immediate goals are to raise growth
to 4.5 per cent by the end of the programme, decrease
annual inflation and maintain the budgetary deficit
consistent with available financing. My Government
has also established a business training centre in order
to create an environment conducive to fostering and
improving economic activity.
Preparations are also under way to conclude the
electoral cycle, in particular with Parliament’s adoption
of a draft law for municipalities that gives added value
to the process of decentralization.
I could refer to other important measures,
although I want to conclude and avoid speaking at
length. For example, Parliament has adopted a fiercely
debated law banning the practice of female genital
mutilation, which represents an important step in
respect for human rights. The Government has also
adopted and submitted to Parliament a host of laws,
including on freedom of the press, social media, the
status of journalists and the right of reply. Finally, it is
important to highlight the very committed efforts by
the Parliament and other national institutions in the
process of national reconciliation — with regard to the
army, the security forces and Guinea-Bissau’s
diaspora — in particular the meetings held in Dakar
and Lisbon for our nationals living in Africa and
Europe.
In the spirit of our national strategic poverty
reduction document, the Government is focusing its
attention on reforms to the security, defence and justice
sectors and the modernization of the State. We are also
focusing on putting in place policies to improve access
to basic social services and optimize sectors with high
potential for growth — such as agriculture,
agro-industry, fishing, tourism and mining — as well
as other promising sectors when it comes to
infrastructure and investment.
To do this, in addition to domestic efforts,
Guinea-Bissau needs strong support from the
international community. We count on such support as

10

we define a comprehensive development policy that
takes into account all of these reforms in the context of
our second national poverty reduction strategy
document over the next five years. We expect to hold a
donors’ conference in that regard by the end of this
year.
With respect to the whole host of defence and
security sector reform programmes, it is worth
mentioning that, during consultations held in Brussels,
our Prime Minister announced that 10 per cent of the
overall cost of the reform throughout the years of its
implementation, including with regard to the pension
fund, would be included in the national budget. The
Government’s contribution to the pension fund is
$4,596,480.
I cannot conclude my statement without
expressing thanks to ECOWAS and UNIOGBIS for the
work carried out by their special representatives in
Guinea-Bissau, Hamet Sidibé and Joseph Mutaboba,
respectively, as well as to Ambassador Maria Luiza
Viotti, Permanent Representative of Brazil to the
United Nations and Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. I
would like to take this opportunity to thank them for
their outstanding work and their commitment to
Guinea-Bissau. We are open to advice and guidance
that adds value to the efforts that we are undertaking to
help our country emerge from the recurring instability
that we have had in the recent past.
I know that there may be sceptics among those
present here. However, I would invite them to share
our relative optimism. We are deeply convinced that
our country is now regaining peace and stability for the
long term, decreasing crime and better respecting
human rights. Today, there are no political prisoners or
arbitrary detentions. We have the longest-lasting
Government since 1997. We have armed forces and
security forces that are beginning to believe in the
reform of their sectors. We have a population that
believes in a Guinea-Bissau that is being reborn and
blossoming. I thank members for their solidarity and
for their affection for Guinea-Bissau. We believe in a
brilliant future. Together, let us move forward.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Minister Da Silva for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Manuel Domingos
Augusto, Secretary of State for Political Affairs at the

11-39059

S/PV.6569

Ministry of External Relations of Angola and Chair of
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries.
Mr. Augusto (spoke in Portuguese; English text
provided by the delegation): On behalf of my country, I
wish to address the Security Council as the current
Chair of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP) on behalf of the member countries of
the CPLP, namely, Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde, GuineaBissau, Mozambique, Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe
and Timor-Leste.
As Angola participates in this important meeting
of the Security Council, which includes Brazil and
Portugal as non-permanent members, dedicated to an
assessment of the situation in Guinea-Bissau, with
particular emphasis on issues related to the reform of
the security sector, we are fully aware of the
importance of cooperation among the multilateral and
bilateral actors involved in the stabilization of GuineaBissau under the auspices of the United Nations, whose
Special Representative of the Secretary-General has
been doing a clearly outstanding job, which we are
pleased to commend.
Under the coordination of the United Nations and
in close partnership with the Government of GuineaBissau, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the African Union, the European
Union and the CPLP are committed to the
implementation of the road map for security sector
reform with determination and a genuine desire to
achieve the expected results, namely, the effective
subordination of Guinea-Bissau’s armed forces and
other defence and security institutions to political
control. That process includes upgrading and
refurbishing these bodies in order to safeguard
institutions, the democratic regime and the reform of
the justice sector so that it can count on the appropriate
means to effectively combat impunity, organized crime
and drug trafficking.
Beyond the multilateral aspect, CPLP member
countries have shown a great sense of solidarity and
commitment to that process at the bilateral level.
Tangible efforts that contribute directly to achieving
the goals of the road map have been implemented at
various levels, with an emphasis on the important
political and diplomatic roles of Cape Verde,
Mozambique, Sao Tome and Principe and Timor-Leste
in promoting dialogue with a view to national
reconciliation in Guinea-Bissau.

11-39059

Brazil is developing a training programme for
Guinea-Bissau’s security forces that includes the
establishment of a training centre, including Brazilian
instructors, for the three security branches, namely, the
public order police, the State information service and
the judiciary police. Brazil will also establish a training
centre for military officers. Moreover, Brazil continues
to provide training for the youth of Guinea-Bissau at
Brazilian military academies.
Portugal is carrying out a basic police training
programme, including refresher courses in public
security and judicial policing. It is also training judges
and prison guards and supporting the implementation
of the country’s organic laws, which were developed
with the support of the European Union.
Last February, Angola established a mission to
support security and defence sector reform in GuineaBissau, which will provide military and technical
assistance to defence and security organs and help to
rebuild the military infrastructure. The Angolan
Government has contributed a total of $30 million in
that regard.
The CPLP welcomes the current climate of truce
that is now being felt in Guinea-Bissau, and especially
the good relations among its national institutions,
political forces and civil society, with an emphasis on
the ongoing national dialogue involving the Guinean
diaspora.
Following discussions last November with the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World
Bank at a meeting of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, member countries
were encouraged to support the deliberations of both
financial institutions on Guinea-Bissau. In December,
the IMF and the World Bank declared that GuineaBissau had reached the completion point in the Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries Initiative and decided to
support debt relief for the country in the amount of
more than $1 billion. In that context, on 10 May, Paris
Club creditors announced the forgiveness of $283
million of Guinea-Bissau’s debt. The CPLP welcomes
the decisions of the IMF, the World Bank and the Paris
Club.
In addition to recognizing the efforts of the
Government of Guinea-Bissau and the progress that
has been made, those actions, along with other bilateral
and multilateral initiatives, reflect the convergence of

11

S/PV.6569

views within the international community with regard to an
assessment of the situation in the country.
Taking into account the negative impact of illicit
drugs in Guinea-Bissau and the West African subregion, the
CPLP welcomes and supports the recent commitment of
ECOWAS authorities to mobilizing West African countries
against transnational organized crime. We also stress the
need for close collaboration with the High-level Policy
Committee of the West Africa Coast Initiative. The
Committee has adopted a set of recommendations that
include the holding of a donors’ conference to extend
financial support for international activities under the
Initiative and support the implementation of the ECOWAS
plan of action. The Initiative provides an appropriate
response to the transnational nature of drug trafficking
through the establishment of transnational crime units in
countries that have joined the Initiative. The international
community must now support the operationalization of the
transnational crime unit in Bissau. The Government of
Guinea-Bissau has already appointed a board of directors
and president for the unit, who will begin work later this
month.
It is very important to strengthen international
cooperation in combating transnational organized crime
based on the principle of common and shared
responsibility. Countries of origin, transit and destination
must become increasingly involved in combating drug
trafficking.
The CPLP notes with satisfaction the adoption by the
National Steering Committee, on 15 June, of a
peacebuilding priority plan for Guinea-Bissau for the
period 2011-2013. The CPLP therefore calls for $16.8
million from the Peacebuilding Fund to quickly be made
available to expedite the implementation of planned
activities, so as to prevent uncertainty and insecurity in the
country.
Guinea-Bissau still faces challenges in several areas,
including combating impunity and drug trafficking, the
need to bring the military under the control of civilian
authorities, and the demobilization and retraining of the
personnel of the armed forces.
The CPLP has taken note of the information provided
by the Minister of Defence on the schedule of actions to be
performed by the Government of Guinea-Bissau. In that
regard, I would like to stress the importance of quickly
rendering operational the armed forces pension fund, which
is a key step in the overall security sector reform process.
The international community’s commitment is crucial in

12

that connection. We therefore welcome the decision of
ECOWAS heads of State and Government to contribute $45
million to the fund, out of the total $63 million contributed
to security sector reform. CPLP member countries will also
contribute. We call on Guinea-Bissau’s other partners,
especially those that have supported the security sector
reform process, to make similar contributions.
The CPLP also calls for understanding on the part of
international and bilateral partners with regard to the need
to mobilize additional resources to contribute to the
successful implementation of national poverty reduction
strategies, as well as the joint CPLP-ECOWAS road map
for security sector reform. We believe that only then can the
gains of peacebuilding and political stability in GuineaBissau be made sustainable and irreversible.
For the process to be successful, the CPLP
encourages the Government of Guinea-Bissau, as well as
the country’s political movements and civil society in
general, to join the efforts of the international community
for the full implementation of the ongoing programme to
ensure peace, security, stability and socio-economic
development in the country.
The European Union has duly raised some concerns
that are shared by all those who defend democracy and the
rule of law. Responses and solutions to those concerns must
now be found. It is therefore imperative that GuineaBissau’s partners not isolate or alienate the country, but act
with understanding to support and participate in this
massive effort to rebuild the country and forge unity and
national reconciliation.
Finally, the CPLP also encourages the authorities of
Guinea-Bissau to continue to undertake the necessary
efforts to pursue a policy of good governance, to promote
respect for human rights and to combat impunity, drug
trafficking and organized crime, thereby sending positive
signals to attract major international and bilateral donors.
The President (spoke
Mr. Augusto for his statement.

in

French):

I

thank

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list. I
now invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

11-39059
