UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/53
17 October 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3588th meeting of the Security Council, held on 17 October 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
concerning Rwanda", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the Secretary-General’s report on
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) of 7 October 1995
(S/1995/848).
"The Security Council welcomes progress made by the Government of
Rwanda in the reconciliation process, including the integration of more
than 2,000 members of former Rwandan Government Forces (RGF) troops into
the Rwanda Patriotic Army (RPA). The Council calls on the Government of
Rwanda to intensify its contacts with all sectors of Rwandan society,
except with those directly responsible for the genocide. The Council
reiterates its concern at reports about continuing cross-border
infiltrations from neighbouring countries which have a destabilizing effect
within Rwanda. The Council also reiterates its concern at the danger for
peace and stability in the Great Lakes Region which would be caused by
uncontrolled arms flows and in this context reaffirms the relevant
provisions of its resolution 1013 (1995). The Council condemns all acts of
violence in Rwanda. The Council welcomes the fact that the Government of
Rwanda has voluntarily and without delay initiated an investigation into
the killing of civilians at Kanama and expects that prosecution of those
responsible will follow.
"The Security Council calls again upon all States to act in accordance
with the conclusions of the summit meeting of the leaders in the subregion
in Nairobi in January 1995 and the recommendations by the Regional
Conference on Assistance to Refugees, Returnees and Displaced Persons in
the Great Lakes Region, held in Bujumbura in February 1995. The Council
welcomes recent efforts to improve relations among the States in the
region, which should help pave the way for the proposed Regional Conference
on Peace, Security and Development. In this regard, the Council supports
the efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to the Great

95-31327 (E)

171095

/...

S/PRST/1995/53
English
Page 2

Lakes region for the preparation and convening of such a conference. It
requests the Secretary-General to submit his report on the results of the
first round of consultations of the Special Envoy in the region as soon as
possible.
"The Security Council reaffirms the important role UNAMIR has played
in Rwanda and the subregion. In this respect, the Council underlines its
commitment to UNAMIR which, inter alia, assists the Government of Rwanda in
facilitating the voluntary return and resettlement of refugees and has made
available to the Rwandan authorities its engineering and logistics
capacity. The Council underlines that UNAMIR can effectively implement its
current mandate only if it has an adequate force level and sufficient
means. The Council stands ready to study carefully any further
recommendations that the Secretary-General might make on the issue of force
reductions in relation to the fulfilment of the mandate of UNAMIR.
"The Security Council reaffirms its view that genuine reconciliation
as well as long-lasting stability in the region as a whole cannot be
attained without the safe, voluntary and organized return to their country
of all Rwandan refugees. In this respect, the Council welcomes the joint
efforts of Rwanda, neighbouring countries and UNHCR to speed up the
voluntary return of refugees through, inter alia, the work of the
Tripartite Commissions. The Council underlines that, in order to foster
the process of national reconciliation, an effective and credible national
judiciary has to be established. In this respect, it welcomes the
appointment of the members of the Rwandan Supreme Court. The Council
further underlines that the International Tribunal for Rwanda should begin
its proceedings as soon as possible. The Council calls on Member States to
comply with their obligations with regard to cooperation with the Tribunal
in accordance with resolution 955 (1994). It urges once more all States to
arrest and detain persons suspected of genocide and other serious
violations of international humanitarian law in accordance with resolution
978 (1995). The Council underlines the necessity for the Tribunal to be
fully financed, as a matter of priority, and for continued access to the
Voluntary Trust Fund established for the Tribunal. The Council continues
to support the work of human rights monitors in Rwanda in cooperation with
the Rwandan Government.
"The Security Council reaffirms its concern at the appalling situation
in the Rwandan prisons. In this respect, it welcomes measures initiated by
the Department of Humanitarian Affairs, in coordination with the
international community and the Government of Rwanda, to alleviate the
intolerable conditions in Rwandan prisons. It calls on the international
community to continue its assistance in this regard and encourages the
Rwandan Government to continue its efforts to improve the situation in the
prisons. The Council underlines the importance of parallel action by the
Rwandan Government to restore the Rwandan judicial system and requests the
international community to assist the Rwandan Government in this urgent
task.
"The Security Council underlines that sound economic foundations are
also vital for achieving lasting stability in Rwanda. In this respect, it
/...

S/PRST/1995/53
English
Page 3

welcomes the increased commitments and funds pledged for the Government’s
Programme of National Reconciliation and Socio-Economic Rehabilitation and
Recovery following the mid-term review of the Geneva Round-Table
Conference, and calls on the international community to continue to support
Rwanda’s rehabilitation process.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
