S/2018/432

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 May 2018
Original: English

Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2391 (2017) of 8 December 2017, the Security Council
welcomed the progress achieved in making the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel fully operational and requested me to take the steps necessary to conclude
a technical agreement between the United Nations, the European Union and the States
members of Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), with a view to providing
operational and logistical support to the Joint Force through the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MI NUSMA).
2.
The Council also requested me, in close coordination with the States members
of G-5 Sahel and the African Union, to report on the activities of the Joint Force,
focusing on progress in making it operational, international support for it, the
implementation of the technical agreement, challenges encountered and the
implementation by the G-5 Sahel countries of a human rights and international
humanitarian law compliance framework and the human rights due diligence policy.

II. Operationalization of the Joint Force
3.
Pursuant to resolution 2391 (2017), the States members of G-5 Sahel, the United
Nations and the European Union, at the margins of the international high -level
conference for the Sahel, held in Brussels on 23 February 2018, signed a technical
agreement defining the scope and scale of United Nations support for the Joint Force
through MINUSMA. Under the resolution, the support comprises medical
evacuations, access to life-support consumables (fuel, water and rations), the use of
United Nations engineering plant equipment and material, and assistance to be
provided by uniformed MINUSMA engineering enabling units in the preparation of
the Joint Force’s operational bases in Mali. The support will be provided to Joint
Force elements operating on Malian territory, in line with the Mission ’s mandated
area of operations. The European Union and the United Nations also signed a separate
financial agreement on the modalities for transferring funds between them.
4.
Efforts by the G-5 Sahel countries to make the Joint Force fully operational
continued. On 8 January, the ministers for foreign affairs and ministers of defence of
those countries attended an extraordinary ministerial meeting in Bamako, which
resulted in the creation of a dedicated trust fund for the Joint Force and the

18-06796 (E)

110518

*1806796*

S/2018/432

establishment of the Defence and Security Bureau, which will coordinate and liaise
with the headquarters of the Joint Force in Sévaré, Mali, and the Group ’s permanent
secretariat in Nouakchott. On 6 and 7 February, the Heads of State of the Group met
for their annual summit in Niamey, during which its acting presidency was rotated
from Mali to the Niger. The Heads of State endorsed the outcomes of the January
ministerial meeting and subsequently, under the acting presidency of the Niger,
requested assistance from the United Nations in enhancing the capacities of the
permanent secretariat and in setting up the trust fund. On 23 March, the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union, at its 759th meeting, decided to extend the
deployment of the Joint Force by 12 months, effective 12 April 2018.
5.
The security situation in the Sahel, as described in detail in my previous report
on the matter (S/2017/869), continues to worsen. A large-scale terrorist attack in the
heart of Ouagadougou on 2 March, continual attacks on defence and security forces
in the tri-border area between Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger and an attack,
unprecedented in duration, sophistication and scope, on forces of the French
Operation Barkhane and MINUSMA on 14 April in Timbuktu, Mali, bear witness to
the trend. State authority remains absent in large areas of central and northern Mali
and in northern Burkina Faso. The local population lacks access to basic social
services and continues to suffer from poverty and hunger. The underlying root causes
of instability, in particular weak political, financial and security governance, under development and exclusion, remain unchanged and largely unaddressed. The
presidential elections due to be held in Mali in July 2018 will be a decisive moment
in shaping the future of that country and could have a significant impact on the region.

A.

Deployment update: military component
6.
The Joint Force reached its initial operational capability in October 2017 and is
projected to become fully operational in the coming months. As at 13 April, six out
of a total of seven battalions had been identified by States members of the G roup.
Two thirds of the troops designated for the Central Sector have reportedly deployed:
130 out of 650 troops of the Mali battalion in Boulikessi, 528 out of 650 troops of the
Niger battalion in Bankilaré and 596 out of 650 troops of the Burkina Faso ba ttalion
in Dori. The Joint Force will define new timelines for becoming fully operational
once the relevant criteria have been established and approved by the chiefs of defence
staff of countries of the Group at the next meeting of the Defence and Security
Committee, which were to be held on 10 and 11 May in Ouagadougou. The Committee
will also establish timelines for the transfer of authority over the individual battalions
from Group countries to the Joint Force’s central command.
7.
The Commander of the Joint Force, Brigadier General Didier Dacko, conducted
an initial assessment visit to the Central Sector, supported by the Barkhane force,
from 4 to 9 April to determine compliance with deployment requirements. The visit,
along with an inspection visit to Sector East and Sector West headquarters, had
initially been scheduled for late 2017, but had to be postponed owing to a lack of
means of transport. His findings are expected to be approved in late April. A second
assessment visit in Sector East to Wour, Chad, and Madama, Niger, is ongoing.
8.
The Joint Force’s headquarters and central command post in Sévaré and the
three sector headquarters, in Niamey (Central Sector), in Wour, Chad (Sector East),
and in Nbeiket el Ahouach, Mauritania (Sector West), have reached 80 per cent of
their staffing capacity. Initial assessments of human resources, however, had to be
revised and the staffing ceilings for the four command posts have been adjusted
accordingly. The central command post is expected to be reinforced by 1 20 additional
staff officers and the three sector headquarters would require a total of 64 additional

2/16

18-06796

S/2018/432

posts. The Defence and Security Committee is expected to confirm the exact number
of additional posts required at its May meeting.
9.
At their extraordinary summit, held in Bamako on 2 July 2017, the Heads of
State of the G-5 Sahel countries decided to prioritize the operationalization of the
Joint Force in the Central Sector, as the majority of terrorist attacks were being carried
out in that region. Since then, the Joint Force has conducted two military operations
in the tri-border area between Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger. In Operation Hawbi,
which was carried out from 28 October to 11 November, three inter-army detachments
under Joint Force command coordinated with the armed forces of Burkina Faso, Mali
and the Niger, and with the Barkhane force. The central command post in Sévaré
directed the operation with the support of the tactical command post in Niamey.
10. From 30 December 2017 to 15 January 2018, the Joint Force conducted
Operation Pagnali in the forest area between Tofagala, Ouoromana and Serba, close
to Boulikessi, in Mali. The objective was to destroy the supply chains of armed
terrorist groups and to contain their movements in the border ar ea between Mali and
Burkina Faso. Four tactical inter-army combat units and nine aircraft from those two
countries participated in the operation.
11. The Joint Force is preparing its operational plan, which is expected to be
approved at the next meeting of the Defence and Security Committee in early May.
12. On 29 January, the Group’s permanent secretariat and Brigadier General Dacko
met representatives of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) and other United Nations agencies, funds and programmes in
Nouakchott. They agreed to work together to build capacity in the areas of civil military coordination, gender mainstreaming, human rights, social cohesion and
conflict management.
13. The Joint Force also identified the building of two new sites in Boulikessi and
Tessit, the rehabilitation of camps in Guiré, Nampala, Ngoumacoura and the
enhancement of its headquarters in Sévaré as priority construction projects. The
precarious conditions in and around those sites present a major security threat and are
delaying the deployment of remaining troops. Building bunkers in the camps to
protect personnel, arms, ammunition, equipment and supplies is a key priority. Until
camp infrastructure in Nbeiket el Ahouach and Wour is improved, the command posts
for Sector West and Sector East are temporarily located in Néma, Mauritania, and
N’Djamena, respectively. Given the lack of transport assets, the distances between
the sector headquarters, command posts and battalion camps constitute a major
challenge.
14. The Joint Force urgently requires air assets for gathering intelligence and
transport, as well as communications equipment. It currently relies on the national
armies of the G-5 Sahel countries or the Barkhane force to conduct reconnaissance
missions. Communications equipment is in short supply and the different systems
used by the G-5 Sahel countries are not always compatible or encrypted. The lack of
expertise, training and equipment for detecting and mitigating the threat of mines is
also a source of great concern, in particular given the asymmetrical threat posed in
the areas in which the Joint Force operates. It also requires assistance with developing
outreach and communication strategies to target the population in its area of
operations.
15. On 2 March, Brigadier General Dacko requested technical assistance from the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to meet the asymmetrical threat posed by
improvised explosive devices. His request envisages the provision of advice and
assistance by the Mine Action Service in order to strengthen the military and civilian

18-06796

3/16

S/2018/432

capacity in the countries concerned and at headquarters in Sévaré. An assessment of
how to provide such support is currently under way.

B.

Deployment update: police and civilian component
16. In addition to the military component, comprising 5,000 elements, the strategic
concept of operations of the Joint Force, referred to in resolution 2359 (2017) and
previously endorsed by the Peace and Security Council of the African Union, includes
a police and civilian component.
17. In December 2017, the Government of Mali, in its capacity as acting president
of the Group, supported by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
held a workshop in Bamako to define the role and responsibilities of the police
component, in particular with regard to provost and judicial police. A conceptual
framework for the structure and operation of the police component was adopted at an
extraordinary meeting of the Defence and Security Committee on 8 December.
18. Under the conceptual framework, the police component will consist of a provost
police unit, integrated into the military component of the Joint F orce, and an
investigation unit under the command of national specialized units combating
terrorism and transnational organized crime. The core responsibilities of the provost
police will include monitoring military units and providing them with training o n
human rights and upholding the rule of law. The investigation units will be
responsible for the collection, analysis and exchange of information and for
investigating crimes, gathering evidence and pursuing criminals and the perpetrators
of human rights violations. The police component will also include a police adviser
to the Joint Force Commander, appointed by States members of the Group on a
rotating basis for a term of one year, renewable once, and supported by a secretariat
and liaison officers to coordinate with the Security Cooperation Platform, the
Sahelian Threat Analysis and Early Warning Centre and the International Criminal
Police Organization (INTERPOL). The police adviser will monitor the development
of legal frameworks in the Sahel, advise the Joint Force Commander on legal aspects
of operations, anticipate legal issues and their solutions and assist the Commander in
the coordination of cross-border operations by facilitating the exchange of
information between investigation units. In operational matters, the police adviser
will monitor and analyse threats relating to terrorism and transnational organized
crime, facilitate the collection and exchange of information between investigation
units, participate in planning operations and provide the Commander with police
expertise and information relating to the judicial police. He or she will also be tasked
with centralizing data on arrests.
19. The conceptual framework requires strict compliance with international law
provisions regarding the treatment of persons suspected of terrorism or other criminal
acts, the integration of the women and peace and security agenda into the work of the
police component and measures for protecting children. It also stipulates that the work
of the police component should comply strictly with human rights and international
humanitarian law and with the human rights compliance framework of the Joint
Force.
20. From 10 to 12 April, the Government of the Niger, supported by UNODC, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and other international partners,
held a workshop in Niamey on making the police component operational, with the
aim of defining the component’s scale and scope, including the number of police
officers to be deployed in total and within each battalion. Participants agreed to
entrust the Director General of the National Police of the Niger with the task of
establishing a commission composed of States members of the Group, UNODC and

4/16

18-06796

S/2018/432

other international partners to determine the specific needs of each of those States in
creating the police component and to assist them with setting up its investigation and
provost units as soon as possible.
21. In order to ensure due process and in line with the strategic concept of
operations, investigative police units deployed to the Joint Force will be required to
work with national authorities in each of the G-5 Sahel countries. In Mali, the
Specialized Judicial Unit to Combat Terrorism and Transnational Organized Crime
has exclusive jurisdiction over those matters. To avoid jurisdictional conflict,
terrorism and organized crime suspects apprehended by the Joint Force in Mali will
be handed over to the Unit, which will thus play a key role in ensuring that such
suspects are properly investigated and brought to j ustice in Mali, in accordance with
human rights standards. The Unit will also be responsible for implementing all
judicial cooperation requests from other G-5 Sahel countries.

C.

Permanent secretariat and institutional framework
22. On 6 February, at their fourth annual summit, the Heads of State of the G-5
Sahel countries endorsed the appointment of Maman Sidikou as the Group ’s new
permanent secretary. Mr. Sidikou, of the Niger, replaced Najim Elhadj Mohamed, who
held the post for three years.
23. Pursuant to resolution 2391 (2017), UNOWAS is mandated to provide technical
assistance, within its existing mandate and as its resources permit, to the permanent
secretariat of the Group with a view to enhancing cooperation between G-5 Sahel
countries in the areas of security, governance and development. In line with that
mandate and pursuant to the decision reached by the Group ’s Heads of State at their
annual summit in February, UNOWAS is supporting the establishment of the
secretariat’s Defence and Security Bureau in Nouakchott, thereby restructuring the
secretariat and broadening its responsibilities. Staff for the Bureau will be provided
by countries of the Group. Burkina Faso and Mali have each nominated defence and
security assistants and Mauritania has designated a secretary. Those posts will be
staffed and financed by States members of the Group on a one -year rotating basis.
24. The Group’s Council of Ministers has approved the standard operating
procedures of the Joint Force trust fund and the terms of reference for its support and
steering committees. States members of the Group are expected to make nominations
for positions in the fund’s secretariat, which will be led by a coordinator and staffed
with technical personnel in areas such as finance, partnerships management,
procurement and supply chain management.
25. On 23 March, at the margins of the extraordinary summit of the African Union
in Kigali, representatives of the G-5 Sahel countries signed a memorandum of
understanding with the Peace and Security Council of the African Union on the
provision of equipment and technical and financial support to make the Joint Force
fully operational. In the memorandum, measures are outlined for enhancing
coordination between the permanent secretariat and the African Union, including
through the establishment of a strategic coordination cell in Addis Ababa to provide
technical assistance for the Joint Force trust fund and to mobilize resources.

D.

Human rights due diligence policy and human rights
compliance framework
26. In resolution 2391 (2017), the Security Council underlined the need for Joint
Force operations to be conducted in full compliance with international law and for

18-06796

5/16

S/2018/432

G-5 Sahel countries and the Joint Force to take steps to minimize the risk of harm to
civilians in all areas of operation. It also called upon the States members of G-5 Sahel
to establish a robust compliance framework to prevent, investigate, address and
publicly report violations and abuses of human rights law and violations of
international humanitarian law relating to the Joint Force. It also noted that the
implementation of United Nations support is to be undertaken in strict compliance
with the human rights due diligence policy on United Nations support to non -United
Nations security forces.
27. On the basis of previous experience and lessons learned in Afghanistan and
Somalia, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR), in consultation with the Joint Force and other relevant United Nations
offices and departments, developed a compliance framework that was endorsed
through the signature of the technical agreement by the United Nations, the European
Union and the States members of G-5 Sahel at the Brussels conference on
23 February. The main elements of the framework are outlined in the agr eement. The
framework provides for a set of risk-reduction and mitigation mechanisms designed
to prevent and address the possible adverse effects of the Joint Force ’s operations on
local communities. They include but are not limited to: the screening of tr oops and
personnel to ensure that they are selected, recorded and identifiable as belonging to
the Joint Force and its operations; generalized and specific training for troops and
personnel, before and during deployment, relevant to the operations; the ado ption and
dissemination of rules and regulations and standard operating procedures for the
conduct of operations by the Joint Force; a mechanism to ensure that operations
planning takes into account the requirements of human rights and international
humanitarian law and protection concerns, including measures specific to women and
children; mechanisms for conducting after-action reviews to assess the impact of
operations on civilians and human rights; mechanisms for monitoring and reporting
on the conduct of operations by the Joint Force, including casualty and incident
tracking and analysis and reporting on the implementation of the compliance
framework; and the creation of effective accountability processes in the countries of
the Group to address violations.
28. In response to a request by the Group for support in implementing the
compliance framework, OHCHR, MINUSMA and other partners are finalizing an
operational support plan that will include technical assistance to the Joint Force in
Sévaré, mobile monitoring of the Joint Force’s operations and technical assistance
and monitoring of follow-up actions taken in response to allegations of human rights
abuses in each of the Group’s member States. A plan to reinforce the capacity of the
Mission to ensure that United Nations support provided to the Joint Force complies
with the human rights due diligence policy is also being finalized. Such compliance
is a prerequisite for United Nations support provided pursuant to resolution 2391
(2017).
29. Pending finalization of the costing and disbursement of donor contributions for
the establishment of the compliance framework, the Peacebuilding Fund provided
critical seed funding of $590,640, enabling OHCHR to deploy t echnical experts to
Mopti and Sévaré to develop the framework with the Joint Force ’s central command
and work with national authorities and United Nations partners on its implementation
in G-5 Sahel countries. Support for the Joint Force in terms of upholding human rights
and international humanitarian law will require a sustained commitment by Member
States and donors of political and financial resources over the entire course of its
deployment. The presence of a civilian component in the Joint Force with which the
United Nations and other partners can engage will be essential for putting many
aspects of the framework into practice. For the framework to fulfil its potential as a
tool for protecting populations and become a model for future operations, suppo rt will
6/16

18-06796

S/2018/432

need to be sustained beyond the current round of projected funding for its
implementation so as to ensure its maintenance in the long term.
30. During the reporting period, MINUSMA continued to monitor the human rights
situation in Mali, including in relation to the activities and operations of the Joint
Force. In a letter dated 20 January 2018, the Joint Force formally notified the Mission
of a case that occurred in connection with Operation Pagnali, in which it is alleged
that a 51-year-old man was killed and a 29-year-old woman was injured when a Joint
Force patrol opened fire in a residential area during an altercation with assailants. The
Mission is investigating the incident. The Joint Force also offered to cooperate fully
with an investigation by the police in Sévaré into the matter.
31. Operation Hawbi led to the arrest and detention, on 7 November 2017, of nine
members of the Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad, initially suspected as
terrorists. The Joint Force transferred them to the custody of the police in Gao two
days later. They were released on 12 November for lack of evidence.
32. In December and January, nationals of Burkina Faso reportedly fled to Gossi, in
the Timbuktu region of Mali, to escape security operations led by forces of Burkina
Faso in the border area. As at 28 February, 2,373 refugees from Burkina Faso had
been registered by the authorities in Mali, supported by representatives of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. More remain to be
registered. The internal displacement of 9,534 Malian nationals in the Timbuktu
region was also highlighted in the displacement tracking matrix of the Ministry of
Solidarity and Humanitarian Action in Mali. At present, there is no indication as to
whether the displacement occurred as a result of operations by the Joint Force or oth er
defence and security forces.

E.

Issues and challenges
33. Progress in making the Joint Force fully operational and mobilizing
international funding for its support has been slow and, at times, cumbersome.
Initially, it was due to be fully operational by March 2018, but the deadline has been
set back. A variety of factors are contributing to the delay. The rate of deployment has
been slowed by major deficiencies in terms of training and equipment and the fact
that the national defence and security forces in G-5 Sahel countries are already
overstretched.
34. The lack of progress in the peace process in Mali, combined with the
deteriorating security situation, can only fuel further radicalization, especially among
vulnerable groups. The success of the Joint Force’s future operations is, however,
intimately linked to progress in the peace process. Security operations must
complement efforts to provide the civilian population with a tangible peace dividend.
At the same time, the Joint Force could provide an important bulwark against the
spread of violent extremism, terrorism and transnational organized crime when fully
operational. That, however, would also require the full implement ation of the human
rights compliance framework with a view to preventing and mitigating any adverse
impact of operations on civilians.
35. It is important that the G-5 Sahel countries intensify efforts to create unity of
purpose and develop a shared vision and a sound political framework for the Joint
Force. That requires a further revision of the strategic concept of operations, as
recommended in my previous report. It also requires an intensified dialogue with the
international community to mobilize the requisite support for such an endeavour and
to ensure that all key partners are aligned in their support.

18-06796

7/16

S/2018/432

III. International support for the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel
A.

Political support
36. Following the adoption of resolution 2391 (2017), a series of high-level
meetings were conducted to mobilize international support for the Joint Force. On
11 December, European Union ministers for foreign affairs met their counterparts
from States members of G-5 Sahel in Brussels. Two days later, the President of
France, Emmanuel Macron, and the Chancellor of Germany, Angela Merkel, had a
high-level meeting with the Heads of State of the Group and other leaders in La Celle Saint-Cloud, France. The matters of funding and measures of international support
for the Joint Force were discussed at both meetings. On 8 January, ministers of
defence and ministers for foreign affairs of the G-5 Sahel countries met in Bamako
and announced the creation of a trust fund and the establishment of the Defence and
Security Bureau. The need for the complementarity of funding mechanisms and
effective communication and coordination between the European Union coordination
hub and the Group was emphasized at a meeting of the ministers of defence of the
Group’s member States hosted by the Government of France on 15 January in Paris.
At the summit of the Heads of State of the Group, held in Niamey on 6 February,
timelines for the deployment of the Joint Force were approve d. On 23 February, the
technical agreement on MINUSMA support for the Joint Force and the financial
agreement between the United Nations and the European Union were signed at the
Brussels conference. On 23 March, the Peace and Security Council of the Afric an
Union extended the mandate of the Joint Force mandate for another year. On 25 April,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations hosted a high-level meeting in New York,
co-chaired by the Group, the European Union and the United Nations, to mobilize
additional donor support for the Joint Force. Donors were urged to make funds
available for MINUSMA engineering support for the Joint Force, given the serious
lack of equipment in the Joint Force and the dire conditions in and around their
operational bases.
37. The flurry of high-level meetings underlines the ownership by the Group of the
Joint Force and its activities and the sustained interest and commitment of the
international community to rally behind this important cause. Discussions were,
however, dominated by practical concerns with regard to the implementation of the
technical agreement and efforts to mobilize funds. In resolution 2391 (2017), the
importance of the link between the peace process in Mali, the stabilization role of
MINUSMA and the support it will provide to the Joint Force are emphasized, but
little attention was paid during the reporting period to a broader political framework
for the Joint Force. The strengthening of the Group ’s permanent secretariat, creation
of the Defence and Security Bureau and signature of the memorandum of
understanding between the African Union and the Group are important steps towards
situating the operations of the Joint Force in a broader political and institut ional
framework for a holistic and comprehensive approach to addressing the challenges
facing the Sahel. No progress was made during the reporting period, however, on
establishing a support group that, in line with paragraphs 4 to 6 of resolution 2391
(2017), could bring together the Governments of the Group’s member States, regional
stakeholders, donors and technical partners, centralize support efforts and define the
overall vision for and future direction of the Joint Force.

8/16

18-06796

S/2018/432

B.

Financial support and efforts to mobilize resources

1.

European Union coordination hub
38. At the request of several of its member States, the European Union established
a coordination hub, led by the European Union Military Staff, in November 2017 to
coordinate support in the international donor community for the Joint Force. It holds
regular meetings attended by representatives of the member States of the Union and
other States, including Canada, Japan, Norway, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia,
the United Arab Emirates and the United States of America, and of international
organizations. The hub liaises with key G-5 Sahel stakeholders, such as its presidency
and permanent secretariat, the Commander of the Joint Force and the African Union,
through the Union’s delegations and its common security and defence policy missions
in the Sahel. The hub is first and foremost a tool for the countries of the Group and
the international donor community to mobilize support as efficient ly and effectively
as possible.

2.

African Peace Facility
39. The African Peace Facility is a mechanism of the European Union through
which international voluntary contributions may be channelled to the Joint Force.
Through it, the Union has been involved in efforts to make the Joint Force operational
from its inception, initially with a contribution of €50 million for the provision of
services, infrastructure and equipment. At the Brussels conference, the Union
increased its contribution to €100 million and broadened coverage to include funding
for MINUSMA assistance to the Joint Force (€10 million), efforts by OHCHR to
implement the compliance framework (€10 million) and the Group ’s governance
structure (€5 million).

3.

International high-level donor conference for the Sahel
40. At the Brussels conference, member States of the European Union and other
countries pledged €88 million in support of the Joint Force, bringing all pledges
received to date to a total of €414 million. The G-5 Sahel had estimated the total cost
for the start-up and first year of operations of the Joint Force at €423 million. Some
pledges have not been earmarked, and the disbursement of most pledges is still
pending.

4.

Operational and logistical support
41. In January and February, negotiations took place in Niamey, Bamako and
Nouakchott to conclude a tripartite agreement defining the scope and modalities for
reimbursing MINUSMA for its support for the Joint Force, pursuant to resolution
2391 (2017). The support for the Joint Force by the Mission under the technical
agreement of 23 February is to be provided within a broader political framework of
efforts aimed at supporting the peace process in Mali and stab ilization efforts
throughout the Sahel. The support is directed at the defence and security forces of the
States members of G-5 Sahel participating in operations of the Joint Force on Malian
territory and requires the application of the human rights due di ligence policy.
42. MINUSMA support is provided subject to the full reimbursement of the United
Nations through a financing mechanism coordinated by the European Union. The
financial agreement between the Union and United Nations, a Pillar Assessed Grant
or Delegation Agreement, provides for the payment of €10 million through the
African Peace Facility and constitutes the financial framework in which the
modalities for reimbursement are set forth. On the basis of an initial needs assessment
carried out by the Mission and the Joint Force, the cost of the support is estimated at

18-06796

9/16

S/2018/432

approximately $44 million over two years. In the absence of pledges to cover the full
cost, initial assistance will be limited to life-support consumables and casualty
evacuation. The Mission has made all the necessary arrangements to provide such
support, upon request by the Joint Force, and will begin to do so upon receipt of the
funds contributed by the European Union. The Mission has also conducted initial
assessments on the capabilities and material needed to provide engineering assistance
within its capacity and to ensure that such support can be provided as soon as
resources become available.
43. The Joint Force has identified the enhancement and fortification of six camps in
Mali as a priority (see para. 13). The Mission undertook a reconnaissance visit to the
Tessit site on 12 April and assessment visits to the remaining five sites, including
Sévaré, between 26 and 28 April. Costs are estimated at an average of $600,000 per
hectare for construction according to United Nations standards. In line with initial
assessments and pending the outcome of the reconnaissance visits and availability of
the necessary funding, Mission engineers envisage the construction of three 4 -ha and
two 10-ha camps and rehabilitation of the Joint Force’s main headquarters at a total
cost of $19.5 million.
44. The Mission set up an internal coordination group made up of civilian, police
and military components in December 2017 to plan, assess and review the needs of
the Joint Force. At the Mission’s initiative, a tripartite mechanism with the Joint Force
and the European Union was created in January 2018 as a platform to determine at
regular meetings how to implement the technical and financial agreements .
45. The Mission has prepared a provisional annual support plan with standard
operating procedures for implementing the technical agreement and a logistics expert
has been assigned to Sévaré to coordinate with the Joint Force. The Force is
developing, with assistance from the European Union military mission to contribute
to the training of the Malian Armed Forces and the Barkhane force, an annual
operational plan that will be submitted for approval at the next meeting of the Defence
and Security Committee. The Mission will then align its support plan with Joint
Force’s operational plan. The Mission stands ready to recruit additional civilian
capacity to provide the agreed support when additional resources become available.
46. In line with resolutions 2364 (2017) and 2391 (2017), the Mission and the Joint
Force have each assigned one military liaison officer to the other ’s headquarters to
facilitate information sharing and coordination within their respective mandates. The
Mission has also established a forward command post in Sévaré.
5.

Bilateral support
47. Several countries are providing bilateral assistance to the Joint Force and to the
armed and security forces of the G-5 Sahel countries to complement border control
and counter-terrorism efforts. The Barkhane force assisted with the planning and
conduct of the Joint Force’s first operations. Following its pledge of $60 million in
support of the Group, announced on 30 October 2017, the United States is providing
training and a technical support package to the Joint Force and logistics and
engineering support to the armed forces of Burkina Faso. In addition, the United
States Africa Command will assign two planners to the Joint Force’s Central Sector
headquarters. At the high-level meeting held in La Celle-Saint-Cloud on 13 December
2017, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates pledged $100 million and
$30 million respectively to support the Joint Force. Further pledges were made by
bilateral partners during the Brussels conference but have not yet materialized.

10/16

18-06796

S/2018/432

IV. Support options going forward
48. In my previous report, I presented four options for United Nations support for
the Joint Force, ranging from the establishment of a dedicated United Nations office
to support the provision of aid by MINUSMA, limited to the territory of Mali and
relying on the Mission’s existing logistics and supply chains. Resolution 2391 (2017)
and the technical agreement align with the latter option.
49. In the present report, I will again put forward two options for mor e extensive
and comprehensive United Nations support, using assessed contributions. Enhancing
the role of the United Nations in providing support to the Joint Force through assessed
contributions would allow for more predictable financing and thereby facil itate more
precise, efficient and longer term planning, while also strengthening the strategic and
tactical partnership with the Joint Force.
50. The first option would comprise a support package delivered by a dedicated
United Nations support office, akin to the United Nations Support Office in Somalia
for the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). As in the case of AMISOM,
the payment of salaries and stipends should not be assumed to be a component of the
support package. However, support could be developed to include, exceptionally, the
reimbursement of major contingent-owned equipment and the reimbursement of basic
and essential supplies and services required to allow Joint Force contingents to sustain
themselves. If mandated accordingly, the areas of operations of such a support office
would cover the entire territory of the G-5 Sahel countries and mirror the area of
operations of the Joint Force, once it reaches phase two of its strategic concept of
operations. A support package mandated by the Security Council and a support office
separate from MINUSMA could cover the types of support outlined in paragraph 47
of my previous report, including but not limited to: aeromedical evacuation capacity
and related medical support; life-support services, including rations, fuel and water
adapted to the requirements of the Joint Force; consumables, including field defence
stores, first aid kits, tactical tentage, accommodation materiel and medical supplies;
technical assistance to mitigate the threat posed by improvised explosive devices;
technical support to apply and implement compliance frameworks, including the
human rights due diligence policy; capacity for managing its environmental footprint;
maintenance contracts, geospatial, telecommunications and information technology
and infrastructure support.
51. The second option would entail adjusting the mandate of the Mission to enhance
its support for the Joint Force and providing it with additional resources to establish
more permanent support structures and mechanisms. Such enhanced support could
include the elements already authorized under resolution 2391 (2017): medical and
casualty evacuation; access to life-support consumables (fuel, water and rations); the
use of United Nations engineering plant equipment and material; and uniformed
MINUSMA engineering enabling units to assist in the preparation of Joint Force
operational bases in Mali (para. 13 (b)). It could also be expanded to include other
types of support not covered by other partners. Support would be limited to the
Central and West sectors, whereas bilateral partners should focus their support role
on sector East, where the United Nations has no proximate presence. This option bears
the risk of Mission overstretch, given its comprehensive and multidimensional
mandate. Moreover, since the Joint Force is not yet fully operational and the Mission
has yet to begin implementing its current support measures, no assessment of the
impact of this second option on the Mission and the implementation of its core
mandate is available. The creation of a dedicated support office as outlined above
would allow for a clearer distinction between the Mission’s role in support of the
peace process in Mali and that of assisting the Joint Force.

18-06796

11/16

S/2018/432

V. Broader challenges in the Sahel
52. Making the Joint Force fully operational is one of several parallel initiatives to
tackle the root causes of instability in the Sahel. Given the rapidly deteriorating
security situation in the area, a security-centred approach to countering the spread of
violent extremism, terrorism and transnational organized crime is necessary. It
should, however, form part of a broader, holistic vision. A key challenge in the months
to come will be to ensure that the Joint Force’s operations fall within a comprehensive
strategy for the Sahel that is owned and directed by all the Sahel countries, beyond
those that make up the G-5 Sahel, and backed by bilateral, regional and multilateral
partners.

A.

Priority investment programme
53. The G-5 Sahel is completing a review of its priority investment programme,
integrating new projects and taking into account other regional frameworks.
Responding to a formal request from the Group’s permanent secretariat, the United
Nations Development Programme sent an expert to the secretariat to assist it in
recalibrating the investment programme, thereby ensuring alignment with the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, and to develop a set of tools and strateg ic
documents. The review should lead to an increase in the number of projects to be
presented to donors at a round table meeting scheduled for December. It also
encompasses ongoing projects in the Sahel and new cross-border projects proposed
by Chad and the Niger.

B.

United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel
54. The United Nations is working to recalibrate its integrated strategy for the Sahel,
which will be implemented in partnership with the 10 countries identified under the
strategy, including those of the G-5 Sahel, and aligned with their national and regional
priorities. A support plan for the Sahel is also being developed to trigger investment
and mobilize further resources in the region. More detailed information will be
provided in June in my report on the activities of UNOWAS.
55. On 21 March, I appointed Ibrahim Thiaw as my Special Adviser for the Sahel,
who will support my Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel and Head
of UNOWAS in recalibrating the strategy and developing the support plan for the
Sahel. Mr. Thiaw’s national, regional and international experience will lend strength
to efforts to serve millions of people in one of the world ’s most complex areas and
contribute to the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development there.
56. On 15 March, my Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel attended
the sixth meeting of the Ministerial Coordination Platform for the Sahel in
N’Djamena, which was organized with the support of UNOWAS and the African
Union Mission for Mali and the Sahel. The need for a holistic approach to challenges
in the region, combining security concerns with development priorities, was
emphasized at the meeting. The High Representative of the Mission, Pierre Buyoya,
stressed the need to maintain the Platform as a unique forum for discussions involving
all stakeholders. The Platform is the highest-level regionally owned mechanism for
enhancing consistency between the multilayered regional strategies for the Sahel and
national and local strategies.

12/16

18-06796

S/2018/432

C.

Regional, subregional and national initiatives
57. On 28 March, the Deputy Secretary-General attended the Strategic Consultative
Meeting on the Sahel in Nouakchott, organized by the African Union. The meeting
provided an opportunity to discuss security and development efforts driven by the
countries, people and institutions of the subregion and to ensure alignment with
similar efforts by the African Union, the European Union, the United Nations and
other international partners. The Deputy Secretary-General underlined the need to
increase the investment of the United Nations in the Sahel, which had been less than
optimal in comparison with its investment in other areas facing similar levels of
fragility and instability. That investment should be directed at priority areas identified
in the process of recalibrating the strategy for the Sahel: economic growth;
governance and the rule of law; youth, women and girls; and climate change. It should
also be used to expand livelihood options and boost access to basic goods and
services. She emphasized that the United Nations should work hand-in-hand with the
African Union in addressing challenges in the Sahel, and that their pursuit of common
aims would be facilitated by frameworks on peace and security and development
signed by them recently.
58. The flow of illicit drugs and firearms and the movement of terrorists in the Sahel
have flourished along traditional trade and migration routes, adversely affecting
security, good governance and development. In that context, UNODC plans to help
Governments in the Sahel to improve the accessibility, efficiency and accountability
of their criminal justice systems by providing legislative, criminal justice and law
enforcement advisory services and technical assistance and promoting regional and
international cooperation. With the assistance of UNODC, the authorities in Mali
have seized l.7 tons of drugs since 2017. Inter-service joint airport interdiction task
forces have been set up and trained in Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger. As a result,
a total of 35 kg of drugs was seized at international airports in the Sahel and more
than $1 million in foreign currencies was confiscated in 2017.
59. A great number of firearms are in circulation in West and Central Africa, as a
result of the numerous conflicts in the region. UNODC works wi th national
authorities to address the issue in various ways: assisting with the harmonization of
their legislation with the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking
in Firearms, Their Parts and Components and Ammunition, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime; providing support for
efforts to mark, collect and destroy firearms; improving security and effective record keeping with regard to firearms; training criminal justice personnel; and bui lding
investigative and prosecutorial capacity to deal with trafficking in firearms. UNODC
has provided the authorities in Burkina Faso and Mali with registration software for
marking equipment for use with State-owned firearms, resulting in the marking of
more than 13,500 firearms in those countries since 2015.
60. UNODC supports the strengthening of legislative and policy frameworks to
build the capacity of the authorities in G-5 Sahel countries to investigate cases of
trafficking in persons and the smuggling of migrants, to identify and protect the
victims and to improve data collection on the nature and scale of the phenomenon,
and works to enhance cooperation at the national, regional and international levels.
With UNODC technical assistance, police academy instructors in Burkina Faso, Mali
and the Niger have approved training manuals on combating trafficking in persons
and the smuggling of migrants.
61. Reform of the security sector is under way in several countries of the Group.
Not all of the Group’s member States have units for combating transnational
organized crime. In Burkina Faso, a special counter-terrorism service is being

18-06796

13/16

S/2018/432

established. The senior security sector reform adviser deployed there by the United
Nations and financed by the Peacebuilding Fund supported a needs assessment of the
sector, promoted synergies between the defence and security forces and advocated the
streamlining of rule of law and democratic governance procedures. On 24 October
2017, my Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel attended the opening
of a three-day national security forum in Ouagadougou, organized with the support
of UNOWAS and the United Nations country team, during which the key elements of
a new national security policy were identified. The forum was preceded by regional
consultations to ensure an inclusive and participatory process.
62. In addition to the limited capacity of the security sector in the countries of the
Group, the many overlapping agreements in the region on police and judicial
cooperation put in place by the Economic Community of West African States, the
Economic Community of Central African States and the Group itself raise the
question of which framework should form the legal basis for cross -border operations
by the Joint Force.
63. The Peacebuilding Fund is implementing a cross-border project in the LiptakoGourma area to complement operations by the security forces there. The project, with
$3 million in funding, is aimed at preventing and countering violent extremism,
including through socioeconomic activities for young people and women at risk,
support for local conflict prevention and resolution mechanisms, with a focus on
farming conflicts, and the promotion of dialogue between the civilian population and
the defence and security forces.
64. In Mali, MINUSMA and the United Nations country team are working to
strengthen the rule of law by supporting the restoration and expansion of State
authority throughout the country, including through the redeployment and activation
of justice institutions. Such programmes contribute to creating mutually reinforcing
environments for the Joint Force and MINUSMA, by strengthening the nexus between
peace, development and security initiatives. The Mission’s stabilization mandate
specifically provides an opportunity for creating space to address the root causes of
instability in the region, while security operations focus on the immediate
manifestations of that instability: violent extremism, terrorism and transnational
organized crime.

VI. Observations
65. I applaud the G-5 Sahel countries for their steadfast determination to make their
vision succeed. I commend them for their continued efforts to mobilize and deploy
their troops and for the conduct of the Joint Force’s first two operations. I extend my
gratitude to the international community, which has rallied together behind this
important initiative and made such generous contributions to the Joint Force. Now,
however, support must materialize in a more concrete and tangible manner.
66. In just one year, since the Peace and Security Council of the African Union
authorized the deployment of the Joint Force, considerable progress has been made
in mobilizing resources and support for it. This, however, has yet to translate into
progress in making it fully operational. Significant challenges and obstacles remain.
The security situation in the Sahel continues to deteriorate. The heinous terrorist
attacks in Ouagadougou and, most recently, in Timbuktu and the continued assaults
on local armed and security forces demonstrate that terrorist groups are attempting to
gain influence and expand their presence. State authorities are increasingly absent in
northern and central Mali and northern Burkina Faso. The international community
must take timely action to reverse those trends.

14/16

18-06796

S/2018/432

67. Against that backdrop, the Joint Force is not being brought to fully operational
capability at the required speed. I urge the G-5 Sahel countries to deploy their
remaining troops as quickly as possible and to resolve command and control issues.
Delays in the transfer of authority over their battalions to the Joint Force Commander
are also slowing down the process. The States members of the Group must initiate the
transfer of authority as a matter of urgency. Otherwise, operati ons will continue to be
conducted on an ad hoc basis, and longer-term planning, including with regard to the
end state of the Joint Force, will be difficult, if not impossible. I further call upon the
Group to clarify and finalize the strategic concept of operations and the criteria and
timelines for achieving the Joint Force’s full operational capability. At the same time,
I acknowledge that the Joint Force cannot be the sole response to the security
challenges in the Sahel. I extend my gratitude to the tr oops serving in the Barkhane
force and the men and women of MINUSMA, whose presence remains critical.
68. Coordination between the Joint Force, the Barkhane force, MINUSMA and
liaison mechanisms needs to be boosted to ensure that each mission contributes
effectively to creating an enabling environment for all. I welcome the deployment of
liaison officers and the establishment of the coordination mechanisms, pursuant to
resolution 2391 (2017) and the technical agreement. I urge States members of the
Group and the Joint Force to be as forthcoming as possible about their needs for
assistance and updates regarding deployment timelines.
69. Lasting peace and stability in the Sahel can be achieved only if underlying
political, financial and governance deficiencies are addressed, State presence is
restored and expanded across the region and the entire population, especially
vulnerable communities and young people, are able to benefit from basic socia l
services and employment opportunities.
70. The Joint Force therefore needs to be firmly embedded within a broader political
and institutional framework that can guide its operations and ensure that it constitutes
just one of many elements of a regional strategy. While I am encouraged by steps
taken in recent weeks to strengthen the Group’s permanent secretariat, reinforce links
between the African Union and the Group and ensure that the Joint Force is an integral
part of the African Union Peace and Security Architecture, I strongly urge the
countries of the Group to accelerate the establishment of a support group (see
para. 37).
71. I welcome the fruitful collaboration between the States members of the Group,
the European Union and the African Union, which resulted in the signature of the
technical agreement. The European Union has played a critical role in mobilizing
donor support and in managing financial contributions to the Joint Force, including
for the establishment of the human rights compliance fr amework, through its
coordination hub. I also express gratitude to my Special Representative for Mali,
Annadif Mahamat Saleh, and all MINUSMA colleagues, who have spared no effort
to ensure that the Mission stands ready to provide support to the Joint Forc e,
whenever it is requested, within the confines of resolution 2391 (2017) and the
technical agreement. However, the Mission can effectively provide support,
especially life-support and medical evacuations, only once the Joint Force resumes
operations.
72. I am deeply concerned about the lack of funding available to the Mission for the
provision of engineering support to better fortify the camps of the Joint Force. That
funding shortage could further delay progress in bringing the Joint Force to its full
operational capability. I therefore call upon donors and partners to urgently mobilize
the remaining resources needed to provide this support effectively.
73. The Mission’s support is critical. It will, however, be limited to the territory of
Mali. I therefore urge international donors and partners to prioritize support for
18-06796

15/16

S/2018/432

Sectors East and West, where the lack of infrastructure and resources is a serious
impediment to making the Joint Force fully operationa l. I also call upon donors to
disburse the amounts pledged at the Brussels conference and earlier. Announcements
must now be translated into action.
74. I remain convinced that United Nations support for the Joint Force through
assessed contributions is the best means of ensuring sustainable and predictable long term financing and support measures for the Joint Force. The current arrangements
are neither sustainable nor commensurate with the challenges we face in the Sahel.
Once again, I urge the members of the Security Council to be ambitious and provide
the Joint Force with the strong mandate that would bestow upon it the political
legitimacy it deserves and provide G-5 Sahel and the United Nations with the
resources required to accelerate and finalize the process of making the Joint Force
fully operational.
75. Until then, I urge the G-5 Sahel countries and the European Union to intensify
their collaboration and joint needs mapping to ensure a maximum of transparency and
to avoid overlap and the duplication of efforts in the mobilization of additional
resources. I commend the Group for creating its own trust fund for the Joint Force,
which could constitute a crucial instrument for mobilizing additional resources and
donor support, including for lethal equip ment. The United Nations stands ready to
assist with the establishment of the trust fund. I would like to emphasize, however,
the need to work closely with the European Union coordination hub and strongly
recommend moving the hub to Nouakchott so that both organizations might intensify
their collaboration and joint resource mobilization efforts. I also encourage the
countries of the Group to assume full ownership of those efforts, including for their
own trust fund, and to work more closely in that regard with international donors and
partners, including the African Union and European Union. Last but not least, I urge
international donors and partners to increase their support for the Group ’s permanent
secretariat.
76. The upcoming elections in Mali, if prepared and carried out well, will be an
opportunity to foster political dialogue, strengthen democratic institutions and lay the
foundations for an inclusive Malian nation-State in which the concerns of minorities
and vulnerable groups are adequately addressed. That would send a strong political
message and serve as a concrete contribution to the prevention of the spread of violent
extremism in the region. I call upon all signatories to the peace agreement in Mali to
spare no effort in working together to facilitate the holding of peaceful, fair and
transparent presidential elections. Beyond the elections, progress in the peace process
remains crucial and will determine the success of any regional stabilization efforts. I
urge the signatory parties to accelerate the implementation of key provisions of the
peace agreement prior to the presidential elections, to demonstrate their commitment
to the peace process and, more importantly, to deliver tangible peace dividends to the
long-suffering population. I recall that, pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017), any
spoilers of the peace process may be subject to sanctions.

16/16

18-06796
