S/2006/383

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 June 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 13 June 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached letter, dated 11 June 2006 (see
annex), from the Government of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, signed by
the President, the President of the National Parliament and the Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste. In the letter, the Timorese leaders have requested that I propose to the
Security Council “to establish immediately a United Nations police force in TimorLeste to maintain law and order in Dili and other parts of the country as necessary
and re-establish confidence amongst the people, until the PNTL [Timorese police]
has undergone reorganization and restructuring so that it can act as an independent
and professional law enforcement agency”. In view of the forthcoming presidential
and parliamentary elections in 2007, the letter recommends that the proposed United
Nations police force should remain in Timor-Leste for a minimum of one year and
undertake the tasks specified therein.
With regard to the nature of a future United Nations presence in Timor-Leste
to succeed the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL), the letter expresses
the view that “a robust United Nations police, military and civilian mission is
indispensable in order to assist the Timorese people to consolidate [their] hard won
peace and freedom”.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-38541 (E) 130606

*0638541*

S/2006/383

Annex
Letter dated 11 June 2006 from the President, the President of
the National Parliament and the Prime Minister of Timor-Leste
addressed to the Secretary-General
On behalf of the people of Timor-Leste and the State Institutions we represent,
we wish to take this opportunity to extend our appreciation to you and the Members
of the Security Council for having endorsed the request of the Timorese leaders
outlined in our letter of 24 May 2006, requesting multinational security forces to be
sent to Timor-Leste to restore peace and stability in the country. Security forces of
Australia, Malaysia and New Zealand have since successfully stabilized the
situation in Dili and surrounding areas. Portugal is also contributing to the security
situation with the deployment of its special elite Police Force, the GNR.
• United Nations Police Force for Timor-Leste
The Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) has not been able to discharge its
operational responsibilities as a law enforcement agency, and basically disintegrated
on 28 April 2006. We wish to request that you kindly propose to the Security
Council to establish immediately a United Nations police force in Timor-Leste, to
maintain law and order in Dili and other parts of the country as necessary and reestablish confidence among the people, until the PNTL has undergone
reorganization and restructuring so that it can act as an independent and professional
law enforcement agency. In view of the forthcoming presidential and parliamentary
elections in 2007, such a United Nations police force should remain in Timor-Leste
for a minimum of one year, and be comprised of a strength of approximately 870
officers in five units, to undertake the following tasks:
• Specialized and rapid reaction force through formed police units to maintain
law and order in Dili and other key regions as necessary;
• Community and general policing in Dili with limited presence in the districts
(150-250 officers: the initial number of officers required will be 150 and
increase to 250 during the first six months in 2007 when electoral campaign
activities will take place);
• Institutional and capacity-building advisory team for the reorganization of the
PNTL, including vetting of PNTL officers, policy planning and legislative
drafting etc.;
• Investigation of serious incidents along with forensic support to the districts;
• Management and support functions will be carried out at United Nations
Police Force/PNTL headquarters in Dili.
In regard to the current United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL)
mandate we hold the view that a further one month extension as of 20 June 2006 is
necessary. We remain ready to provide our input into the discussion concerning the
nature and need of a robust United Nations presence in Timor-Leste, to replace
UNOTIL after the expiration of the one-month extension period.
The rapid response of the Australian, Malaysian and New Zealand defence
forces, has succeeded in quelling the violence and has now stabilized the situation.

2

S/2006/383

Once the emergency phase has passed it will be necessary to review the
current force arrangements. As to the size, composition, mandate and rules of
engagement and command we are open to the expert advice of the Office of the
Secretary-General, the deploying forces and other friends. In any case we believe
that a robust United Nations police, military and civilian mission is indispensable in
order to assist the people of Timor-Leste to consolidate our hard won peace and
freedom.
(Signed) Kay Rala Xanana Gusmao
President of the Republic
(Signed) Francisco Guterres “L’Olo”
President of the National Parliament
(Signed) Mari Bim Amude Alkatiri
Prime Minister

3
