S/2002/246

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 March 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 6 March 2002 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
You will recall that in my letter to you of 26 December 2001 I had informed
members of the Security Council of my decision to authorize the commencement of
the operation of the Special Court for Sierra Leone beginning with the dispatch of a
planning mission.
In that letter I had also indicated that upon the return of the planning mission I
would report to members of the Council on its recommendations on the organization
of the start-up phase and all aspects of the establishment and operation of the
Special Court. Please find attached in the annex to the present letter the report of the
Planning Mission on the Establishment of the Special Court for Sierra Leone, which
took place from 7 to 19 January 2002.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

02-27442 (E)

130302

*0227442*

S/2002/246

Annex
Report of the Planning Mission on the Establishment of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone
I. Introduction
1.
In a letter addressed to the President of the
Security Council on 26 December 2001, you informed
the Council of your decision to authorize the
commencement of the operation of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone (Special Court) beginning with the
dispatch of a planning mission to Sierra Leone.
2.
The terms of reference of the Planning Mission
approved by you were to discuss with the Government
of Sierra Leone the practical arrangements for the
establishment and operation of the Special Court,
including, inter alia, the question of premises, the
provision of local personnel and services, and the
launching of the investigative and prosecutorial
processes. The specific outcomes of the mission that
were envisaged included the signing of the Agreement
with the Government of Sierra Leone, laying the
framework for the arrival of the members of the
administrative and prosecutorial staff of the Special
Court, and a report containing detailed recommendations
on the organization of the start-up of the Special Court.
3.
The Planning Mission, led by Ralph Zacklin,
Assistant Secretary-General for Legal Affairs, visited
Sierra Leone from 7 to 19 January 2002. The mission
was composed of members of the Office of Legal
Affairs, a Security Coordinator, a building management
expert, an Interim Prosecutor and two investigators, an
Interim Registrar, an administrative expert, a
representative of the United Nations Office for Project
Services (UNOPS) in the region and representatives of
Member States who are members of the Management
Committee of the Special Court (see paras. 45-47
below). The complete list of members of the Planning
Mission is contained in appendix I to the present
report. Hans Corell, Under-Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs, the Legal Counsel, joined the mission on 13
January 2002. The Agreement between the United
Nations and the Government of Sierra Leone on the
Establishment of a Special Court for Sierra Leone (see
appendix II) was signed on 16 January 2002 by Hans
Corell and the Attorney General and Minister of Justice
of Sierra Leone, Solomon E. Berewa, in the presence of
the President of Sierra Leone, Ahmad Tejan Kabbah.

2

4.
The Planning Mission interfaced with a
Government of Sierra Leone task force headed by
Solomon E. Berewa and carried out its activities at
both the plenary and the working group level.
5.
At the plenary level, the Planning Mission met
several times with the government task force. The
mission visited the High Court and a number of
proposed locations for the permanent premises of the
Special Court and detention facilities. Meetings were
also held with the police and prison authorities,
members of the Bar Association and representatives of
civil society and human rights non-governmental
organizations. The mission also travelled to the
provinces and the regional capitals of Bo and Kenema
where it met with the Paramount Chiefs, local
government officials and NGOs. In Koidu, the capital
of Kono District, it met with representatives of the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF), the Civil Defence
Forces (CDF) and the Movement of Concerned Kono
Youth (MOCKY). The mission also met with
Traditional Leaders, and on the margins of a tripartite
meeting between the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL), RUF and the Government of
Sierra Leone, it met with the RUF political leadership
to answer questions pertaining to all aspects of the
Special Court.
6.
At the working group level, the Planning Mission
assessed the locally available resources, re-assessed the
needs of the Special Court and developed an
operational plan for the different organs of the Court.
The Interim Prosecutor and two investigators met with
members of the police and security forces, the Director
of Public Prosecutions, the Director of Prisons, the
Chief Justice and members of the Bar Association,
human rights organizations and the UNAMSIL Human
Rights Section to assess the availability of any
information or evidentiary material in their possession.
The Interim Registrar and Administrative Officers met
with the High Court Registrar and court management
officers to review the Registrar’s system in place and
assess the availability of local staffing resources and
the possibility of sharing existing infrastructures. The
Registry team met with the UNAMSIL Administration
to assess its capacity to assist in the initial stage of the

S/2002/246

establishment and operation of the Special Court. The
building management expert, along with the Registrar,
the Administrative Officers and the Security Coordinator,
met with representatives of the Ministry of Lands and
the Ministry of Works to discuss the logistical aspects
of the temporary and permanent premises of the
Special Court and the detention facilities as well as
security requirements for the premises, archives,
investigations and the staff of the Court.
7.
As part of the Secretary-General’s statutory
responsibilities under the Agreement, the Office of
Legal Affairs engaged in consultations with the
Attorney General of Sierra Leone on the candidates for
judges, the Prosecutor and the Deputy Prosecutor, and
discussed the practical implementation of the
Agreement in the legal system of Sierra Leone. The
Office of Legal Affairs and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
convened the second session of the Group of Experts
on the Relationship between the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission and the Special Court and
recommended a general framework of principles which
might govern the relationship between the two
institutions.
8.
The present report contains, by way of conclusions,
the recommendations of the Planning Mission on the
organization of the start-up phase and all aspects of the
establishment and operation of the Special Court.

II. General observations
9.
Since 14 August 2000, when the Security Council
first requested the Secretary-General to negotiate an
agreement with the Government of Sierra Leone to
create an independent Special Court and since the first
exploratory visit by a United Nations team in
September 2000 (S/2000/915), Sierra Leone has
undergone a period of difficult post-conflict
peacekeeping and peace-building in which UNAMSIL
has played a significant role. During the period of the
Planning Mission’s visit, the successful conclusion of
the disarmament programme was celebrated with a
symbolic arms destruction ceremony on 17 January
2002, an official declaration ending the war was signed
by the Government, RUF and CDF on 18 January
2002, and preparations for national elections to be held
on 14 May 2002 commenced. It is important to
recognize that the establishment and operation of the
Special Court is not taking place as an isolated event,

but rather as part of a complex and multifaceted peace
process.
10. In its various formal and informal meetings with
government representatives, UNAMSIL staff and
military personnel, representatives of civil society and
individuals, members of the Planning Mission were
able to appreciate the seriousness of the debate on the
timing of the establishment of the Special Court; the
high level of expectations for the early establishment of
the Court combined with fears, concerns and
misconceptions in some quarters, as to its role and
jurisdictional scope; the availability of local resources;
the willingness on the part of the Government to assist,
despite its limited ability to do so; and the paramount
role that UNAMSIL can play in the initial and
subsequent stages of the operation of the Special Court.
11. Along with the high level of expectations among
the people of Sierra Leone, concerns were expressed by
all sectors of society that the judicial process should be
fair, impartial and comprehensive in its temporal and
territorial reach, and that the Special Court be, and
should be seen to be, independent of both the
Government and the United Nations. Since last year,
UNAMSIL has been conducting a wide campaign of
sensitization both on the Special Court and on the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission in collaboration
with local and international NGOs. Notwithstanding
this laudable effort, concerns and misconceptions
persist which must, as a matter of priority, be allayed.
It is proposed, therefore, that a dynamic strategy of
dissemination of information and education should be
developed by the Special Court for the general public.
This outreach campaign would explain the nature of the
Special Court, its territorial, temporal and personal
scope of jurisdiction, and the relationship between the
Special Court and the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission. The campaign should be multifaceted and
adapted to the needs of specific groups, such as
victims, ex-combatants and children.
12. In assessing the availability of local resources,
the Planning Mission found that in almost all areas of
the operation of the Special Court the resources at the
national level were either non-existent or extremely
scarce. However, an important exception to the scarcity
of local resources is the availability of human
resources, in particular in the legal profession. Having
met with many of the Sierra Leonean members of the
legal profession, the Planning Mission is convinced
that, while not experienced in the relevant fields of

3

S/2002/246

international criminal law, with the necessary training,
they could render an important contribution to the work
and success of the Special Court.
13. Given the scarcity of local resources, the ability
to rely on the existing administration and infrastructure
of UNAMSIL in the initial stage of the operation of the
Special Court, indeed for the duration of their
simultaneous operations, would ensure a quick and
cost-effective start-up of its operation. The sharing of
resources is not only justified as a matter of United
Nations policy, for both operations represent parts of
the overall United Nations involvement in Sierra
Leone, but is also administratively sound and
financially cost-effective. While noting that the
different financial bases of the two United Nations
operations make the sharing of administrative
resources more complicated than would have otherwise
been the case had both operations been established as
subsidiary organs of the United Nations, the difficulties
are not insurmountable.
14. In developing a road map for the establishment
and operation of the Special Court, the Planning
Mission revisited the earlier recommendations on the
premises, assessed the existing local resources in the
different areas of operation of the Special Court, reassessed the needs of the Office of the Prosecutor and
the Registry in terms of funds, equipment and
personnel, developed an organizational plan for both
organs and a plan of operation with a tentative
timetable. The following sections describe the selection
of the premises, the structure, functions and staffing of
the Office of the Prosecutor and the Registry, the role
of the Management Committee and the relationship
between the Special Court and the Truth and
Reconciliation
Commission.
A
comprehensive
operational plan for the start-up phase of the operation
of the Special Court concludes the recommendations of
the Planning Mission.

III. Premises
15. The
Secretary-General’s
report
on
the
establishment of a Special Court for Sierra Leone
(S/2000/915) had concluded, on the basis of the
assessment made by the United Nations team in
September 2000, that none of the facilities and
buildings proposed by the Government of Sierra Leone
to accommodate the Special Court and its detention
facilities were suitable, for reasons of either cost or

4

security. It was the recommendation of the United
Nations team that the option of prefabricated, selfcontained structures erected on government land should
be adopted. That option, it was argued, would be costeffective and rapid and would have the additional
advantages of an easy expansion paced with the growth
of the Special Court and a salvage value at the
completion of its activities. It was also the
recommendation of the United Nations team that the
Central Prison at Pademba Road could not be utilized
due to the lack of space and security measures, but that
the New England Prison could be utilized if it were
renovated and secured. Those recommendations were
in part reconsidered by the Planning Mission in the
light of changing circumstances.
16. In assessing the availability and suitability of the
locations offered by the Government for the premises
of the Special Court, the Planning Mission examined
both permanent and temporary premises which could
be made readily available pending the completion of
the permanent site. It determined the requirements of
the permanent premises to include, as a minimum, the
following:

• One courtroom and associated support space
such as a public gallery, witness waiting rooms,
holding cells for the accused and rooms for
interpreters and audio-visual technicians, as well
as additional space to accommodate a second
Trial Chamber and an Appeals Chamber.
• Office and other support space such as
ablutions, storage, meeting rooms, LAN/PABX
(telephone system) rooms, evidence vaults and
law library.

A. Permanent premises
17. The building management expert, together with
his government interlocutors, the directors of Public
Works, Lands and Prisons, visited a number of
government-owned properties. These included the City
Hall, the United Nations Building, the Old Election
Office and the Brookfields Hotel. All of these
structures, however, are in need of substantial repair,
some are occupied and others are located in the centre
of the Freetown business district and are thus
considered too risky for holding high-profile trials.
Judging these structures to be unsuitable to
accommodate the Special Court, the Planning Mission

S/2002/246

requested the Government of Sierra Leone to make
available the land adjacent to the New England Prison
for the permanent premises of the Special Court. The
proximity of the Court to the Detention Facility will
have the advantage of reducing the risk of exposing the
detainees travelling on the public highway to and from
the Court. The cost of construction for the permanent
premises on the New England site is estimated at
US$ 4,435,250.00.
18. In reconsidering the previous recommendation for
prefabricated structures, the Planning Mission took
account of the Government’s request that the Court’s
building should be a permanent structure, and the
intention expressed by a number of donor countries
that the Court building and other facilities should be
turned over to the Government of Sierra Leone at the
end of the operation of the Special Court. With no
apparent advantage of a salvage value, therefore, the
Planning Mission recommended that the courthouse
should be constructed as a permanent building and the
office facilities accommodated in a prefabricated
structure.
19. The advantages of prefabricated structures lie in
the speed at which they can be obtained and erected,
and in their flexibility of use. As the Special Court
evolves through a rapid growth phase, a plateau phase
and a downsizing phase, its space needs will change.
Unlike a permanent structure, therefore, which imposes
severe limitations on the re-allocation of space,
particularly between the organs of the Registry, the
Chambers and the Office of the Prosecutor,
prefabricated modular construction is flexible and
office units can be relatively easily added on or moved
to where they are most needed.
20. The planning for the construction process should
take into account the rainy season, which begins at the
end of May and ends sometime in October.
Accordingly, concrete elements of the construction,
such as the perimeter wall, will have to be substantially
completed by then. If the office complex were not to be
fully completed beforehand, a contingency plan would
have to be developed. It is estimated that if construction
of the courthouse begins at the end of the wet season, it
will in all likelihood not be completed before April 2003.

B. Temporary premises
21. With the prospects of completing the permanent
premises for the Special Court by April 2003 at the
earliest, the need for temporary premises is acute. In
order to accommodate the start-up teams of the Office
of the Prosecutor and the Registry, the Government has
offered a building in the compound of the Bank of
Sierra Leone complex free of rent, and with few
security-related adjustments, ready to use. In addition,
the Registrar of the Freetown High Court has offered
the use of one of the courtrooms and a small room for
closed hearings, should hearings be conducted before
April 2003. In such an eventuality, a contingency plan
for special security arrangements will have to be put in
place.

C. Detention facilities
22. The Planning Mission visited two possible sites
for detention facilities: the New England Prison,
recommended by the United Nations team following its
September 2000 visit, and the demolished Masanki
Maximum Security Prison. The latter is a site 40
kilometres south-east of Freetown and is a minimum of
1 hour and 30 minutes away by car. It was the view of
the Planning Mission that, as the Court facilities will
be located in Freetown, it would not be advisable to
have the detention facilities located at a great distance,
as the risk exposure in transporting the accused is too
great, and the additional costs for armoured vehicles
and security forces, too high.
23. The Planning Mission was thus able to confirm
the previous finding of the United Nations team that, if
renovated to provide for the minimum requirements for
detention facilities, the New England Prison could be
utilized for the Detention Facility of the Special Court.
The renovation of the existing structure, however, is
not expected to be completed before the end of
September 2002.

D. The role of the United Nations Office
for Project Services in the procurement
of design and construction services
24. Given its experience and expertise in the region,
the Planning Mission recommends that the services of
UNOPS be retained for the purpose of procuring design

5

S/2002/246

and construction materials and services on behalf of the
Special Court and under its authority.

material places a significant burden on the
investigative functions of the Office of the Prosecutor.

E. Residential accommodation for
international staff

B. Tentative prosecutorial strategy

25. The Planning Mission has enquired into the
availability of suitable accommodation for the
international staff of the Special Court in the more
secure area of the western part of the city. The cost
varies between $1,000.00 and $1,800.00 per month for
rent, with the average being $1,500.00. Availability at
this time is poor and is likely to become worse in the
period leading up to the elections, but it is anticipated
to improve thereafter.

IV. The Office of the Prosecutor
A. Availability of evidentiary material
26. In regard to available evidentiary material on the
crimes falling within the jurisdiction of the Special
Court, the Interim Prosecutor found that it was of
limited utility and that substantial investigations would
be required in order to bring indictments. The only
reliable material available is held by the Sierra
Leonean police. Such material, however, pertains
exclusively to the period following the 1999 Lomé
Agreement, partly because certain assumptions had
been made in implementation of the amnesty provision
of that Agreement, and partly because of the
decimation of the police force and the destruction of
the headquarters of the Criminal Investigation
Department by rebel forces in 1999. With few
exceptions, therefore, there is virtually no evidentiary
material for the bulk of the crimes committed against
the people of Sierra Leone in the decade-long conflict.
Information of a general nature on crimes committed in
Sierra Leone, however, has been collated by the
UNAMSIL Human Rights Section, the civilian police
and military intelligence, as well as by nongovernmental organizations, Traditional Leaders and
churches. While not in a form appropriate for use in
court, such material may be valuable as a lead for
further investigations.
27. In the assessment of the Interim Prosecutor,
therefore, the paucity of detailed, reliable evidentiary

6

28. Developing a prosecutorial strategy is in essence
the attribution of concrete content to the notion of
“those who bear the greatest responsibility” in terms of
the numbers and the identity of potential indictees.
Based on the concept laid down in the SecretaryGeneral’s earlier report as further developed in
subsequent discussions with the members of the
Security Council and the Government of Sierra Leone,
the personal jurisdiction of the Special Court includes
primarily those in political and military leadership
positions. It would not exclude, however, others in
command authority singled out by the gravity of the
crime committed, its massive scale or heinous nature.
Two other categories of persons, never before
prosecuted by an international jurisdiction, also fall
within the jurisdiction of the Special Court, namely,
peacekeepers and juveniles. However, in both these
categories substantial conditions must be fulfilled prior
to a possible prosecution by the Special Court. In the
case of peacekeepers, the State of nationality must be
either unable or unwilling to prosecute, while in the
case of juveniles the Prosecutor must show that all
alternative options to prosecution, including the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission, have been explored,
exhausted and rejected for justifiable reasons.
29. The limited duration of the Special Court, its
reduced budget and voluntary financing dictate the
need for an exceptionally clear and well-defined
prosecutorial strategy. It should, nonetheless, be
inclusive of persons of all political affiliations and
encompass the crimes committed throughout the
country during the relevant period. In developing a
prosecutorial strategy, the Prosecutor, bearing in mind
the limitations of the evidentiary material, will as a
first step be required to “map the conflict”, reconstruct
the history of the hostilities and study the
organizational and command structure of the different
factions and the means of their financial support. On
the basis of this study, an investigation launched into
the crimes committed would lead the Prosecutor to
“those who bear the greatest responsibility” and enable
him or her to establish a limited but comprehensive list
of indictees on the basis of the parameters indicated.
While the Planning Mission, in fulfilling its terms of

S/2002/246

reference has reached certain conclusions as to the
tentative prosecutorial strategy, it nevertheless
recognizes that the selection for prosecution of those
“who bear the greatest responsibility” necessarily
entails a measure of discretion on the part of the
Prosecutor both as to the identification of individual
indictments and to any priority that may be assigned to
them.

C. Structure and staffing requirements of
the Office of the Prosecutor
30. To ensure the successful implementation of a
prosecutorial strategy in the circumstances of Sierra
Leone, the Planning Mission recommended the
following structure and staffing table for the Office of
the Prosecutor.
31. The Office of the Prosecutor should comprise a
Trial Section and an Investigations Section, each
reporting to the Prosecutor through the Deputy
Prosecutor. The two sections would work closely with
each other, with investigations conducted on the basis
of advice provided by the Trial Section. An Evidence
and Analysis Section, headed by a trial lawyer, should
serve both the Trial Section and the Investigations
Section.
32. With
relatively
small-scale
Trial
and
Investigations sections, both the Prosecutor and the
Deputy Prosecutor will be required to perform court
functions. The need for a Chief of Prosecutions could
be dispensed with, and only two Senior Trial Attorneys
would be necessary. Three Prosecution Teams shall
serve in the Trial Section each with a leader
(Prosecutor, a Deputy Prosecutor or a Senior Trial
Attorney), one Trial Attorney, one Assistant Trial
Attorney or Assistant Legal Adviser, and one Case
Manager. Under the control of a Chief of
Investigations, three Investigation Teams should serve
in the Investigations Section, each of which should
comprise one Team Leader, two Senior Investigators,
six Investigators and two Associate Investigators. Each
Investigation Team should be split further into two
smaller teams of one Senior Investigator, three
Investigators and one Assistant Investigator. The
Evidence and Analysis Section should have a Chief and
an Evidence Custody Officer, supported by General
Service or local staff. This section should be the first to
start in order to take possession of, process and assess
the available material.

V. The Registry
33. The Registry of the Special Court will be
responsible for a broad range of administrative and
judicial services to the Court. The administrative or
non-judicial aspects of the Registry will entail
personnel,
finance,
procurement,
information
technology, transportation, buildings management,
detention facilities, and security and safety. The
judicial services will include court management and
responsibility for witness and victims support.
34. With a view to ascertaining the local availability
of facilities, personnel and services, the Registry
component in the Planning Mission carried out
extensive
discussions
with representatives of
government authorities and the administration of
justice, on the basis of which it concluded that no such
resources could be made available by the Government.
The mission was advised, however, that there was a
pool of candidates available with expertise in legal and
judicial issues who would be interested in opportunities
with the Special Court. Moreover, the mission was
informed that it might be possible to benefit from the
temporary secondment of a number of staff from the
High Court in Freetown while the necessary
recruitment process is undertaken by the Registry.

Possible relationship with UNAMSIL
1. Administration
35. The Registry component of the Planning Mission
held discussions with virtually all facets of the
UNAMSIL administration with a view to determining
if UNAMSIL, given its administrative capacity, could,
in the short and the long run, serve both UNAMSIL
and the Special Court, thereby avoiding a duplication
of similar if not identical functions. It is understood,
however, that the assistance of UNAMSIL in areas of
commonalities would be on a reimbursable basis, and
provided at no or negligible cost to UNAMSIL.
36. During the discussions it was determined that the
key areas where use of existing UNAMSIL
infrastructure could eliminate the need for establishing
separate administrative services for the Special Court
would be in personnel administration, communication,
transport, finance and procurement. As a follow-up to
meetings with the UNAMSIL administration, two
different options were prepared by the Planning

7

S/2002/246

Mission, one to reflect the Special Court with a
completely independent administrative infrastructure,
and another reflecting a reliance on certain UNAMSIL
units, while at the same time providing some support
staff to augment these administrative units in
UNAMSIL. In comparing the two options, the Planning
Mission concluded that even with the additional
support staff provided to UNAMSIL, there would be a
difference of 12 to 15 fewer international staff, and the
cost savings in the administration area alone would be
quite significant. Given, in addition, the fact that the
banking system in Sierra Leone is practically nonexistent, the assistance of UNAMSIL in transferring
and safeguarding the funds provided to the Special
Court would be crucial.
2. Communications
37. In addition to the administrative functions in
UNAMSIL, the Planning Mission took special note of
the communications facilities already established for
UNAMSIL which could be expanded at marginal costs
to provide services to the Special Court. This would
eliminate the need for the Court to duplicate the
expensive installation of communications satellite
equipment. In connection with the above, it should be
noted that since the communications infrastructure in
Sierra Leone does not meet the necessary reliability
requirements of the Special Court, there is no
alternative but to set up independent facilities, or to
join in the use of UNAMSIL facilities.
3. Transportation
38. Discussions with UNAMSIL confirmed that longterm assistance could be provided, if mandated by the
Security Council. Any immediate assistance by the
UNAMSIL Transportation Service would be difficult in
the period leading to the elections; thereafter, however,
maintenance of Special Court vehicles could be carried
out by UNAMSIL on a fee-for-service basis, or by
providing some additional support staff to UNAMSIL.
Moreover, certain other transportation assistance such
as travel throughout the country could be considered,
subject to availability of space on scheduled
UNAMSIL flights. This assistance would be crucial
since much of the investigative work undertaken by the
Office of the Prosecutor would have to be carried out
in the field and the roads in Sierra Leone are
practically impassable, especially after the onset of the
rainy season.

8

39. The conclusion reached following the discussions
with the UNAMSIL administrative units was that
significant economies could be achieved by utilizing
the infrastructure already in existence in UNAMSIL if
the respective UNAMSIL administrative units were
augmented by additional support staff provided by the
Court, and on the understanding that the provision of
assistance to the Special Court would have to be
introduced into the mandate of UNAMSIL.
40. While the interviews with UNAMSIL were
primarily with administrative units, the Planning
Mission was cognizant of the issue of possible medical
support for the officials of the Special Court and for
detainees once they arrived. In that regard, it was noted
that UNAMSIL has a medical support unit up to level
three which would provide psychological comfort to
the staff of the Special Court.
41. While members of the Planning Mission were of
the view that many aspects of the UNAMSIL operation
could support the Special Court on a cost-reimbursable
basis or at marginal additional costs, UNAMSIL
officials pointed out the possibility that the UNAMSIL
mandate might be discontinued prior to the Special
Court having completed its work. The implications of
this point were clearly understood by the Planning
Mission. Nevertheless, it remained the view of the
mission that, since significant economies could be
achieved by maintaining common administrative
processes with UNAMSIL, the UNAMSIL support
option should be considered for as long as it was
available. In the event that UNAMSIL demobilizes
before the completion of the activities of the Special
Court, installed equipment and materials could be
transferred on a cost-recoverable basis to the Special
Court.

VI. Security
42. A Security Office within the Registry will be
responsible for monitoring and advising on local
security conditions, conducting risk assessments,
preparing and maintaining emergency security
contingency plans, liaising with local authorities,
conducting appropriate investigations of security
violations and providing security orientation briefings
and training. It shall also be responsible for the security
guard force, security control centre and associated
security equipment (CCTV/alarms). The Security
Office shall be headed by a Chief Security Officer and

S/2002/246

Deputy Chief Security Officer. Given the confidential
nature of the material processed, a secretary at the
international level would be assigned to the Office.
43. Security to the Special Court shall be provided to
the premises, the judges and in residential areas.
(a) External security. Security outside the
perimeters of the entire Special Court complex shall be
the responsibility of the Government of Sierra Leone.
The Government will pay the salaries and other
entitlements of the Security Officers and the Special
Court will provide the logistical support required. The
number of police officers required will be determined
in consultation with the operational staff of the
Inspector General of the Sierra Leone Police Force.
(b) Internal security. Security within the
perimeter of the Special Court (Chambers, Office of
the Prosecutor and Registry) will be provided by a
locally recruited security force on a 24-hour basis. The
force will provide security control centre operation,
access control, fire safety and internal security. It will
be hired, trained and operated by the Deputy Chief
Security Officer and under international supervisors.
(c) Detention facilities. The Sierra Leone
Prison Service will provide the prison officers required
to operate the Detention Facility and pay their salaries
and other entitlements. The Special Court will provide
an international Corrections Officer and supervisors to
provide for 24-hour operation of the Detention Facility.
It will provide additional training in the operation of
the facility and all special equipment, as may be
required.
(d) Protective detail. The Chief Security
Officer will be responsible for the personal protection
of the judges and, if circumstances dictate, the
Prosecutor and the Registrar as well. Each judge will
be assigned one Security Officer to provide personal
protection during working hours. Three Security
Officers will be assigned to protective detail in the
initial period. With the appointment of additional
judges, the number of Security Officers will be
adjusted accordingly.
(e) Residential security. Currently there are
reimbursable residential security measures approved
and in effect for all internationally recruited staff in
Sierra Leone. Such measures should be provided also
to all internationally recruited staff of the Special
Court, including judges.

44. It should be noted that in the current security
phase in effect, Sierra Leone has been classified as a
non-family duty station. If, however, the security
situation improves to allow a reclassification of Sierra
Leone as a family duty station, a number of additional
administrative elements, such as the availability of
schools, medical facilities and support, suitable
housing and other associated issues, will also have to
be examined before such a reclassification becomes
possible.

VII. The Management Committee
45. In the course of the discussions held between the
Secretariat and Member States regarding the
implementation of the Security Council resolution
requesting that the Secretary-General enter into an
agreement with the Government of Sierra Leone to
establish the Special Court, an informal group of
interested Member States was formed. The need to
ensure the cooperation and assistance of interested
States in the establishment and continued operation of
the Special Court, as well as the necessity of providing
the Court with an oversight mechanism for its nonjudicial functions, in turn gave rise to the creation of a
Management Committee composed largely of major
donors to the Special Court (Canada, Netherlands,
Nigeria, Lesotho, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America). While
not an organ of the Special Court in a formal sense, the
Management Committee is nevertheless recognized in
the Agreement between the United Nations and the
Government of Sierra Leone. According to article 7 of
the Agreement, its functions are as follows:
“It is the understanding of the Parties that
interested States will establish a management
committee to assist the Secretary-General in
obtaining adequate funding, and provide advice
and policy direction on all non-judicial aspects of
the operation of the Court, including questions of
efficiency, and to perform other functions as
agreed by interested States. The management
committee shall consist of important contributors
to the Special Court. The Government of Sierra
Leone and the Secretary-General will also
participate in the management committee.”
The functions of the Management Committee are more
fully elaborated in the terms of reference of the

9

S/2002/246

Management Committee, contained in appendix III to
the present report.
46. Representatives of Canada, the Netherlands,
Lesotho, the United Kingdom and the United States
participated in the Planning Mission in their capacity
as members of the Management Committee. They took
part in all aspects of the work of the Planning Mission,
as well as in the development of the operational plan
for the Special Court contained in this report. The
presence of the State representatives on the Planning
Mission was a physical demonstration to the people of
Sierra Leone of the commitment of the international
community to the Special Court. For the members of
the Management Committee it was an invaluable
opportunity to familiarize themselves with the political
and legal environment in Sierra Leone, as well as the
infrastructure difficulties that the Special Court faces.
The opportunity to observe first hand the laying of the
foundation of the Special Court will assist the
Committee in fulfilling its functions of providing
advice, oversight and policy direction on all
institutional aspects of the operation of the Special
Court.
47. As the operation of the Special Court progresses,
the Management Committee will, pursuant to article 7
of the Agreement, review periodically all non-judicial
operations of the Court and exercise its oversight role
through receipt of regular reports on the operations,
financial status and administration of the Court, as well
as through meetings with the principal officers of the
Court as appropriate. The Management Committee will
report to the Group of Interested States at regular
intervals. Despite its informal character, as the Special
Court evolves it is likely that the Management
Committee itself will play an increasingly important
role in advising the senior management of the Court
with regard to any non-judicial problems that may be
brought to its attention.

VIII. Relationship between the Truth
and the Special Court
48. As the establishment of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone has become imminent, the question of the
relationship between the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission and the Special Court has become urgent.
The Commission, which was established by the Sierra
Leone Truth and Reconciliation Act, 2000, and the

10

Special Court have distinct purposes, and have
different legal bases and mandates. Yet their subject
matter, and personal and temporal jurisdiction
intersect, hence the need to clearly identify the linkages
and potential cleavages between them.
49. The earlier report of the Secretary-General
recognized the need for the conclusion of cooperative
arrangements between the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission and the Special Court but left the
determination of such arrangements to the two
institutions, once they are established. In the period
which has ensued, however, the uncertainty as to the
scope of amnesty still recognized under the national
law of Sierra Leone but which is explicitly excluded by
the Statute of the Special Court, the lack of clarity as to
their modes of simultaneous operation, and concerns on
the part of perpetrators that an appearance before the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission could no longer
immunize them from prosecution, made necessary a
preparatory process designed to elucidate some of these
questions.
50. The relationship between the Special Court and
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission was
discussed in a workshop jointly organized by the
Government of Sierra Leone and UNAMSIL in
Freetown, in November 2000, and subsequently in a
meeting held in May/June 2001 on the protection of
children before the Commission. Participants in those
meetings included representatives of the various United
Nations offices involved in the Special Court, the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission and children (the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children in Armed Conflict, the Office of
Legal Affairs and UNAMSIL), representatives of the
Government of Sierra Leone, civil society — both
national
and
international
non-governmental
organizations — and individual experts.
51. The preparatory process culminated in a twosession meeting of a Group of Experts jointly convened
by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Office of
Legal Affairs in New York in December 2001 and in
Freetown in January 2002, to discuss the relationship
between the Commission and the Special Court. The
purpose of the meeting was to identify areas of
cooperation and potential conflict between the two
institutions and to recommend modalities of

S/2002/246

cooperation and means of avoiding conflict. Another
purpose was to recommend guidelines for the
cooperative arrangements between the Commission and
the Special Court for the consideration of the members
of the Commission and the Prosecutor, once they are
appointed.

on the roles of the two institutions in general, and the
relationship between the Commission and the Special
Court in particular.

(a) The principle of complementarity. The
Special Court and the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission perform complementary roles in achieving
accountability, deterrence, story-telling and national
reconciliation;

55. In the areas of potential conflict, such as
information-sharing or the exercise of competing
powers, the Expert Group made the following
recommendations. When information received in
confidence by the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission is required by the Special Court in a case
of an accused “who bears the greatest responsibility”,
such information should be shared with the Special
Court on the following conditions: (a) the information
or evidentiary material sought can only be obtained
from the Commission, and (b) the evidentiary material
requested is essential for the conviction or acquittal of
the accused. Similarly, if both institutions exercise
their powers to compel the production of the same
document or evidentiary material, the person, entity or
government authority faced with the competing request
should inform both institutions of the fact of the
competing request and seek their agreement as to
which request should take precedence. If the
Prosecutor has convinced the Commission that the
evidentiary material sought is required and essential in
the case of any one accused of bearing the greatest
responsibility, the Special Court shall have priority.

(b) Independent nature of both institutions.
The Special Court and the Commission should operate
in a complementary and mutually supportive manner
and in full respect for each other’s mandate,
independence and their distinct but related functions;

56. The Group of Experts also recommended that a
process of consultation should take place between the
two institutions on a regular or as-needed basis, it
being understood that in the final analysis it will be for
the two institutions to decide on their relationship.

(c) Setting of priorities. While respectful of
each other’s mandate, an agreed set of priorities for
each institution in clearly defined areas, circumstances
and conditions is a means to ensure cooperation in
areas of potential conflict.

IX. Operational plan for the start-up
phase of the Special Court

52. The Group of Experts analysed the different legal
bases for the establishment of the two institutions, their
respective mandates and jurisdictional scope, and their
implications for the relationship between the two
institutions. It discussed a range of issues pertaining to
information-sharing
between
the
Truth
and
Reconciliation Commission and the Special Court,
their respective powers to compel the appearance of
witnesses and accused and the submission of
evidentiary material, the treatment of juveniles and a
public information campaign.
53. There was a general agreement that the following
principles should guide the two institutions in
developing their modalities of cooperation:

54. In recommending guidelines for the relationship
between the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and
the Special Court, a distinction was drawn between
areas conducive to cooperation and areas of potential
conflict. In areas conducive to cooperation, it was
recommended that sharing of resources, services,
knowledge and expertise should be considered in
matters of commonality between the two institutions,
such as protection of victims and witnesses, including
children, rehabilitation and reintegration programmes,
joint training programmes, where appropriate, and a
coordinated public awareness and education campaign

57. The signing of the Agreement between the United
Nations and the Government of Sierra Leone for the
Establishment of the Special Court for Sierra Leone on
16 January 2002 marks the end of one stage of the
process and the beginning of a new stage of
implementation and operation. As indicated at the
beginning of the present report, expectations run high
among all sections of Sierra Leone society that justice
as well as reconciliation will be served by the Special
Court and that, together with the national Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, some measure of
accountability and deterrence will at long last be
achieved. The signing of the Agreement, therefore,

11

S/2002/246

places the onus on the parties, the United Nations and
the Government of Sierra Leone to bring the Special
Court into operation as soon as possible.
58. The Planning Mission believes that urgent
attention must be given to the fundamental issues of
governance and administration of the Special Court, as
well as the role of the parties, the United Nations and
the Government of Sierra Leone, and of the
Management Committee. In that connection, the legal
nature of the Special Court as a sui generis, treatybased organ, independent in its judicial functions of
both the United Nations and the Government of Sierra
Leone, will have to be given concrete legal content.
The Special Court, the United Nations and the
Government of Sierra Leone, as well as members of the
Management Committee, will have to develop the legal
regime applicable to the financial and administrative
aspects of its operation as well as to the process of
recruitment and the terms and conditions of its
employees. In so doing, they should take into account
the fact that while the United Nations is not, strictly
speaking, the parent organ of the Special Court, it is a
founding party. They should also be mindful of the fact
that while the financing of the Special Court is based
on voluntary contributions and not the United Nations
regular budget, funds held in a United Nations trust
fund are subject to the applicability of the Financial
Regulations and Rules of the United Nations, with
regard, in particular, to the disbursement of such funds
and the activities financed therefrom. The legal
implications of the relationship between the United
Nations and the Special Court and the extent of the use
of rules of the Organization to the non-judicial aspects
of its operation will have to be resolved urgently as a
prerequisite to the rapid, timely and efficient start-up of
the Court.
59. The visit of the Planning Mission to Sierra Leone
and its broad interaction with all segments of Sierra
Leone society through public and private meetings and
outreach through the radio and press created a
momentum that must not be lost. The mission has thus
envisaged a start-up phase of the Special Court with
identifiable and achievable objectives. The gradual and
sequenced implementation of these objectives together
with appropriate public information dissemination will
give concrete form to the Agreement as the Special
Court slowly takes shape.
60. In the start-up phase of the operational plan,
which should be completed by 31 May 2002, the

12

following actions should be taken simultaneously with
regard to the premises, both temporary and permanent,
the staffing of the Registry and the Office of the
Prosecutor, the appointment of the judges, the
Prosecutor and the Registrar, and the activities of the
Chambers:
(a) Premises
(i) An agreement should be signed between the
Special Court, represented by the Interim
Registrar, and UNOPS, authorizing UNOPS to
procure design and construction services on
behalf of the Special Court and under its
authority;
(ii) An agreement should be concluded between
the Special Court, represented by the Registrar,
and the Government of Sierra Leone for the grant
of land and the construction of permanent
premises;
(iii) While temporary premises are readily
available, minor adjustments, such as changing
the locks and installing document safes, would be
required before the start-up teams could occupy
the premises;
(iv) Prior to the start-up of the construction
works in the New England site, the Government
will have to relocate a number of civil defence
forces, ex-combatants and their families currently
occupying a former hotel site approximately 500
metres from the site;
(v) The construction of the permanent premises
should start with design work undertaken for the
New England site, a perimeter fence erected
around it and the laying of a foundation for the
office accommodation;
(vi) The start-up of the renovation works of the
detention facilities should be undertaken, with a
view to their completion by September 2002;
(b) Office of the Prosecutor
(i) An advance team of the Office of the
Prosecutor should be deployed in Sierra Leone to
launch the investigative and prosecutorial
process. It should be composed of the Prosecutor,
two Trial Attorneys, the Chief of Investigations,
the Chief of Evidence, the Evidence Custody
Officer, one researcher, three investigators and

S/2002/246

four support staff. To ensure a rapid deployment,
the advance team should include either staff on
loan from the two ad hoc Tribunals, or personnel
contributed by Governments;
(ii) The advance team should initiate the
research on the history of the conflict (“map the
conflict”), take into possession existing evidence
from the Sierra Leone Police, UNAMSIL and
NGOs, and establish an evidentiary basis from
which investigations could be launched;
(c) Registry
(i) An administrative infrastructure should be
developed as a matter of priority to ensure the
self-sufficiency of the Special Court in all its
aspects. Given the reliance of the Registry on the
United Nations Administration, it is essential that
a core unit of Registry personnel — composed of
the Interim Registrar, a Deputy Registrar, whose
functions would comprise those of the Chief of
Administration as well, and a buildings
management expert — should be assembled first
at United Nations Headquarters for a short initial
period prior to deploying to Freetown in support
of the Trial Chambers and the Office of the
Prosecutor;
(ii) At United Nations Headquarters, the core
unit of the Registry will liaise with the
appropriate offices in the Department of
Management to
establish
the
budgetary
requirements, the staffing table and account
structures for the Special Court, the status of
personnel, and a recruitment and appointment
strategy. In conjunction with the above, the
appropriate administrative procedures will be
established and approved. In matters related to
procurement, the start-up team would have to be
equipped with the necessary modalities for
approving contracts and general procurement;
(iii) In addition, the core Registry unit at
Headquarters would have to carry out work
related to the establishment of premises for the
Special Court, including preparation of a
Statement of Work for a land survey and site
plan, preparation of terms of reference for
architectural services for the court building and
procurement of design and construction services;

(iv) Once the basic administrative operating
parameters have been defined and established at
Headquarters, the core Registry would have to be
established in Sierra Leone. The Registry advance
team would include, in addition to the core
Registry personnel assembled in New York,
financial and personnel officers to manage and
disburse the funds and establish information
technology and other support systems. An Interim
Chief Security Officer or Deputy Chief Security
Officer would also have to be included in the
Registry advance team to address all security
matters arising in the start-up phase of the
operation of the Court and provide support to the
Prosecutor and the Interim Registrar, once in
Freetown;
(d) Appointment of judges, the Prosecutor, the
Deputy Prosecutor and the Registrar
(i) After
having
consulted
with
the
Government of Sierra Leone on the appointment
of the judges — both international and Sierra
Leone nominees — the Prosecutor and the
Deputy Prosecutor, the Secretary-General should,
as a matter of priority, appoint the Prosecutor.
Once appointed, the Prosecutor and the
Government of Sierra Leone should, according to
article 3 (2) of the Agreement, consult on the
appointment of a Deputy Prosecutor. A Deputy
Prosecutor should thereafter be appointed;
(ii) The
Secretary-General
should,
in
accordance with article 2 (2) of the Statute,
appoint the international judges, two of whom
should be appointed to the Trial Chamber and
three to the Appeals Chamber. At the same time,
the Government of Sierra Leone should appoint
one judge to the Trial Chamber and two to the
Appeals Chamber;
(iii) In appointing the Registrar, the SecretaryGeneral, according to article 4 of the Agreement,
should consult with the President of the Special
Court. Pending the election of the President by
the judges of the Court, the Interim Registrar
should continue to perform his functions;
(e) Chambers
(i) The Agreement on the Establishment of the
Special Court adopts a phased-in approach to the

13

S/2002/246

establishment of the Special Court in accordance
with the chronological order of the legal process.
Accordingly, judges of the Trial Chamber shall
take permanent office shortly before the
investigative process has been completed, and
judges of the Appeals Chamber shall take
permanent office when the first trial process has
been completed (article 19 (4) of the Agreement);
(ii) While it is not expected that judges would
take up their judicial functions in the first phase
of the operation of the Court, it is nonetheless
envisaged that during that period, and shortly
after their appointment, judges of both Chambers
shall meet in Sierra Leone for an organizational
meeting, or as may be required. The purpose of
these meetings should be to elect the President of
the Court and adopt the Rules of Procedure and
Evidence of the Special Court. It is also
recommended that a “familiarization trip” should
be organized for judges of both Chambers to the
International Tribunals in The Hague and in
Arusha;
(iii) When convened on the business of the
Court before taking permanent office, judges
shall be paid on an ad hoc basis.
61. Adherence to this schedule would mean that by
the third quarter of 2002, the judges will have been
appointed, the Offices of the Prosecutor and the
Registry will be functioning in their temporary
premises in Freetown and the construction of the
permanent premises will be substantially under way. In
other words, the machinery of the Special Court will be
in place to enable it to function in accordance with its
Statute. The first indictments and trials could be
envisaged by the end of the first year of operation,
which is well within the parameters of the practice of
international criminal tribunals.

14

S/2002/246

Appendix I
Members of the Planning Mission
List of participants
Name

Title

Mr. Hans Corell

Under-Secretary-General, The Legal Counsel

Mr. Ralph Zacklin

Assistant Secretary-General for Legal Affairs

Ms. Daphna Shraga

Senior Legal Officer, Office of Legal Affairs

Mr. Ken Lasiuk

Executive Officer, Office of Legal Affairs

Mr. Kenneth Flemming

Senior Trial Attorney, International Tribunal for
Rwanda

Mr. Alfred A. Kwende

Commander of Investigations, International Tribunal
for Rwanda

Mr. Marcel Savard

Chief, Division of Administration International
Tribunal for Rwanda

Mr. Gerald Ganz

Office of the United Nations Security Coordinator

Mr. Robert Kirkwood

Head of Facilities Management, International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia

Mr. Robin Vincent

Interim Registrar (Consultant)

Sgt. Sid Gray

(Expert on Mission)

Mr. Doudou Mbye

Senior Portfolio Manager, United Nations Office for
Project Services

Representatives of States
Mr. Andras Vamos-Goldman, Counsellor, Permanent Mission of Canada to the
United Nations
Mr. Phakiso Mochochoko, Counsellor, Permanent Mission of Lesotho to the United
Nations
Mr. Carl Peersman, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of the Netherlands to the
United Nations
Ms. Alice Burnett, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
Mr. Richard Mills, Permanent Mission of the United States of America to the United
Nations

15

S/2002/246

Col. Mike Newton, Senior Adviser to the Ambassador-at-Large for War Crimes
Issues, United States Department of State
Permanent Mission of Sierra Leone to the United Nations
Ambassador Allieu Ibrahim Kanu
Ms. Giorgia Tortora

16

S/2002/246

Appendix III
Terms of reference for the Management Committee for the
Special Court for Sierra Leone
I.

Mandate of the Management Committee
1.
Pursuant to the letter of the President of the Security Council (paragraph 2 of
S/2000/1234 of 22 December 2000), a Management Committee for the Special
Court will be established.

II.

Composition of the Management Committee
2.
The Management Committee will be an informal arrangement open to
important contributors to the Special Court willing to assume the functions referred
to in section III of these terms of reference. The Government of Sierra Leone and
the Secretary-General will also participate in the Management Committee.

III.

Functions of the Management Committee
3.

The Management Committee for the Special Court will, inter alia:

(a) Assist in the establishment of the Special Court, including in the
identification of nominees for the positions of Registrar, Prosecutor and judges, for
appointment by the Secretary-General;
(b) Consider reports of the Special Court and provide advice and policy
direction on all non-judicial aspects of its operations, including questions of
efficiency;
(c) Oversee the Special Court’s annual budget and other financially related
reports, and advise the Secretary-General on these matters;
(d) Assist the Secretary-General in ensuring that adequate funds are available
for the operation of the Special Court;
(e)

Encourage all States to cooperate with the Special Court;

(f) Report, on a regular basis, to the Group of Interested States for the
Special Court.
IV.

Secretariat services
4.
The Secretary-General will provide the Management Committee with
secretariat services, if required.

43
