S/PV.7325

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7325th meeting

Wednesday, 26 November 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Quinlan .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Australia)

Members:

Argentina .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Bartoux
Mr. Omaish
Mrs. Jakubonė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. Klein

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

14-65266 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1465266*

S/PV.7325

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/507)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I will now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Australia.
While November was a busy month, the level of
Council activity tells us more about the breadth and
depth of the crises in the world than it does about the
Council’s effectiveness in itself — and it is effectiveness
that must always be our focus.
Peacekeeping remains a paramount concern. The
informal interactive dialogue on Mali very usefully
addressed the unique situation of a peacekeeping
mission operating for the first time in an asymmetric
threat environment where there is effectively no
peace to keep. Contemporary peacekeeping is facing
unprecedented challenges. The Secretary-General’s
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
is a necessary assessment 15 years after the seminal
Brahimi review. The Council had a useful initial
dialogue with the Panel, but we need to do a lot more
serious thinking about peacekeeping, the increasing
demand for it, the increasing difficulty of generating
and equipping peacekeepers, and the increasing threat
to our peacekeepers. At a time when civilians are being
deliberately targeted as a tactic of war and more people
are displaced by conflict than at any time since the
Second World War, the protection of civilians must
be at the core of our peacekeeping efforts, and our
peacekeeping missions must be postured robustly to
use force when required.
The Council has perhaps been most forensic in its
focus on implementation in the case of Syria on both
the chemical weapons and the humanitarian tracks.
The fact that progress has been made on chemical
weapons is primarily due to the demanding monitoring
and reporting framework established under resolution
2118 (2013). The Council must now ensure the complete
eradication of Syria’s chemical weapons programme
and that the credible allegations of the use of chlorine
as a weapon by the regime, in violation of resolution

2/19

26/11/2014

2118 (2013), are fully investigated and that those who
use chemical agents in warfare are held to account.
The regular analysis that the Secretary-General
provides us on the implementation of resolutions 2139
(2014) and 2165 (2014), on humanitarian assistance
and protection in Syria, is crucial. While some limited
progress has been made on humanitarian access, most
elements of the two resolutions — particularly as they
relate to the protection of Syrian civilians — have not
been complied with. The Syrian regime’s military
strategy remains deliberately targeted at its own
civilians, and systematic violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law are massive,
savage and routine. The mandate on access contained
in resolution 2165 (2014) expires in early January and
must be extended in December. We need to give serious
attention to what we can do about implementing the
much more comprehensive obligations on all parties set
out in resolution 2139 (2014).
The centrality of human rights to the Council’s
work is evident. In November, High Commissioner for
Human Rights Zeid Al Hussein briefed the Council for
the first time since his appointment (see S/PV.7314).
Those who heard his searing indictment of the horrific
crimes of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
and its abuse of Islam’s own precepts will not forget it.
As President, Australia has sought to make a
reality of the requirements of Article 24 of the Charter
of the United Nations to ensure that Council members
represent the broader United Nations membership and
that the Council builds strong partnerships with other
actors. Having heard the responses of members of the
General Assembly to the Council’s annual report, we
conveyed those back to the Council.
In partnership with Argentina, we arranged for
the first open briefing by the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005)
concerning the Sudan in the Chamber for all to hear
(see S/PV.7320). We engaged closely with the African
Union Peace and Security Council in advance of and
during our presidency. We need, as a Council, to do a
lot more to ensure that our own protestations that we
will work closely with our African partners are better
operationalized. Joint visits and assessment missions
would be a good way to improve that.
While the three initiatives Australia has pursued
during its presidency are distinct, there is a common
philosophy underpinning them all. The Council must

14-65266

26/11/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

make the best use of the tools it has to effectively
address the challenges it faces. The open debate on
counter-terrorism (see S/PV.7316) enabled the broader
United Nations membership to focus on one of the most
dangerous contemporary challenges to international
peace and security.
The need for concerted and coordinated efforts to
degrade ISIL and other Al-Qaida affiliates is one defining
imperative; the urgent need to combat foreign terrorist
fighters and confronting violent extremism ideologies
is another. Presidential statement S/PRST/2014/23,
adopted on 19 November, provides practical steps to
build on the momentum generated by resolutions 2170
(2014) and 2178 (2014) (2014). Contemporary terrorism
is not just a threat in itself; it often takes advantage of
local or regional conflict, making the conflict worse
and in the process increasing its own lethal impact. The
Council needs to keep terrorism high on its agenda and
to ensure that the implementation of our resolutions and
November’s presidential statement happens.
Our initiative on policing has filled a serious gap
by recognizing the vital importance of policing to
peacekeeping, peacebuilding, the rule of law and the
protection of civilians. Resolution 2185 (2014), the
first ever on policing, is designed to make a practical
contribution to improving the effectiveness of the
work of police components, and the joint briefing by
the heads of police components will be an important
annual addition to the Council’s work.
The final initiative Australia has pursued, of
course, is on sanctions. Sanctions are a crucial and
often the only tool for the Council, and we need to do
much better on implementation. The high-level review
that Australia conducted with Sweden, Greece, Finland
and Germany reaffirmed the demand from Member
States for greater guidance and assistance, and the
need for better coordination within the United Nations
system — 20 United Nations entities contribute to
sanctions implementation — and between the Secretariat
and other institutions. We look forward to securing
agreement on a Council resolution in the coming days
that will respond to those needs definitively.
In closing, I thank all colleagues for their
cooperation and engagement in November. The month
has not yet finished. Together, we have made some
progress; we may well make some more in the next few
days.

S/PV.7325

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the other members of the Council.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): We are almost at
the end of another busy month — busy, yet skillfully
facilitated by a presidency with a clear sense of
purpose, efficiency and transparency. This month the
Council focused its discussions on a number of issues
that Lithuania finds particularly pertinent.
We held the first-ever briefing with the heads of
police components (see S/PV.7317) and the adoption
of resolution 2185 (2014) on United Nations police.
Like the debate with the heads of military components
during the Argentinian presidency (see S/PV.7275), it
allowed us to hear directly from the commanders of
the most rapidly growing United Nations peacekeeping
component on efforts to stop community violence, ensure
accountability and build national justice institutions.
It was very encouraging to hear police commanders
reaffirming that the protection of civilians, and in
particular women and children, is the key priority for
United Nations peacekeeping. The Council has been
consistent in sending that message through its countryspecific and horizontal resolutions. Member States and
the Secretariat alike have to reinforce their efforts in
ensuring that peacekeepers are prepared and willing to
actively intervene when the most vulnerable are in need
of protection.
Yesterday’s debate on United Nations sanctions (see
S/PV.7323) offered us an opportunity to reflect on how
sanctions have evolved from being punitive measures
imposed in response to incompliance with international
obligations. We look forward to a prompt adoption of
the draft resolution on this issue. Currently, more often
than not sanctions are a much more comprehensive
tool intended to help countries in their post-conflict
recovery or in preventing relapse The Council must
therefore consider how it should readjust its efforts to
ensure better compliance with and implementation of
sanctions.
While arms embargoes, travel bans and asset freezes
might indeed be instrumental in setting a country on a
path towards peaceful development, it is only through
capacity-building and technical assistance that their
true potential can be achieved. It is also important for
the Council and relevant Committees to remain engaged
with neighbouring countries. Their shared interest
in regional stability and first-hand knowledge of the

14-652663/19

S/PV.7325

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

situation are a crucial asset in making sanctions timely
and well targeted. Finally, the sanctions committees
must engage in constant dialogue with the wider United
Nations membership through open briefings and press
statements.
Looking ahead into next month, the Council will
have to decide on the extension of the mandates of
the judges of the International Criminal Tribunals for
the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. During the past
two decades, both tribunals have made enormous
contributions both to the development of international
criminal law and to assistance to national judicial
systems in conducting their own trials. They are now at a
crucial juncture, in which they are aiming to effectively
conclude cases still under consideration while referring
pending tasks to the Residual Mechanism. Keeping
that in mind, the Council has to ensure that closure
dates depend on the completion of ongoing trials in
compliance with the highest standards of procedural
fairness. That can be assured only by the extension of
the mandates, as requested by the Presidents of both
Tribunals.
In November the Council held an important debate
on international cooperation in combating terrorism
(see S/PV.7316) and adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/23), which reiterated the grave concern
about the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, the Al-Nusra
Front and other Al-Qaida affiliates, as well as the
negative impact of violent extremist ideology on the
stability of Iraq, Syria and beyond. Next month the
Council will continue to address the multifaceted issue
of terrorism with a focus on the African region, which
remains one of the most vulnerable to this increasingly
diffuse threat. As noted in the Secretary-General’s
report of 9 January 2014 (S/2014/9), the picture is further
complicated by the increasing cooperation among
criminal networks and terrorist groups, especially in
West Africa and the Sahel. It often involves drugs, arms
and human trafficking, as well as other illicit activities,
which call for an immediate and enhanced response at
all levels.
Despite repeated calls from the international
community to find a solution, the situation in the east of
Ukraine continues to escalate. In the public meeting on
12 November (see S/PV.7311) most Council Members
echoed concerns expressed by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and Assistant
Secretary-General Toyberg-Frandzen over increased
tensions as convoys moved into the separatist-held

4/19

26/11/2014

areas with substantial amounts of heavy weapons
and troops from across the Russian border. Constant
violations of the ceasefire continued to fuel the conflict
and further endangered the Minsk agreements, as did
the illegal and illegitimate so-called elections held
on 2 November by foreign-backed illegal armed rebel
groups despite the overwhelming consensus on the part
of the international community that they would damage
the political solution. As the international efforts to find
a solution that can only be based on respect of Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity continue, the
Council and the United Nations should support them.
Lastly, as this is the last Council meeting for
November, let me thank Australia for this extraordinary
month, welcome the newly elected Council members
that have now joined us and, finally, wish Chad every
success in December.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, and your entire
team for all the work done in November. The programme
was extremely tightly packed, which sometimes gave
the impression of running the New York marathon here
too in the Council, but at a pace not quite as fast as
the sprinters. You, Sir, conducted our debates with as
much rigour as enthusiasm. In that regard, your second
presidency reflects your outstanding two-year balance
sheet in the Council, for which we thank you.
While the media focused on Syria, the situation in
Gaza and Jerusalem and counter-terrorism — regarding
which Australia has been fully mobilized during its
tenure — let us not forget that crises in Africa are and
will remain a major topic for the Security Council,
where it is heavily invested politically and through
peacekeeping operations and where what the Council
does can make a difference. I shall therefore devote
most of statement to those issues.
The brainstorming meeting on the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) held by the Security Council
on 10 November, following the proposal made by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,was an
innovative and productive exercise. I would like to
thank the presidency and the Secretariat in particular
for successfully organizing that interactive informal
debate. The meeting enabled Council members to
address very directly all aspects, political and securityrelated, relating to the tense situation in northern Mali.
Council members expressed a strong consensus, on the
one hand, to continue to put pressure on the Malian
14-65266

26/11/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

parties to complete the Algiers peace negotiations
on their terms and in a spirit of compromise and, on
the other hand, to take all the necessary measures to
strengthen security for the Blue Helmets of MINUSMA,
with the support of Operation Barkhane, so that they can
fully carry out their very robust mandate to stabilize
northern Mali.
The proposals made by the Secretariat to the
Council for that meeting and the President’s summary
are valuable in helping us to make progress. We expect
that the next report of the Secretary-General on Mali
in late December will report on the implementation
of the proposed measures. After the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), we can say
that the MINUSMA is now the second laboratory
on peacekeeping in a complex environment. As we
did this month for Mali, we need to be able to reflect
collectively in an innovative, more interactive and more
concrete fashion to allow peacekeeping operations to
cope with new situations on the ground. We believe that
the formula tested in Mali deserves to be taken up in
the future.
Turning to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
one year after the Mouvement du 23 Mars (M-23) was
defeated, which was a milestone for the country and
for the reputation of the United Nations on the ground,
many challenges remain. On the security front, while
the protection of civilians and the neutralization of
armed groups are the Council’s priority, obstacles
remain: the voluntary disarmament of the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda is deadlocked,
the upsurge in violent attacks in the Beni region shows
that sustainable neutralization of the Allied Democratic
Forces is not yet a reality, and the demobilization and
reintegration of former M-23 combatants is delayed.
Moreover, the political situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is tense in the context of the
sensitive pre-electoral situation. The members of the
Council are concerned about the slow implementation of
the reforms agreed to by the Government in the context
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
Agreement for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region, signed in Addis Ababa, which remains
the basis for a lasting settlement of the crisis in the Great
Lakes region. In that fragile context, the expulsion of
the head of the United Nations Joint Human Rights
Office by the authorities of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is disturbing.

S/PV.7325

The strategic review expected in late December
will be an opportunity to make a first assessment of
resolutions 2098 (2013) and 2147 (2014) on how to
continue strengthening MONUSCO. We can never
overemphasize the importance of the protection
of civilians, which should be active and effective.
Neutralizing armed groups is necessary, but the return
to sustainable stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo cannot be achieved without the implementation
of the necessary reforms by the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and without firm resolve on the part of
the signatories to the Framework Agreement to respect
their commitments. МОNUSCO also has a crucial role
to play.
The review of those two major peacekeeping
operations naturally leads me to mention the review
of peacekeeping operations by the Secretary-General.
Last week the Security Council had discussions with
members of the High-Level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations, chaired by Мr. Ramos-Horta. It is
good to step back and to reflect on how to strengthen
and adapt a tool — peacekeeping operations and
political missions — that sometimes suffers from its
own success. In that regard, we thank Australia for its
initiative of introducing the first Council resolution
(resolution 2185 (2014)) on the role of police in
peacekeeping operations. That initiative will make a
useful contribution to the thinking on an increasingly
important and complex dimension of our operations.
We expect the review of peacekeeping operations
to lead to concrete proposals aimed at improving the
effectiveness of peacekeeping — for example, to better
fulfil what has become the core mission, that is, the
protection of civilians; to speed up the deployment
of missions; to ensure the cohesion of the various
military, police and civilian components; and to
reduce tensions on critical capacity resources, such as
helicopters, personnel and financing. We also hope that
the review will make it possible to move towards more
flexible peacekeeping operations that are adapted to
the local situation and deployed in sequence and that
can be adapted if necessary, including with a clearly
identified exit strategy. In the coming months France
will contribute to that debate, here and in Paris, where
our authorities are studying the subject and willing to
support the review process.
Finally, let me turn to a matter that my delegation
holds dear: the issue of human rights in the day-today work of the Security Council. In that regard, we

14-652665/19

S/PV.7325

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

welcome the presence of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Prince Zeid, at
the last meeting on Iraq (see S/PV.7314), and the
outstanding statement he delivered on that occasion.
We agree with his analysis on the need to combat the
deadly rhetoric of Daesh. We support his appeal to the
Iraqi authorities to acknowledge the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court. That initial interaction
between the Council and the new United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights was very fruitful, and
we hope it can be continued.
Soon the Council will take up the human rights
situation in North Korea, for the General Assembly
decided to refer to us the report of the United Nations
Commission of Inquiry on Human Rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, headed by
Justice Kirby. The crimes described in the report, as
the Commission of Inquiry states, are “unprecedented
in the world today”. They may constitute crimes
against humanity. The Council must not shirk its
responsibilities, and must be ready to consider the
contents and conclusions of that report.
Let me conclude by thanking you, dear Gary, once
again, for your presidency. Chad will take up the torch
in December, as France did at a similar time last year.
We now know that the Council can work very hard
between Christmas and New Year’s Day, which is not
necessarily the best model to follow. My country wishes
Chad every success.
The President: Unfortunately, there is no good
model in the world in which we operate.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and the Australian
delegation on a successful presidency during the
month of November. Although it has been an unusually
busy month, the work of the Council was efficiently
conducted thanks to your able leadership and the
exemplary work of your team, which I think set a new
standard.
Throughout the month the Council maintained
its vigilance with respect to various regional issues,
including Syria, Iraq and South Sudan. We also explored
how best to use the tools at the Council’s disposal,
primarily United Nations peacekeeping operations and
sanctions regimes, in order to better promote a climate
of global peace and security. Particularly noteworthy
was the Council’s first meeting with United Nations
police commissioners (see S/PV.7317), which shed new

6/19

26/11/2014

light on the unique role played by the police component
of peacekeeping operations. We believe that resolution
2185 (2014) will serve as an important reference for
United Nations policing as a crucial part of post-conflict
peacebuilding endeavours, including the rule of law,
security sector reform and the protection of civilians.
Also of great importance was the informal
interactive dialogue with the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations. The Panel has an enormous
task before it: to come up with a prescription for
the changing nature of conflicts and the evolving
environments of United Nations peace operations.
Sanctions, in conjunction with other Security
Council tools, remain a vitally useful policy instrument.
Yesterday’s briefing (see S/PV.7323) allowed us to take
stock of the evolution of United Nations sanctions and to
discuss ways to further improve their implementation.
We look forward to the adoption of a resolution that
aims to improve the coordination and implementation
of United Nations sanctions.
We believe that the high-level open debate on
counter-terrorism (see S/PV.7316) came at the most
opportune time to build upon the outcome of the
September Security Council summit (see S/PV.7272) and
maintain international momentum to fight terrorism.
Faced with the common threat posed by terrorists,
including the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, the
Al-Nusra Front and other Al-Qaida-associated groups
and foreign fighters, we were able to share national
implementation experiences and compare notes with
a view to further strengthening national counterterrorism measures. The Council took a step forward
by adopting a presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/23)
that lays out practical steps to implement counterterrorism measures, including those that curb financing
for terrorists.
November was also a significant month for the
work of the subsidiary bodies. The Council received a
90-day report by the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006). We appreciated that the
Committee worked diligently and made continued
progress under the Chair’s able leadership. However,
given the continued provocative rhetoric from the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including
the threat of another nuclear test, we reiterate that the
Council and the Committee should remain vigilant.
The Council should continue to send a clear and
united message warning that such provocations will
be squarely dealt with by the Council. Two days ago
14-65266

26/11/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

I gave the Council my last briefing (see S/PV.7319) on
the activities of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) in my capacity as Chair
of the Committee. Looking back over the work and
accomplishments achieved in this tenth anniversary
year, those accomplishments would not have been
possible without the strong and unwavering support
of Member States. The comments and guidelines of
Council members will be duly reflected in the work of
the Committee to achieve the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).
Finally, we would like to wish Chad great success
in its upcoming presidency in December and assure the
Chadian President of our full support.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting to wrap up
a very busy month of November during Australia’s
second and last presidency of the Security Council.
Looking ahead to the draft programme of work
for December, the year 2014 will be a good one for the
transparency of the Security Council, with 9 wrap-up
sessions in 12 months, including 5 under the format of
a public briefing. We hope that in the coming months
the Council’s Presidents will also mobilize the United
Nations membership, including through the original
groupings, to ensure better attendance by non-Council
members. Indeed, wrap-up sessions are organized
first and foremost for the United Nations general
membership, which mandated the Council to maintain
international peace and security. We therefore believe
that their participation in these meetings should be
enhanced. Wrap-up sessions are a unique opportunity
for Member States to receive first-hand information on
the activities of the Council, including an assessment of
its work, progress and effectiveness.
Rwanda congratulates you, Mr. President, for the
excellent manner in which you conducted the business
of the Security Council for the month of November.
We particularly appreciated the attention that The
Honorable Julie Bishop, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Australia, paid to the work of the Council by presiding
over three important meetings — on counter-terrorism
(see S/PV.7316), United Nations policing (see S/PV.7317)
and the Ebola virus disease (see S/PV.7318). We extend
our appreciation to Ambassador Philippa King, Deputy
Permanent Representative, to Michael Bliss, Political
Coordinator, and to the whole Australian team for its
excellent job in making this presidency a success. I
also take this opportunity to congratulate Ambassador

S/PV.7325

Mahamat Zene Cherif of Chad on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of December,
the last month during Rwanda’s present term. I am
convinced that with his extensive diplomatic experience
and demonstrated commitment to peace and security,
especially on the African continent, Ambassador Cherif
will enable the Council to make substantive progress on
the main items on its agenda.
November was one of the Security Council’s busiest
and most productive months this year. I will begin by
mentioning the first-ever briefings on United Nations
policing (see S/PV.7317) and on United Nations sanctions
(see S/PV.7323). In its meeting on policing, the Council
adopted resolution 2185 (2014), which highlights the
critical role of United Nations policing in peacekeeping
missions and special political missions. In the sanctions
meeeting, the Australian presidency proposed an
important draft resolution on United Nations sanctions,
which we hope will be adopted by consensus in the days
to come. The Australian presidency also convened an
open debate on counter-terrorism (see S/PV.7316) and
a briefing on the Ebola virus disease (see S/PV.7318).
At those meetings, it adopted presidential statements
S/PRST/2014/23 and S/PRST/2014/24, which express
the Council’s continued commitment to fight two of
the current threats to international peace and security.
November was also the month of the election of five
judges of the International Court of Justice, which was
a New York marathon in itself. The month also included
the twelfth annual workshop for newly elected members
of the Security Council, also known as the Finnish
workshop, and the presentation of the 2013-2014 annual
report of the Council to the General Assembly (A/69/2).
Furthermore, the Council continued to closely
follow country-specific situations on its agenda and
to discuss conflicts in Africa, the Middle East and
Eastern Europe. However, while the Security Council
usually garners consensus on African conflicts, the
Council’s unity was once again put to the test with
respect to conflicts in the Middle East, in particular
in Syria and between Israel and Palestine, as well as
in Eastern Europe, mainly Ukraine and, to a lesser
extent, Bosnia and Herzegovina. Resolution 2183
(2014), which extends the mandate of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force Operation Althea, was
adopted without consensus for the first time. We call
on all members, particularly the permanent members,
to enhance consultations and deepen dialogue with a
view to finding common ground for the common good.

14-652667/19

S/PV.7325

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

With respect to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, I will only recall without comment presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/22, of 5 November, through
which the Security Council expresses its deep concern
over the lack of progress in the voluntary disarmament
process of the so-called Democratic Forces for the
Liberation of Rwanda (FDLR) and stresses again that
there should be no further delay beyond the 2 January
2015 end date set by the region for the voluntary
disarmament process.
The Security Council went on to call on the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Government
of that country to immediately update operational plans
for military action against the FDLR commencing
no later than January and to immediately undertake
military action against those leaders and members of
the FDLR who do not engage in the demobilization
process and who continue to carry out human rights
abuses. Here the Council has a clear blueprint, and
there should be no further excuse or reason for failure.
In conclusion, I would like to commend Australia
for carrying out a successful mandate in the Security
Council over the past two years, in which it has made
the best use of its presidencies in September 2013 and
November 2014. It has enabled the Council to explore
new territory, such as United Nations policing and
United Nations sanctions, and to revive consideration
of critical issues such as small arms and light weapons.
In that regard, Mr. President, you introduced our firstever resolutions on those three topics — small arms
and light weapons, policing and sanctions — of which
the first two have been adopted by the Council as
resolutions 2117 (2013) and 2185 (2014), and the third
will hopefully be adopted early next month.
Considering your decisive leadership, together
with that of Jordan and Luxembourg, in the unanimous
adoptions of resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014),
on the humanitarian situation in Syria; your effective
chairing of critical sanctions committees, such as the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), on Iran;
not to mention your able penholdership on Afghanistan,
I think that Australia can be proud of its legacy in the
Council for the period 2013-2014.

8/19

26/11/2014

Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Before
getting to the main part of my statement, I would first
like to congratulate you, Sir, and all your team warmly
on your conduct of our work during this month. I
would also like to thank you for organizing this useful
synthesis meeting. In your concept note for the meeting,
you asked us not just to review the highlights of the
month but also to look ahead and focus on cross-cutting
issues and our methods of work.
In guiding our work, especially in closed
consultations, you consistently worked to reconcile the
importance of managing our time well with the desire
to make our discussions more interactive. The two
informal interactive dialogues held this month enabled
Council members to have a fruitful exchange with key
personnel, first on the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and later on
the review of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
To that I would add another welcome attempt to inject
a dose of interactivity into the Council’s informative
open debates, as was the case during the meeting on
the role of the United Nations police, presided over
by Foreign Minister Bishop (see S/PV.7317). All those
efforts geared to greater interactivity, launched a few
months ago and improved over time, have undoubtedly
helped to enrich our debates and ultimately provide us
with better ways to shape the Council’s action.
Considering that this has been a month full of
activity, I would like to emphasize a few specific
initiatives. In the wake of the adoption of resolutions
2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014), Mr. President, you chose to
organize an open debate at the ministerial level devoted
to the issue of terrorism and violent extremism (see
S/PV.7316), sadly justified in the light of the ongoing
challenges posed by the threat of terrorism and the need
for decisive action to combat it. The barbarism of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, whether through
the atrocities committed against the Syrian and Iraqi
peoples or the murder of those working to bring help
and assistance to people in need; the unspeakable
brutality of Boko Haram; the insidious appeal that
this extreme ideology has for more and more young
people around the world are all elements that demand
resolute action on the part of the international
community. The presidential statement we adopted at
that meeting (S/PRST/2014/23) will help to strengthen
the international community’s action and cooperation
on the issue. It is now up to us to work to ensure that the
Council’s measures go into full effect. In that context, I

14-65266

26/11/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

would like to reiterate our belief that respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms must be an integral
part of our strategy against terrorism, or we run the risk
of the cure being worse than the disease.
It was also during your tenure, Mr. President, that
the Security Council held its first ever meeting on the
role of the United Nations police in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. The adoption of resolution 2185 (2014),
our first on police functions, is a useful addition to the
tools at our disposal for peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and reforming the security sector. It also constitutes
recognition of the increasingly important role that the
United Nations police plays in conflict situations and
peacebuilding, as we saw in that debate and in our
meetings on Liberia (see S/PV.7310) and South Sudan
(S/PV.7305), to cite only two examples.
The role of the United Nations police will also be
one of the many topics to be discussed during the review
of United Nations peacekeeping to be conducted by the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations. We
greatly appreciated the opportunity we were given this
month for a discussion with the Panel, and we hope that
the Council, like the other interested parties, will have
the chance to contribute throughout the review process.
As I said during our informal interactive dialogue, it
is particularly important that we establish synergies
with the reviews of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture and of the role of women in peace and
security, which will be conducted simultaneously.
Only yesterday, the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Valerie Amos, gave us the
latest update on the humanitarian situation in Syria
(see S/PV,7324). The figures speak for themselves and
I will not repeat them here. Through its adoption of
resolution 2165 (2014), the Security Council created a
framework enabling aid to be provided to populations
in need by the most direct routes possible. Thanks to
that resolution, almost 300,000 more people have been
able to benefit from humanitarian and medical aid.
It is vital to maintain that momentum, and in order
to do so the Security Council must play its part. We are
confident that we will be able to rely on the support of
our colleagues in the Council to renew very shortly the
decision made in resolution 2165 (2014) on operations
that cross borders, conflict lines and United Nations
monitoring mechanisms and thereby continue to give the
Office for the Coordination for Humanitarian Affairs,
as well as humanitarian agencies and personnel, the

S/PV.7325

support it needs from the Security Council to help those
trapped in the conflict in Syria.
I would like to say a lot more — to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing a meeting on general
issues relating to sanctions (see S/PV.7323), and to talk
about the situations in South Sudan, the Middle East,
Libya and Iraq, to mention only a few of the issues
we are dealing with — but I am not sure that it would
be a very good idea, from the point of view of the
efficiency of our work, to exceed the time allotted to
me to speak. I will therefore stop here, but I cannot fail
to offer Ambassador Cherif and the entire delegation
of Chad our best wishes for their presidency of the
Security Council in December. They can count on our
cooperation and support.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
first like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on you
and your team’s effectiveness and hard work during
your leadership of the Council in November. We have
watched you seriously improve the new, interactive
discussions in the Council, allowing us to save time
during our meetings. I would also like to thank all
those who have extended kind words to us, in particular
to Ambassador Cherif, and wished us success in our
upcoming presidency. It will be an honour for the
delegation of Chad to occupy the Security Council
rostrum for the first time in its history. With the
Council’s support, we strive to live up to the challenge.
With that said, allow me to say that the 5 November
meeting on Burundi (see S/PV.7295) highlighted the
very delicate situation in that country on account of the
tensions leading up to the elections to be held in 2015,
two months after the withdrawal of the United Nations
Office in Burundi. The meeting of 12 November on
Liberia (see S/PV.7310) addressing the Ebola crisis
allowed Council members to unanimously adopt very
important measures in that connection. At that meeting,
Mr. Hervé Ladsous underscored the need to consider
what international assistance would be needed during
the post-Ebola reconstruction in the country. Also
with regard to the Ebola crisis, we must acknowledge
that your leadership, Mr. President, led the Council to
address the matter on two occasions, with the broad
participation of Member States in the open meeting on
Ebola on 21 November (see S/PV.7318). With regard to
the increasing terrorist threat, the Australian presidency
organized a high-level debate (see S/PV.7316), led
by your Minister for Foreign Affairs, at which
77 delegations spoke, underlining the importance of

14-652669/19

S/PV.7325

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

the issue and the mobilization of Member States in
addressing it. Presidential statement S/PRST/2014/23
was adopted by the Council at that time.
We congratulate you, Mr. President, on having
taken the initiative to hold the first meeting of the
Security Council on the key role of United Nations
policing in peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations
(see S/PV.7317), during which resolution 2185 (2014)
on that issue was adopted unanimously. We reiterate
our support for the strengthening of the police
components in peacekeeping operations and special
political missions, which largely contribute to postconflict peacebuilding and the sustainable protection
of civilians. We also believe that the issue of the level
of linguistic and cultural knowledge could become a
criterion for the selection of police officers.
The meeting held on 25 November on the
effectiveness of sanctions (see S/PV.7323) provided an
opportunity to consider the very important issue of the
implementation of sanctions by the Security Council.
That debate will contribute to opening the door for
subsequent decisions to fill the gaps that we observed
in that area.
I cannot end without talking about the retreat in
Greentree on 13 and 14 November, organized by the
Permanent Mission of Finland, which brought together
the Council members, including the newly elected
members, on relevant issues related to an assessment
of the Council’s activities in 2014 on methods of work
and lessons learned. From those discussions, it became
clear, inter alia, that briefings and consultations are
virtually identical. It was also stressed that the Council
is still divided on some so-called sensitive issues and,
as such, solutions do not appear forthcoming, as is the
case with the question of Palestine, for example.
In conclusion, I once again congratulate you, Sir,
and the entire Australian team on your tremendous
work, the relevance of the issues you took up and your
perseverance throughout your presidency. Do not forget
to tell us the secret of your success. It will be a precious
gift.
Mr. Klein (United States of America): Tomorrow
in the United States it is the Thanksgiving holiday.
My delegation is actually giving thanks today to the
delegation of Australia for its professionalism, flair and
excellent stewardship of the Security Council during
the month of November.

10/19

26/11/2014

Today I would like to share my delegation’s views
on some areas in which the Council has been productive
over the past month, while also looking ahead to what
we still need to continue to focus on in December and
beyond. First, my delegation appreciates the meeting
Australia held on Ebola (see S/PV.7318). Foreign
Minister Bishop’s decision to chair the meeting helped
to communicate the seriousness of that ongoing crisis,
which has led to over 5,000 deaths. We are beginning
to see the effects of the international community’s
collective response. Our efforts are saving lives. In
the past month, the average number of reported cases
per week in Liberia has fallen by one third. But just
because we are seeing signs of progress does not mean
that we can abandon the fight. We must continue our
efforts to contain the virus and our response needs to
be fluid, nimble and regional as well.
Going forward the United States believes four
points are especially important. First, the United
Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response
should help coordinate and better target the work of
multiple United Nations agencies, Member States and
organizations to optimize our collective response.
Secondly, donors need to tailor contributions to the
needs of the moment rather than what best suits our
capitals. Thirdly, we need more international healthcare workers to support national health responders
and we need to do a better job of protecting healthcare workers and other volunteers. Fourthly, we need
to invest more in preparing neighbouring countries to
prevent new outbreaks and to contain those outbreaks if
and when they occur.
We have now had more than two dozen meetings
on Ukraine this year in the Council and our continued
attention is clearly necessary. The recent report of the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
showed that between 6 September and 18 November,
during the ceasefire, 957 people were killed in eastern
Ukraine. We are still waiting for Russia and the
separatists it supports to honour the joint commitments
made on 5 September in Minsk. The separatists have
taken advantage of the agreed pause in fighting to try to
expand their territory. On 2 November, separatists held
illegal elections in parts of the Donetsk and Luhansk
oblasts. The vote violated Ukraine’s sovereignty and
defied the Minsk protocol. Minsk is the road map,
but for it to be successful, both sides must commit to
following it.

14-65266

26/11/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

Looking ahead, we must also continue to watch
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The mandate
renewal adopted this month reaffirmed the Council’s
willingness to support the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in their efforts to sustain a safe and secure
environment with the assistance of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force Operation Althea
mission.
There were unprecedented moments in the Council
this month for which we must thank you, Mr. President,
as well as Foreign Minister Bishop and your entire
hardworking team. One example was that the Council
held its first ever session dedicated to policing (see
S/PV.7317). United Nations police are central to
stopping conflicts and to building sustainable and
genuine peace. As the number of United Nations police
increases, we are also asking more and more of them.
We appreciated the session last week because it put a
bright light on police work and the challenges United
Nations police face. We look forward to following the
issue closely and hearing more from the field in the
months and years to come, and, of course, we are also
looking forward to following up with the high-level
panel on peacekeeping.
The United States also greatly appreciates Australia’s
leadership in the international response to terrorism and
violent extremism. Helping our partners capably meet
the evolving threat of terrorism, including stemming
the flow of foreign terrorist fighters and countering
violent extremism, is absolutely essential. In that vein,
we should heed the powerful warning issued by United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Prince
Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, at the meeting on 18 November
that “[t]he scale and violence of ISIL’s brutality towards
civilians shreds every principle relevant to human
rights” (S/PV.7314, p. 5).
The Council has recognized that tackling the ISIL
challenge will require using diverse tools, including
financial measures and sanctions, as we resolved in
August through the adoption of resolution 2170 (2014).
Presidential statement S/PRST/2014/23, adopted on
19 November, once again addressed the importance
of stopping all financial support for ISIL — support
that goes to funding terrorist acts and recruitment.
In the coming months, the Council should consider if
additional actions and measures are needed to ensure
that ISIL does not use oil, kidnapping for ransom,
banks, cultural property in which Iraq and Syria are so

S/PV.7325

rich, donations and other means of financing to support
itself.
Finally, this leads me to the humanitarian situation
in Syria. As we highlighted in the Council yesterday
(see S/PV.7324), the situation in Syria continues to
deteriorate. Millions are suffering due to the regime’s
continued violence against civilians, including shelling
and aerial bombardments, and its systematic restrictions
and bureaucratic obstacles that keep life-sustaining
humanitarian aid from thousands struggling to
survive in besieged communities. Given the immense
challenges to reaching Syrians in need, it is imperative
that all United Nations agencies use the full authority
of resolution 2165 (2014) to deliver cross-border aid.
We need to continue efforts authorized in resolution
2165 (2014), and we look forward to engaging on the
mandate’s renewal.
To our colleagues from Chad, we pledge our full
support as they take the reins for December.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this wrap-up session, which provides us
with an opportunity to assess the work of the Council
in the month of November.
The first briefing by heads of police components
of three United Nations peacekeeping missions was
a notable development in the month (see S/PV.7317).
The briefing offered Council members and the wider
United Nations membership an opportunity to hear
directly from the police commissioners responsible for
carrying out the peacekeeping mandates authorized by
the Council as they concerned police components. With
the mandates of peacekeeping missions becoming more
multidimensional, the police components are taking on
a more complex role. The police commissioners briefed
on three important topics: challenges in building
whole-State institutional capacity, having the necessary
requirements to effectively execute Council mandates,
and the role of police components in the protection of
civilians. The interactive nature of the meeting proved
very useful, as Council members had the opportunity to
ask questions, seek clarification and make suggestions
on issues concerning policing and peacekeeping.
We commend Australia for the leadership role
it played in the adoption of the Council’s first ever
stand-alone resolution on policing and peacekeeping
(resolution 2185 (2014)). This, in our view, was one
of the most significant developments in the Council
in November. The resolution highlights the increased

14-6526611/19

S/PV.7325

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

complexity of United Nations policing. It also
recognizes the need for the United Nations to allocate
adequate resources to police components in order to
enable them to meet the challenges they face on the
ground.
The Council’s debate on Ebola (see S/PV.7318)
presented an opportunity for the stocktaking essential to
assessing the progress made in our collective response to
the scourge. The debate revealed that indeed the global
response is yielding results and that important progress
has been recorded on the ground. That was attributed
in part to the crucial contributions of regional States
that had led the response to the Ebola outbreak. The
contributions of the international community, as well as
non-governmental organizations, were also recognized
as being very important. Nevertheless, more needs to
be done to achieve our ultimate goal of eradicating
Ebola. This is a global medical emergency and not just a
regional problem. For that reason, the sustained support
of the international community remains essential. We
are confident that, with the leadership of the United
Nations, the current momentum will be sustained. We
pay tribute to the men and women on the front line who
put themselves in harm’s way fighting that scourge.
Mr. President, this being the last scheduled
meeting under the presidency of Australia, the Nigerian
delegation congratulates you and your delegation on
the able manner in which you have presided over the
affairs of the Council in the month of November. We
also take this opportunity to extend our best wishes
and full support to Chad as the delegation prepares to
assume the presidency of the Council for the month of
December.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
congratulate the Australian Mission on having steered
the Council through a busy but productive month.
Although one month remains of Australia’s term on
the Council, that will not prevent me from describing
its presidency as a fitting culmination to the energy,
creativity and commitment that Australia has brought
to Council proceedings over the past two years.
I have often expressed frustration that the Security
Council has become too much a captive of its agenda and
procedures. Too many meetings happen simply because
of the cyclical reporting cycle rather than with a clear
purpose in mind or as a response to developments on
the ground. That is not a criticism that can be levelled at
the November programme. We have, it is true, worked

12/19

26/11/2014

our way productively through important regular items
of Council business: the International Court of Justice
elections; mandate renewals for the European Union
military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (see
S/PV.7307), the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(see S/PV.7322) and the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (see S/PV.7321);
and for the international effort to combat piracy off
Somalia (see S/PV.7309). But the Council has also
responded in an agile and speedy way to unforeseen
developments.
On Darfur, following very disturbing reports of
mass rape in Thabit, we were briefed at short notice by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and Special
Representative Bangura. In the light of the obstacles
placed by the Sudanese authorities to follow-up by
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), the Council issued a statement
(SC/11658) calling for the Sudanese Government to
allow full and unrestricted freedom of movement to
UNAMID to enable it to conduct a full and transparent
investigation into those reports without interference.
That statement sent a strong message of the Council’s
determination to uphold its commitments to tackling
sexual violence. It is deplorable that the Sudanese
Government is still denying access to UNAMID. Once
again, we urge the Sudanese Government to respond
to that clear and united message from the Security
Council.
On Ukraine, the Council met on 12 November
(see S/PV.7311) in response to continued breaches
of the Minsk agreements by Russian-backed armed
separatists. That also allowed us to reiterate concerns
over the deteriorating human rights situation in areas
under separatist control in eastern Ukraine and in the
illegally annexed Crimean peninsula. The Council must
be ready to continue to monitor and apply scrutiny to
the ongoing threat to international peace and security
posed by efforts to undermine Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity.
The Council also met on 21 November to consider
developments on the Ebola crisis (see S/PV.7318).
The crisis reminds us of the varied nature of threats
to international peace and security. The presidential
statement we adopted (S/PRST/2014/24) usefully
underlined our strong support for United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER),
as well as the need for continued strengthening of
UNMEER’s coordination role and for accelerated

14-65266

26/11/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

efforts to scale up its presence at the district level in
affected countries.
We have had short-notice briefings also on
the crises in South Sudan (see S/PV.7320) and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (see S/PV.7296). I
welcome the first listings under the sanctions regime
for Yemen established by resolution 2140 (2014) — an
important signal of our readiness to respond firmly to
those who are seeking to obstruct or undermine the
country’s peaceful political transition. Those are all
examples of an agile Council responding quickly and
flexibly to fast-moving developments.
But I also welcome the way in which the Australian
presidency has allowed us to step back and take a more
strategic look at some important thematic and crosscutting issues. The Council’s meeting with heads of
police components (see S/PV.7317) was an important
innovation, as was the accompanying adoption of
resolution 2185 (2014), the first-ever resolution on
United Nations policing. As peacekeeping becomes
ever more complex and challenging, there will be an
increasing role for United Nations police alongside
military components. We need to think carefully
about the role and methods of United Nations policing,
including as a bridging capability during periods of
mission drawdown. The Secretary-General’s report,
commissioned pursuant to resolution 2185 (2014), will
be an important stimulus to this work.
The continuing atrocities committed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), including the brutal
murder this month of a United States humanitarian aid
worker and Syrian captives underline the importance
of sustained Council focus on the threat posed by ISIL
and on counter-terrorism more generally. The debate
on 19 November (see S/PV.7316) and the adoption
of a presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/23) builds
on the series of steps taken in recent months by the
Council, including the adoption of resolutions 2170
(2014) and 2178 (2014), and emphasized the importance
of all United Nations Members complying with and
implementing their obligations under those resolutions.
During the meeting on the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq held on 18 November (see
S/PV.7314), we also heard a powerful briefing from
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights making the case for a new and sustained effort
to tackle extremism and the extremist narrative. That is
something we shall need to follow up.

S/PV.7325

In yesterday’s meeting on cross-cutting issues
relating to United Nations sanctions, Council members
were able to reflect on how to make the best use of this
important tool for contributing to international peace
and security. I hope that we will be able to adopt a draft
resolution on this issue very shortly.
The theme underlying my statement today is the
value of the Council using its programme of work
flexibly and imaginatively so that we can respond
quickly to external developments and so that we can
step back from the cyclical regular business to consider
important strategic issues and draw conclusions about
how to integrate those into our regular work. Your
presidency, Sir, has shown that this can be done in a
productive way, and I hope that future presidencies
will follow the model that you have set this month for
judiciously blending regular Council business with
reactive Council meetings and discretionary meetings
focused on important thematic issues.
Looking ahead, I wish the Mission of Chad the
very best for the month of December and look forward
to the planned debate on terrorism and cross-border
crime, which will add another important dimension to
our consideration of the counter-terrorism challenge.
Finally, I note that next month will be the first
anniversary of the start of the internal conflict in South
Sudan. It is depressing that all our efforts over the last
year, including our visit to South Sudan in August, have
not yet had the desired impact. The fighting continues.
Efforts to secure political agreement have yet to bear
fruit. Huge numbers of people are displaced, many of
them still forced to seek protection in United Nations
bases. We must use the upcoming anniversary to
reflect on what more we can do to sharpen international
pressure on South Sudan’s political and military leaders
and to address the important accountability issues
arising from this conflict.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Colleagues are well aware of the fact that the
Russian delegation is not a fan of the monthly wrap-up
sessions. There is too much reiteration of well-known
positions and too many attempts to glorify approaches
that are not objective ones.
For example, today a number of statements
contained a one-sided interpretation of certain issues
relating to the situation in Syria. In November, some
members of the Council, at the earlier experts stage,
blocked work on a proposed presidential statement by

14-6526613/19

S/PV.7325

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

the Russian delegation on the danger of the potential use
by terrorists of chemical weapons in Syria and in Iraq. If
Damascus is always going to be blamed for everything,
that means giving a free hand to the terrorists; this is
something that we should be quite clear about.
Coming back to the question of the format of
today’s meeting, there is a saying in the theatre that if
there are more actors on the stage than members in the
audience, then it is time to change the repertoire. We
propose having just one wrap-up session per year.
The Council had a heavy agenda in November, but
thanks to the good work of the Australian delegation,
we were able to get through this period without serious
disruption. We would like to wish the delegation of
Chad the very best as it prepares to take over leadership
of the Council in December.
There was strong focus on the Middle East and
North Africa. The situation there is extremely volatile,
and it will be possible to stabilize it only if there is a
political and diplomatic settlement of regional crises,
alongside a consistent struggle, in the framework of
full respect for international law, against terrorism and
extremism, be it with respect to the Syrian conflict, the
situation in Iraq or Libya.
We note the Council’s timely work on counterterrorism. We have to put an end to radicalization,
which fuels terrorism. We must stop terrorists from
using the media, including the Internet, to try to make
their activities appear attractive. We must cut off their
oxygen. We must cut off funding, including from the
illegal trade In Iraqi and Syrian oil. It is vital to work
systematically on this particular issue. The president
statement of 19 November (S/PRST/2104/23) offers
some good guidance in that respect. We must further
develop that approach and give it real, practical content.
On 20 November, we held an important meeting
on United Nations policing. The work of the police
is becoming extremely diverse and complex, but we
should not forget that it is States that bear primary
responsibility for the maintenance of law and order
in their peacekeeping contingents. The main purpose
of police contingents is to assist the national law-andorder forces during the post-conflict reconstruction
period.
We believe that the issue of Ebola is a very important
one, but we believe also that, without infringing on the
prerogatives of other United Nations organs, it should
be taken up primarily in the General Assembly and
14/19

26/11/2014

the specialized agencies. We have to try to be clear in
defining the responsibilities of the Council, the General
Assembly and other agencies of the United Nations
system with respect to the tasks set out in the Charter.
We were obliged to abstain in the voting on
resolution 2183 (2014) as a matter of principle. We
deem it unacceptable that Bosnia and Herzegovina
should be urged to join the European Union and NATO
through a decision of the Security Council on the basis
of Chapter VII of the Charter. In future, responsibility
for what happens in that country should be handed over
to the Bosnians themselves, in strict compliance with
the Dayton Peace Agreement and in view of the closing
of the Office of the High Representative.
During yesterday’s meeting on sanctions, we
heard many crucial arguments, such as the exclusive
prerogative of the Council to impose sanctions and not
to allow unilateral restrictions on them, and that it is
counterproductive to set up additional bureaucratic
structures, be it at the State, inter-State or Secretariat
level. After all, sanctions fall exclusively within
the competence of the States Members of the United
Nations.
This past month, the Council took up the issue
of the settlement of the internal conflict in Ukraine.
Unfortunately, the meeting held on 12 November
(see S/PV.7311) was used by those that proposed it
for another round of propaganda rather than for a
constructive quest for a way to resolve the crisis on the
basis of the Minsk agreements. The situation in Donetsk
and Luhansk remains tense. Thugs are still firing at
buildings and infrastructure, and there are dozens of
civilian casualties every day. The ceasefire regime
is not being fully respected. Instead of withdrawing
heavy weaponry, Ukrainian troops are, on the contrary,
moving ever closer to the lines of demarcation. For
example, on 22 November two Uragan rocket launchers
were brought into the Debaltsevo region. We cannot
remain silent about this kind of event. That is no doubt
why the Kyiv authorities are becoming increasingly
irritated by the Mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. Ukrainian troops
are regularly interfering with their observers, and this
is absolutely inadmissible.
Instead of establishing dialogue with the southeast, as was agreed in April in Geneva, Ukrainian
authorities are breaking off communications with the
people there. They have halted budget expenditures,
including benefits and pensions, so those who are most
14-65266

26/11/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

defenceless in the population are now being deprived of
the very basics of life just as winter approaches. Those
living in Donbas have no medical care or common
services. Schools are closed. There are no cultural
events. There is a virtual blockade against them.
This threatens to become a full-scale humanitarian
catastrophe.
The situation was made worse by Kyiv’s statement
that it does not feel obliged to respect human rights
and fundamental freedoms because it is involved in
anti-terrorist operations. Yesterday, Donbas issued
a statement to the international community and the
Council regarding the situation, and they said outright
that Kyiv has declared war, not on the rebels, but on the
civilian population: women, old people and children.
Those who encourage the Kyiv authorities to carry out
such acts will bear a very heavy responsibility.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, we congratulate you, Mr. President, and your
team on your leadership and presidency in the month
of November. We welcome the convening of this public
wrap-up session, which is a working practice that we
would like to see continue.
Let me begin by mentioning some of the highlights
of our work in November. We will refer mainly to
the issue of sanctions. Chile welcomes the Australian
initiative to bring the issue of sanctions to the
attention of the Security Council, which allowed us
to reflect on and discuss elements for facilitating the
effective implementation of sanctions. We recognize
the specificity of each situation and each sanctions
committee, but if they are to be effective, we must
establish some harmonizing and common criteria to
facilitate the implementation of sanctions, bearing in
mind the different situations on the ground. We hope
that a consensus will be achieved on the draft resolution
proposed by Australia.
Moreover, we reiterate the importance of ensuring
due process. We value the attempts to make
improvements in the listing and de-listing of persons
and entities on the sanctions lists and the establishment
of the post of focal point in resolution 1730 (2006).
But that is not enough, and we therefore hope that we
can make progress on extending the mandate of the
Ombudsperson of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities to other
sanctions committees.

S/PV.7325

As Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Côte d’Ivoire, I had
the opportunity to lead the Committee’s visit to that
country. That showed me how important field visits
are for obtaining a more complete and detailed view
of the situation in a country subject to sanctions by the
Security Council. We believe it is crucial to encourage
such missions in order to avoid gaps between what
is resolved in New York and what actually happens
on the ground. As only non-permanent members of
the Council assume responsibility for chairing such
subsidiary bodies for one or two years, a bigger budget
for such visits is advisable, so that more delegations
can participate in field visits. We reiterate that the
perspective gained by field visits is irreplaceable.
Another landmark area of work of the Security
Council this month was the briefing (S/PV.7317) and the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2185 (2014) on the role
of police in peacekeeping and peacebuilding in postconflict situations. It allowed for an interesting debate
on how to support host States in reaching agreements
and overcoming conflicts. The format that was followed
generated an exchange of information that we consider
useful in the Council’s work, as it provides first-hand
knowledge of the challenges, visions and fears of police
forces in the field. We call, as the resolution indicates,
for such meetings to continue to be held in the future.
An analysis of this month’s work would be
incomplete if it did not highlight the aspects that
we feel need improvement. It is essential that when
analysing the various situations under consideration by
the Security Council, we do so from a perspective that
considers the situation on the ground and recognize
the specificity of each subject based on its own merits,
thus preventing other agenda items from affecting the
relevant discussions.
With regard to issues that it seems appropriate to
follow-up in the future, it seems that the situation in
South Sudan is one of them. We welcome the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS), which will, among other
things, continue to provide protection to the civilian
population affected by that conflict. That is a document
that we support and welcome. However, we regret
that no concrete progress has been evident recently in
the implementation of the ceasefire agreement or in
reaching a political resolution of the serious situation
in the country. Of special concern are the worrying
signs that the fighting could begin again, at the end

14-6526615/19

S/PV.7325

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

of the rainy season, thereby aggravating the conflict
and deepening the already dire humanitarian crisis.
We acknowledge the efforts of UNMISS in fulfilling
its mandate to protect the civilian population, but we
would like to emphasize the obligation to respect the
inviolability of United Nations facilities.
In addition, the humanitarian situations in
several countries that have been considered this
month highlighted the importance of ensuring that
humanitarian workers and staff from the various
missions deployed are granted freedom of movement
and access to all areas needed to fulfil their mission, be
it humanitarian or for protection or verification.
Finally, we wish success to our colleagues in the
delegation of Chad, and we pledge our support to their
presidency in the month of December.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): As I am
the lucky thirteenth speaker in this session, I do not
have much to say. However, I would like to join all
the previous speakers in extending our thanks and
appreciation to you, Mr. President and all the members
of your team for the able and successful manner in
which you conducted the Council’s business this month.
I would like briefly to express our appreciation
for Australia’s leadership during the open debate held
to discuss international cooperation in the field of
combating terrorism (see S/PV.7316) and Australia’s
work on the comprehensive review of sanctions regimes.
We also value Australia’s initiative to hold a debate
on the role of the police components of peacekeeping
operations (see S/PV.7317), which culminated in the
adoption of resolution 2185 (2014).
In conclusion, I would like to welcome the Chadian
presidency and to wish it every success in conducting
the Council’s business next month.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you and your team very much, Mr. President. Like
the rest of my colleagues, I wish to acknowledge your
work, not only during the month of your presidency,
but throughout the two years we have shared on the
Council. It is clear that we do not take the same view
on all matters, and that is good, but we have learned to
engage in dialogue and respect our differences.
You brought that same spirit to your presidency — the
spirit of your delegation and your country, a democratic
country capable of dialogue. It is a spirit of listening to
different positions and of launching initiatives of great

16/19

26/11/2014

value and interest for your delegation so as to fulfil the
responsibility we all have as members of this Council,
and to fulfil it without lowering the standard, but to
prioritize, seek and work tirelessly to attain consensus.
This is how the Council makes progress. A lack of
consensus in the Council means there will be more
victims in the real world. Therefore, we want to note
that our appreciation is not only for one month, but for
a shared experience.
We also welcome the present wrap-up session.
Ten members of the Council convened such wrap-up
sessions during their presidencies in 2014, and we hope
that the practice can continue, as I have said before, so
as to continue building confidence and not only change
the programme a little, but build trust among the
membership so that they may come to participate in the
knowledge that they are not merely passive spectators
but equal protagonists in the international community.
November — as everyone has noted and as my team
and I myself agree — has been an intense month with
the numerous obligatory activities, such as mandate
renewals and meetings required by prior decisions
of the Council, in addition to emergency meetings
and the three valuable initiatives of the presidency:
counter-terrorism, police components in peacekeeping
operations, and sanctions. As it would be imprudent to
talk about all of them, I will focus on Australia’s three
initiatives.
The open debate on terrorism (see S/PV.7316) led by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Australia, to whom
we convey our greetings once again, stressed that today
the threat posed by terrorisms — and I am speaking in
the plural — is once again at the centre of the attention
of the Council, of the mass media, of the international
community and of the collective fear. That threat is at
the centre of the measures to prevent the extension of
that horror.
However, we also have also understood that it is not
the terrorism of the past that is returning to the centre
of our attention. It has become much more complex in
terms of how it operates. It has multiple configurations
and it uses sophisticated and innovative channels to
induce terror in the peoples the world over. These are
forms of violence whose roots we are not yet fully able
to grasp. It is not enough to say that they are fanatics.
We cannot simply say that they appeared overnight with
such determination. We are talking about individuals
from developed countries joining terrorist groups to

14-65266

26/11/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

S/PV.7325

fight in poor countries — extremely poor countries,
decimated by conflict.

coordination of police components with advisers on the
protection of women and children.

Within the Security Council and elsewhere,
we must therefore reflect profoundly — which will
require more time than the five minutes established
by note S/2010/507 — on what is going on. Why are
these terrorisms ensnaring ever younger individuals,
including women and children, as noted by the
representative of Luxembourg, and using them to
commit heinous acts?

Unfortunately, however, we are concerned at the
lack of specific mention in the text of the resolution of
the mandate of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, which is the only forum in the United
Nations entrusted with the broad consideration of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects, including
measures to improve the capacity of the Organization
to carry out such operations. The Secretary-General
should therefore take that mandate fully into account
when developing and implementing standards,
guidelines and procedures for improving the activities
of peacekeeping operations, including those of police
components.

Argentina’s conviction, as we expressed in the
debate, is that while the response to the terrorisms,
including the new challenge of the recruitment and
participation of foreign terrorist fighters, requires
a military component, we cannot reduce the matter
to that. We failed when we reduced the fight against
terrorism to the military dimension alone. We still
need, at the present juncture of military action, to fight
terrorism in the framework of the rule of law and with
respect for due process. Measures adopted by States to
fight terrorism must fully respect international law, in
particular international human rights and humanitarian
law and refugee law. Such measures must also respect
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations, such as sovereignty, territorial
integrity, the political independence of States and the
principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs of
States.
The second issue is your decision, Mr. President,
to convene the first-ever meeting of the Security
Council on United Nations police (see S/PV.7317), at
which the first resolution on the same topic (resolution
2185 (2014)) was adopted. This is an issue to which
Argentina attaches enormous importance, being our
region’s leading contributor of police observers to
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We hope that
you, Sir, have sowed a seed that will bear fruit in the
years to come, receiving the attention it deserves in the
Council.
We believe that resolution 2185 (2014) provides
an important description of the evolving and growing
relevance of the role that police components play in
peacekeeping missions, in particular in the protection of
civilians. We welcome the resolution’s reaffirmation of
the role that police components can play in facilitating
the participation and inclusion of women in conflict
resolution and peacebuilding, as well as the need to
increase the number of women police deployed and the

Thirdly and finally, we highlight Australia’s
proposal to consider measures aimed at improving the
quality and consistency of the assistance that the United
Nations system provides to the Council, its committees
and expert groups and, in turn, at improving the quality
and consistency of the assistance the Council provides
to Member States in the implementation of sanctions.
It will be recalled that at April’s wrap-up session
(S/PV.7166), I said that, as the Security Council appears
to be moving more resolutely towards using sanctions
in a more responsible way, it is essential that we look at
what we can do in order better to preserve international
peace and security.
With respect to sanctions, on this rainy day I agree
with most members of the Council and with you, Sir,
that something has to be done about sanctions. When it
is raining we use umbrellas. If we use umbrellas with
holes in them, we know we are going to get wet. What
do I mean by that? We complain and set up sanctions
and then those sanctions are not complied with, so
either we change umbrellas or we face up to the storm
and try not just sanctions as the only way to go, but we
put on the table the various alternatives available to the
Council. Argentina will certainly continue to maintain
its position on our proposal for extending the mandate
of the Office of the Ombudsperson to other persons
and entities included in the lists of the all the sanctions
committees.
I am not saying that the spirit in the Council is
like an umbrella without holes, but sometimes there is
a feeling that sanctions are selective and random, and
that there is a certain kind of punitive arbitrariness.
Speaking of punitive arbitrariness, in my region and in

14-6526617/19

S/PV.7325

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

my country, when our democracy was less democratic
our penal system caused poor people, immigrants,
people of African origin and young people to be thrown
in prison. The jails were full of such people. We began
to realize that this selective, arbitrary and punitive
system did not strengthen peace or the democracy of
social cohesion. Therefore, having improved these
punitive systems in the very heart of our countries, I
think that we have to really think sincerely and fairly
about the necessary meaning of sanctions. I believe that
they are necessary, but they also have to be legitimate
and not just arbitrary.
Mr. President, I would like to thank you and your
team. I would like to welcome the new delegations. It
is like in restaurants, when the tables are full, there are
always people standing in line to sit down. I see six
Venezuelans waiting up there. I give them my seat. I
welcome them. I welcome all the new countries that are
going to be non-permanent members of the Security
Council. It is indeed a challenging responsibility. I
would like to thank Ambassador Quinlan for this final
meeting as President of the Security Council and for
his professionalism and his sense of institutional ethics.
Finally, I would like to extend to Chad my very best
wishes for good luck in December, a month in which
many of us, believers and non-believers alike, celebrate
the desire for peace on Earth. I hope we will have a
peaceful month.
I would like to address a comment made by a
colleague. It is true that the new members will find that
Africa takes up a lot of our time on our agenda. Violent
zones, organized poverty and conflict are all found
more in Africa than anywhere else. It is true that there
are very complex political situations, power struggles,
new violence and old, but it is also true that Africa must
stop being the object of daily unrestrained greed for
profit and body-shopping.
Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting.
November has proved to be a very busy month.
The Council has adopted resolutions extending the
mandates of the United Nations Mission in the Republic
of South Sudan (resolution 2187 (2014)) and the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (resolution 2186 (2014)); on fighting piracy
off the Somali coast (resolution 2182 (2014)); and on
the stabilization forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina

18/19

26/11/2014

(resolution 2183 (2014)). The Council also adopted
resolution 2185 (2014) on United Nations policing, and
issued presidential statements on the Ebola outbreak
in West Africa (S/PRST/2014/24), counter-terrorism
(S/PRST/2014/23) and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (S/PRST/2014/22). China commends the
Australian presidency for its successful conduct of the
work of the Council for this month.
With regard to the Council’s work for November, I
wish to stress the following three points.
First, on the situation in the Middle East,
24 November was the International Day of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People. This day reminds the
international community once again of the urgent need
to find a solution to the question of Palestine. Recently,
tension has been growing between Palestine and Israel
which China finds very worrisome. We call upon the
parties to exercise restraint and urge Israel to immediately
stop the construction of settlements and treat seriously
the legitimate concerns of Palestine, the Arab States
and the Islamic world with respect to the religious
sanctuary in East Jerusalem and avoid any words or
actions that might further escalate the situation. The
relevant parties, working on behalf of the international
community, should strengthen coordination and work
in synergy to bring the parties back to the right path of
talks and negotiations. It is imperative that the Council
take the required responsibility; inaction can no longer
be an option. China calls for swift Council action
towards holding consultations on the draft resolution
submitted by Jordan on behalf of the Arab States so
as to respond to their legitimate demands and those of
Palestine. China joins the international community in
continuing to work constructively towards a solution
for the question of Palestine.
Secondly, on the question of Burundi, the mandate
of the United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi
(BINUB) is coming to an end at the end of next
month. During the past few years, BINUB has worked
actively to help the Government of Burundi to carry
out peacebuilding, reconstruction and economic and
social development efforts. We hope that BINUB will
strengthen its coordination with the Government so as
to achieve a successful transition from the Integrated
Office to the United Nations country team. At the
same time, we call upon the international community
to continue to provide assistance to Burundi in
preparation for next year’s general election on the basis
of full respect for Burundi’s sovereignty.

14-65266

26/11/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

Thirdly, this month the Council held an open debate
on the question of counter-terrorism (see S/PV.7316)
and adopted a presidential statement at the end of the
meeting. China commends Australia for that initiative
and for the efforts it has carried out in that connection.
At present, the international counter-terrorism
landscape remains very grim. The means of recruiting
and financing terrorist organizations have become more
internationalized, with young people joining their ranks
and a greater reliance on digital technology. China calls
upon the international community to abandon double
standards in fighting terrorism, observe the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and
respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of the countries concerned.
It is vital that the United Nations and the Security
Council play a leading role and undertake effective
measures to prevent terrorist organizations from
using the Internet to broadcast terrorist and violent
audiovisual materials, spread extremist ideology,
recruit new members, raise funds, instigate plans
and execute terrorist actions. China supports the
international community’s efforts in strengthening
exchanges of information and intelligence, sharing
effective practices, enhancing capacity-building and
taking joint actions in order to maintain international
peace and security.
Finally, I wish to express my best wishes to Chad
for its assumption of the presidency for the month of
December.

S/PV.7325

The President: The Council has now concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. Before adjourning the meeting, however, as
this is the last scheduled meeting of the Council for
the month of November, I would like to say how much
the entire Australian team and I have appreciated the
cooperation, the collegiality and even the empathy we
have received from all of our colleagues in Council.
We express our thanks and gratitude for all the
assistance and support we have received from the
Security Council Affairs Division, on which we have
relied for its professionalism, hard work and diligence,
and to all the other personnel in Conference Services
and other parts of the Secretariat, including our
security personnel. They have all been a very efficient
and a friendly part of our Council team. I thank the
interpreters, who have often had to give us just that
additional bit of time in longer meetings.
As our presidency will end in the next few days, I
know I speak on behalf of all the Council members in
wishing the delegation of Chad a very good presidency
in the month of December. I will not say just, “Good
luck”, because although we wish that, of course, I think
it is very obvious to all of us that, in its preparations
for the month of December, the Chadian delegation has
shown that it is not relying on good luck alone. So we
look forward to a very constructive and very productive
month. I know that the delegation of Chad can expect
the completely uninhibited support of all Council
members.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

14-6526619/19
