Resolatiom adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Committee

including the drawing up of an electoral law and of
an independence constitution ;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate action, in consultation with the administering
Power and the Special Committee, to ensure the presence of the United Nations in the Territory for the
supervision of the preparation for, and the holding of,
the election envisaged in paragraph 5 ( b) above and
to participate in all other measures leading towards the
independence of the Territory;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General to transmit the present resolution to the administering Power
and to report to the Special Committee on its implementation ;
9. Decides to maintain the question of Equatorial
Guinea on its agenda.
1641st plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.
2356 (XXII). Question of French Somallland
The General Assembly,
Having._ considered the question of French Somaliland
(Djibouti),
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2228 (XXI) of 20 December 1966,
Having considered the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to French Somaliland (Djibouti), 27
Considering the circumstances in which the referendum organized by the administering Power took place
on 19 March 1967,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
French Somaliland (Djibouti) to self-determination
and independence in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Regrets that the administering Power has not cooperated with the United Nations in the application
of resolution 1514 (XV) and did not implement General Assembly resolution 2228 (XXI) ;
3. Calls upon the administering Power to create the
political conditions necessary for accelerating the implementation of the right of the people to self-determination and independence, including the full exercise of
political freedoms, and to allow the return of all refugees to the Territory;
4. Urges the administering Power to co-operate fully
with the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
and with the United Nations in accelerating the process
of decolonization in the Territory and to grant independence to the inhabitants at an early date;
5. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
consideration of the situation in French Somaliland
(Djibouti) and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-third session;
6. Decides to keep the question of French Somaliland
(Djibouti) on its agenda.
1641st plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.
21 Ibid.,

chapter XII.

55

2357 (XXII). Question of American Samoa, Antigua, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin
Islands, Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling)
Islands, Dominica, Gilbert and Ellice Islands,
Grenada, Guam, Mauritius, Montserrat, New
Hebrides, Niue, Pitcairn, St. Helena, St.
Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia, St. Vincent,
Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Swaziland,
Tokelau Islands, Turks and Caicos Islands
and the United States Virgin Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Antigua, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands,
Cayman Islands, Cocos_ (Keeling) Islands, Dominica,
Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Grenada, Guam, Mauritius,
Montserrat, New Hebrides, Niue, Pitcairn, St. Helena,
St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Swaziland, Tokelau Islands,
Turks and -Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin
Islands,
Having examined the chapters of the report of tlw
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to these Territories, 28
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961, 1~10 1 \'. \' 11 1
of 17 December 1962, 1956 (XVIII) of 11 December
1963, 2066 (XX) of 16 December 1965. 20(19 ( \'. \'.) of
16 December 1965, 2189 (XXI) of 13 December 1966,
2232 (XXI) of 20 December 1966 and 2288 ( XXl I) of
7 December 1967,
Noting the constitutional changes that were introduced in February and March 1967 in the Territories
of Antigua, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts-NevisAnguilla and St. Lucia and that are envisaged for the
Territory of St. Vincent,
Noting further the decision taken by the Special Committee that General Assembly resolution 15 I 4 ( X\')
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and other relevant resolutions continue to apply to these Territories,
Deeply concerned at the information contained in the
report of the Special Committee on the conti11uati<1n of
policies which aim, among other things, at the disruption of the territorial integrity of some of these Territories and at the creation by the administering Powers
of military bases and installations in contravention of
the relevant General Assembly resolutions,
Deplorinp the attitude of some administering I 'owers
which continue to refuse to allow United Nations visiting missions to visit these Territories,
Conscious that these situations require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations i11 the
achievement by the peoples of these Territories of their
objectives, as embodied in the Charter of the United
Nations and in the Declaration on the Granting of f 11dependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Aware of the special circumstances of geographical
location and economic conditions of some of these Territories,
l. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the I mplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of I112s Ibid., chapters XI, XIV to XVIII, XX and XX!ll
