A/76/299–S/2021/749

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
24 August 2021
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-sixth session
Items 37 and 38 of the provisional agenda*

Security Council
Seventy-sixth year

The situation in the Middle East
Question of Palestine

Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine
Report of the Secretary-General
Summary
The present report is submitted in accordance with the request of the General
Assembly in paragraph 15 of its resolution 75/22. The report, which covers the period
from September 2020 to August 2021, contains replies received from the parties
concerned to the note verbale sent by the Secretary-General pursuant to the request
contained in resolution 75/22, as well as the observations of the Secretary-General on
the current state of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and on international efforts to move
the peace process forward, with a view to achieving a peaceful settlement of the
question of Palestine.

* A/76/150.

21-11714 (E)

010921

*2111714*

A/76/299
S/2021/749

I. Introduction
1.

The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 75/22.

2.
On 2 July 2021, pursuant to the request contained in paragraph 15 of resolution
75/22, I addressed the following letter to the President of the Security Council:
“I have the honour of referring to resolution 75/22, which the General
Assembly adopted on 2 December 2020, at its seventy-fifth session, under the
agenda item ‘Question of Palestine’.
“Paragraph 15 of the resolution requests the Secretary -General, including
through his Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative to the Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian
Authority, to continue his efforts with the parties concerned, and in consultation
with the Security Council, including with regard to the reporting required
pursuant to resolution 2334 (2016), towards the attainment of a peaceful
settlement of the question of Palestine and the promotion of peace in the region
and to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session a report on
these efforts and on developments on this matter.
“In order to fulfil my reporting responsibilities under this resolution, I
should be grateful if you would kindly convey to me the views of the Security
Council by 19 July 2021.”
3.

As at 18 August 2021, no response to that request had been received.

4.
In a note verbale dated 24 May 2021, I sought the positions of States Members
of the United Nations, in particular the Governments of Egypt, Israel, Jordan,
Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as the State of Palestine, regarding
any steps taken by them to implement the relevant provisions of the resolution. As at
18 August 2021, replies had been received from Argentina, Bahrain, Cuba, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador and the Permanent Observer
Mission of the State of Palestine.
5.
The note verbale dated 12 July 2021 from the Permanent Observer Mission of
the State of Palestine to the United Nations reads as follows:
“For decades, the General Assembly has affirmed its stance on the question
of Palestine by adoption of an annual resolution entitled ‘Peaceful settlement of
the question of Palestine’, most recently reaffirmed as resolution 75/22. The
resolution’s provisions and the principles enshrined therein reflect the longstanding international consensus on the fundamental pillars and requirements
for achieving a just and lasting solution to the question of Palestine in all its
dimensions. Regrettably, the failure to uphold these principles and implement
those provisions – most starkly reflected in the profound disrespect and grave
violations that continue to be perpetrated by Israel, the occupying Power – have
obstructed the intended contribution of this resolution towards a just and
peaceful solution.
“At its seventy-fifth session, the General Assembly again overwhelmingly
supported this resolution and reiterated the calls for ending the Israeli
occupation that began in 1967; ensuring the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including to self-determination and independence; and responsible
international action to peacefully resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in line
with international law, the relevant resolutions and the permanent responsibility
of the United Nations towards the question of Palestine, which remains
unfulfilled since the adoption of resolution 181 (II) in 1947 and the decision to
partition Palestine and the Nakba that ensued in 1948, resulting in the forced
2/15

21-11714

A/76/299
S/2021/749

dispossession of the majority of the Palestinian people and their expulsion from
their homeland, an injustice that the Palestinian people continue to suffer to this
day, denied their right to return and their most basic human rights, including to
live in freedom and dignity.
“The lack of respect for international law by Israel, the occupying Power,
and inaction by the international community, which has failed to uphold and
implement its relevant resolutions, have prolonged and compounded this
injustice, enabling Israel’s impunity and entrenchment of its illegal colonial
occupation, now in its fifty-fourth year. Many characterize this as a stain on the
global conscience and a litmus test for the viability of the rules -based order,
maintaining that the failure to justly resolve it has severely undermined the
international system’s credibility and authority, particularly that of the Security
Council.
“Regrettably, while States have long condemned Israel’s non-compliance
with United Nations resolutions and its ongoing violations in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, with many amounting to war
crimes, crimes against humanity and the crimes of apartheid and persecution, as
affirmed by numerous independent human rights and humanitarian
organizations, legal scholars and academics, and as also recognized by
numerous Governments and parliamentarians worldwide, little has been done
concretely to hold Israel accountable for its violations and to compel compliance
with its international legal obligations.
“But it is also evident that justly resolving the Palestine question remains
a priority for the international community, as reaffirmed by countless
delegations in General Assembly and Security Council debates and in the
resolutions and declarations endorsed by political and regional groups,
including, inter alia, the League of Arab States, the Non-Aligned Movement, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the African Union and the G -77 and
China, including in the period since adoption of resolution 75/22.
“The overwhelming majority of States underscore the urgency of ending
this injustice, which remains a primary source of regional and global instability,
and consistently call for: ending the Israeli occupatio n that began in 1967;
Palestinian self-determination; salvaging and actualizing the two-State solution
of Palestine and Israel living side by side in peace and security, in sovereignty
and independence, within recognized borders based on the pre-1967 borders;
and a just solution for the Palestine refugee question based on resolution 194
(III), with a near-unanimous call for support to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to ensure continuity of
needed humanitarian and development assistance to over 5.7 million refugees
pending a just solution. Moreover, calls are continually made for the
intensification of international and regional efforts to promote that just solution
in line with international law, relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map, as repeatedly
called for by the General Assembly and the Security Council, most recently in
resolutions 75/22 and 2334 (2016) respectively.
“While the State of Palestine is grateful for such principled positions and
global support, unfortunately this has proven insufficient, as Israel, the
occupying Power, carries on in contempt and mockery of the international
community, disrespecting its will and trampling the law with its illegal
occupation and deliberate, systematic deprivation of the Palestinian people’s
inalienable rights, including those of Palestine refugees. After 73 years of Nakba
and over half a century of colonial military occupatio n and apartheid policies,
21-11714

3/15

A/76/299
S/2021/749

it is clear that statements and condemnations are not enough to end this historic
injustice and the longest belligerent occupation in modern history. As Israel
intensifies its violations before the world’s eyes, it is high time to translate such
positions into immediate action aimed at upholding the Charter of the United
Nations, enforcing legal obligations and ensuring accountability for the
violations being perpetrated, including war crimes.
“Israel has proven beyond a doubt that it is not willing to end this illegal
occupation but is instead willing to use all illegal means to fortify and prolong
its control of our land and subjugation of our people indefinitely. Ending such
impunity and ending the occupation therefore require t he activation of all
available diplomatic, political, legal mechanisms to ensure justice under the law,
uphold human rights and thus ultimately realize a just peace. The absence of
accountability only serves the occupation, enabling impunity at the expense of
Palestinian rights, inflicting mass suffering, destroying peace prospects and
devastating generations more.
“Despite continued setbacks and the deterioration of conditions in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, since the adop tion of
resolution 75/22, the State of Palestine remains committed to the path of peace
and international law as the guarantor of justice, in stark contradiction to the
occupying Power, which persists in its contempt of the law. At the same time,
the Palestinian people and Government reiterate the appeal to all States to
uphold the law and implement the provisions and commitments affirmed in
United Nations resolutions, stressing shared responsibilities and t he imperative
of multilateral efforts to address this grave situation and realize a just solution.
“A glimpse of the Palestinian people’s reality in the reporting period
exposes the depth and gravity of this injustice. In just a matter of months, the
world has witnessed a glaring display of Israel’s impunity as the Israeli
Government, military and settlers have proceeded apace with: rabid settler
colonization and acts of de facto annexation; myriad measures aimed at mass
dispossession of Palestinian families in occupied East Jerusalem, including in
the Sheikh Jarrah and Silwan neighbourhoods, and elsewhere throughout
Occupied Palestine, forcibly displacing hundreds of Palestinians; provocations
and incursions against the city’s holy sites, including the Aqs a Mosque/Haram
al-Sharif, with repeated violations of the historic and legal status quo, as well
as assaults on Muslim and Christian worshippers; another violent military
aggression against the Gaza Strip, killing and injuring over 250 Palestinians,
including 66 children and 41 women; the wanton destruction of Palestinian
homes and properties, land expropriation and exploitation of natural resources;
arrest, detention and imprisonment of thousands of Palestinians, including
children; intensification of a racist, discriminatory apartheid regime; dangerous
incitement, extremism and terror against Palestinians; tightening of the 14 -year
Israeli blockade on the Gaza Strip, exacerbating dire socioeconomic conditions
and the humanitarian suffering of 2 million Palestinians besieged there; and
countless other measures of collective punishment, all aimed at oppressing,
coercing and dispossessing our people and cementing the occupation.
“The escalation of these illegal, aggressive and destructive Israeli policies
and practices has inflicted vast harm on the Palestinian people, provoking
continual instability and decline of the situation on the ground on all fronts –
political, security, socioeconomic and humanitarian; aggravating religious
sensitivities, risking a religious conflagration; and further diminishing the
viability of the two-State solution based on the pre-1967 lines. Last year, the
international community warned Israel against annexation and demanded an end
to its illegal policies and practices, perhaps believing that Israel would abide in
4/15

21-11714

A/76/299
S/2021/749

good faith. The reality has proven otherwise and reaffirmed that, without action
that imposes consequences for violations, Israel will continue undaunted with
its crimes against the Palestinian people.
“The international community must demand a halt to all illegal Israeli
policies and practices in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and demand full respect for international law. The path to a just
solution is clear, as enshrined in resolution 75/22 and all other relevant United
Nations resolutions, including Security Council resolution 2334 (2016), which
charts a clear path to peace and must be implemented in full. Although the
Council regrettably remains paralysed on this issue, States themselves must
uphold obligations to pursue accountability, reasserting the applicability of
international law in all circumstances and contributing towards end ing this
injustice.
“International action must include support for accountability mechanisms,
including legal action in courts such as the International Criminal Court and the
International Court of Justice, as their rulings and decisions are and will rem ain
a primary determination of international law. The decision taken by the Office
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court to initiate an investigation
on the situation in Palestine must be supported and undertaken forthwith as a
means of enforcing the law and ensuring justice. Diplomatic and political
support for the Court is urgent in the light of attacks aimed at undermining its
credibility and authority in an attempt to obstruct accountability. International
courts must be able to carry out their mandate and work without interference, to
end impunity in the face of serious international crimes.
“The State of Palestine also continues to call for a multilateral political
process to achieve a just and peaceful solution based on the internatio nally
endorsed terms of reference and parameters, in accordance with international
law and relevant United Nations resolutions. We have appealed to the Security
Council and the Quartet members – the Russian Federation and the United States
along with the European Union and the United Nations – to uphold their
obligations and exert serious efforts to this end, in cooperation with the League
of Arab States and concerned regional and other partners and with the vital
support of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the Non-Aligned Movement
and all peace-loving nations. We reiterate our call for the convening of an
international peace conference based on the international consensus.
“The international community must realize that the demographic
composition, character, status and identity of the Palestinian Territory occupied
since 1967, including East Jerusalem, is being aggressively altered and the
Palestinian people’s inalienable rights, including to self-determination and
independence, are being perpetually obstructed absent any accountability for
Israel’s crimes. This is not hearsay, but has been thoroughly documented,
including by United Nations agencies, bodies and mandate holders, including
the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Palestinian
territories occupied since 1967 and numerous international, Palestinian and
Israeli humanitarian and human rights organizations. Only accountability and
implementation of the law can remedy this wrongful situation and give genuine
meaning to the global efforts to promote justice and peace.
“The international community, including the Security Council, is not being
asked to resort to extraordinary lengths to hold Israel accountable, but to simply
muster the will to respect and follow through on existing frameworks and rules
of law and affirmed obligations and commitments to end this injustice.
Continued inaction has rewarded Israel, the occupying Power, with automatic
21-11714

5/15

A/76/299
S/2021/749

impunity and an abundance of time to pursue evermore criminal policies at zero
cost to its international standing and relations, but with incalculable
repercussions for the Palestinian people and for the viability of peace prospects
and international law itself. Unless rectified, such gross violations and grave
breaches, including of the erga omnes right to self-determination and the
absolute prohibition of the acquisition of territory by force, will persist, to the
detriment of the Palestinian people, the Israeli people and a future of peace,
stability and security in the Middle East region and globally.
“The calls to compel Israel to respect its international law and the human
rights of the Palestinian people is reaching unprecedented levels, as
Governments and citizens worldwide can no longer ignore or tolerate the
abhorrent reality created by Israel’s 54-year colonial occupation and apartheid
regime. This was apparent in the wide support given again to resolution 75/22
in 2020 and in the global demonstrations held in solidarity with Palestine in
2021.
“It is past time for the international community to act on these long standing calls. We urge strengthened support for the General Assembly’s efforts
to contribute to justly resolving the Palestine question, including support for the
vital efforts of the United Nations Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People and the Division for Palestinian Rights,
important mechanisms mandated by the Assembly to advance the achievement
of Palestinian rights, including self-determination, and a just solution based on
a two-State solution based on the pre-1967 borders, in accordance with
international law and the relevant United Nations resolutions. We appeal to all
States, intergovernmental organizations and civil society for their support and
solidarity and fulfilment of their obligations and commitments to make 2021 a
year that ushers in a new era of justice, freedom, equality and peace.”

II. Developments
6.
International efforts to promote the peaceful settlem ent of the question of
Palestine continued during the reporting period. The envoys of the Middle East
Quartet (the Russian Federation, the United States of America, the European Union
and the United Nations) consulted one another informally throughout the year and
held monthly conference calls to discuss the situation on the ground and prospects for
advancing Israeli-Palestinian peace. The United Nations reaffirmed its commitment
to ending the occupation and achieving a negotiated two-State solution, in line with
relevant United Nations resolutions, international law and bilateral agreements,
within secure and recognized borders on the basis of the pre-1967 lines and with
Jerusalem as the capital of both States, and reiterated its call to all stakeholders to
refrain from any unilateral action that harms the prospects of meaningful negotiations
and peace. Discussions are ongoing among Quartet members regarding the way
forward.
7.
On 25 September 2020, in his statement to the General Assembly, the President
of the State of Palestine, Mahmoud Abbas, called for the convening of an international
conference in early 2021 to engage in a genuine peace process, based on international
law, United Nations resolutions and the relevant terms of reference, leading to an end
to the occupation and the achievement by the Palestinian people of their freedom and
independence within their State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, on the 1967
borders.
8.
Agreements between Israel and Bahrain and between Israel and the United Arab
Emirates were formalized in a signing ceremony at the White House on 15 September.
6/15

21-11714

A/76/299
S/2021/749

On 23 October, the leaders of the United States, Israel and the Sudan announced that
the Governments of Israel and the Sudan had agreed to end the state of belligerence
between their countries and normalize relations. On 22 December, the Governments
of Israel and Morocco agreed to establish full diplomatic, peaceful and friendly
relations in a signing ceremony in Rabat. On 22 July 2021, the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission received credentials from the Ambassador of Israel to
Burundi, Chad and Ethiopia as an observer of the African Union.
9.
On 17 November, the Palestinian leadership announ ced its decision to resume
security and civilian coordination with Israel and accept the clearance revenues Israel
collects on its behalf, after Israel suspended its annexation plans as part of the
agreements it had signed with several Arab States.
10. From September to November, Fatah and Hamas held bilateral discussions in
Istanbul, Turkey, and, subsequently, in Cairo. On 15 January, President Abbas issued
a decree calling for legislative, presidential and Palestinian National Council
elections in 2021. On 9 February, Palestinian factions concluded additional talks in
Cairo, thereby resolving several long-standing differences. On 17 February, the
Palestinian Central Elections Commission concluded the registration of voters and
announced that over 90 per cent of eligible voters had been registered. On 30 April,
President Abbas said that he was indefinitely postponing the legislative, presidential
and Palestinian National Council elections scheduled for 2021 until the participation
of Palestinians in occupied East Jerusalem was guaranteed by Israel. Preparations for
the Palestinian Legislative Council elections scheduled for 22 May were at an
advanced stage. Some 90 per cent of eligible voters (equal to more than 2.5 million
Palestinians) had registered to participate, some 50 per cent of whom were women
and more than 40 per cent of whom would have been first-time voters. Thirty-six
candidate lists, comprising a total of 1,389 candidates, had been cleared to participate
by the Central Elections Commission, and the campaign period was set to begin on
1 May.
11. The reporting period was marked by an increase in violence throughout the
Occupied Palestinian Territory and Israel. Against the backdrop of tensions in
Jerusalem, violence erupted between Israel and Palestinian armed groups based in the
Gaza Strip in May, leading to the worst escalation of armed hostilities since 2014.
Overall, 321 Palestinians, including 80 children and 44 women, were killed by Israeli
security forces as a result of air strikes and during demonstrations, clashes, security
operations and other incidents, and 14,823 Palestinians were injured, including some
1,079 by live ammunition. A total of 11 Israeli civilians, including two children and
six women, were killed in attacks, clashes and oth er incidents and 789 Israelis were
injured in the course of these events. In addition, three non -Israeli civilians and one
Israeli soldier were killed in Israel during the hostilities.
12. The Israeli authorities’ planned forced eviction of four extended P alestine
refugee families, approximately 75 people, from their homes in the Sheikh Jarrah
neighbourhood heightened tensions between Palestinians and Israeli security forces,
resulting in increasingly tense protests beginning in April. In early April, video s went
viral on social media depicting violent attacks by Palestinians against ultra -Orthodox
Jews and attacks against Palestinians by extreme right-wing groups. Following the
start of Ramadan on 13 April, there was a marked increase in unrest after the Is raeli
authorities installed metal barriers outside Damascus Gate in the Old City of
Jerusalem, blocking access to a public area used by Palestinians. Following the
installation of the barriers, widespread protests and violent clashes between
Palestinians and Israeli security forces occurred in occupied East Jerusalem, in
particular in the vicinity of the Aqsa Mosque and Damascus Gate, as well as in Sheikh
Jarrah.

21-11714

7/15

A/76/299
S/2021/749

13. The unrest increased further on 22 April, when Israeli civilians marched towards
Damascus Gate chanting “death to Arabs” and other anti-Arab slogans and clashed
with Palestinians, who were also chanting inflammatory rhetoric, before both groups
were dispersed by Israeli security forces. The removal by those forces of the barriers,
on 25 April, temporarily restored a relative calm to the area. Beginning on 28 April,
Palestinians held daily protests in the Sheikh Jarrah area, which, combined with a
continued heavy presence of Israeli security forces and provocation by Israeli
civilians, including settlers and Knesset members, triggered repeated clashes
throughout East Jerusalem.
14. On 10 May, Jerusalem Day, the situation escalated further when clashes erupted
in Haram al-Sharif/Temple Mount as Palestinians threw stones from the compound
and Israeli security forces entered the Aqsa Mosque compound, launching stun
grenades, using tear gas and firing rubber-coated metal bullets. Subsequently, the
Israeli authorities took steps to reduce tensions, including by rerouting a scheduled
demonstration, organized by right-wing Israeli activists to mark Jerusalem Day, away
from the Muslim quarter of the Old City, postponing a Supreme Court hearing on the
Sheikh Jarrah evictions and barring Jewish visits to the holy sites. Nevertheless, the
violence and heavy security presence continued within the Old City.
15. On 14 May, the deadliest day in the occupied West Bank in over a decade, 10
Palestinians were killed by Israeli security forces in demonstrations and clashes and
about 250 were injured by live bullets, raising concerns that Israeli security forces
had employed excessive use of force. A total of 8,217 Palestinians were injured, 4,703
of them from tear gas inhalation. Most of the fatalities resulted from the use by Israeli
security forces of live ammunition in the context of demonstrations or clashes or in
response to attacks or attempted attacks.
16. On 10 May, late in the afternoon, a spokesperson for the Izz al-Din al-Qassam
Brigades of Hamas published a statement giving Israel “an ultimatum until six in the
evening today to withdraw its forces from the blessed Al Aqsa Mosque and Sheikh
Jarrah neighbourhood and release all detainees from the recent events in Jerusalem”.
That evening, Palestinian armed groups indiscriminately fired 191 rockets and
mortars towards Israel, including some towards Jerusalem, to which th e Israel
Defense Forces responded with 60 missiles and shells, hitting Gaza. For the next
10 days, Israel continued intensive air strikes and shelling, reportedly targeting armed
groups and their infrastructure, while Palestinian armed groups in Gaza conti nued to
launch rockets and mortars on an unprecedented scale towards Israel, including from
highly populated civilian neighbourhoods. The inner compound yard of one United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
school was struck by two Israeli missiles despite the school having been designated
an emergency shelter for civilians during the hostilities. In the context of a subsequent
investigation aimed at finding a way to better secure the building, UNRWA discovered
a tunnel under the school and subsequently condemned the existence and potential
use by Palestinian armed groups of such tunnels underneath its schools in the
strongest possible terms. There is no indication of the existence of any entry or exit
points for the tunnel on the premises. Initial risk assessments of UNRWA premises by
the United Nations Mine Action Service confirmed the existence of unexploded
ordnance that could have led to further damage. Continuing assessments and activities
were initially halted by Hamas authorities. After UNRWA protested these steps,
highlighting the inviolability and neutrality of UNRWA premises and the need to
ensure the safe return of children to their schools, Hamas vacated the school. The
United Nations Mine Action Service continued to remove any remaining explosive
ordnance as quickly as possible.
17. Between 10 and 21 May, Palestinian armed groups fired over 4,000 rockets and
projectiles towards Israel, with over 600 falling in the Gaza Strip, reportedly
8/15

21-11714

A/76/299
S/2021/749

accounting for some Palestinian casualties. According to Israeli sources, Israeli forces
carried out over 1,500 strikes from the air, land and sea across the Gaza Strip. Israeli
air strikes and shelling, directed at what Israel said were targets containing militant
installations, caused extensive damage to civilian property and infrastructure,
including public buildings, residential homes and commercial units, including four
high-rise towers, one of which hosted international media outlets. Damage was also
inflicted on humanitarian assets, medical facilities and roads. Rockets from Gaza
reached as far as the outskirts of Jerusalem, Tel Aviv and its suburbs and Ben Gurion
Airport. The rockets struck multiple locations, causing damage to residential and
commercial property, as well as to schools and a crude oil pipeline.
18. During the escalation in Gaza, the Security Council held four extraordinary
sessions on 10, 12, 16 and 18 May, the General Assembly held an urgent meeting to
address the situation on 20 May, and the Human Rights Council held a special session
on 27 May.
19. Throughout the hostilities, the United Nations worked with all sides to restore
calm, de-escalate the situation and prevent any further loss of life. The escalation
continued until both sides announced a cessation of hostilities, which began at 2 a.m.
on 21 May.
20. The armed hostilities took a severe toll on the civilian population. Between
10 and 21 May, 259 Palestinians were killed in Gaza, including 66 children and
41 women (4 of whom were pregnant), with 248 of them, including 63 children, killed
in air strikes and by falling rockets. According to the Gaza Ministry of Health, 1,948
Palestinians were injured. At least 129 of those killed were civilians. In some cases,
families, including women, children and infants, were killed in their homes by Israeli
air strikes. Over 40 people are estimated to have been killed in a series of air strikes
reportedly targeting tunnels under residential areas in Gaza City overnight on 15 May.
The fatalities included the head of internal medicine at Al-Shifa Hospital, the main
hospital in the Gaza Strip, and one of just a few neurologists in Gaza, as well as
members of their families, and nine members of a family – two women and seven
children – from the Al-Shati refugee camp.
21. In Israel, a 5-year-old boy was killed by a rocket in Sderot and a 16 -year-old
girl and her father were killed in Lod. Nine Israelis, including two children, four
women and one soldier, and three foreign nationals were killed, and hundreds of
Israelis were injured during the hostilities. Throughout the 11 days of hostilities,
hundreds of thousands of Israelis across much of the south and centre of the country
repeatedly had to run for shelter amid rocket barrages. In addition, incendiary
balloons and kites launched from Gaza sparked dozens of fires in southern Israel
during the period.
22. While the cessation of hostilities agreed between Israel and Hamas has largely
held, there have subsequently been 62 incidents in which Palestinian armed groups
have launched incendiary balloons towards Israel since the cessation of hostilities
came into effect, causing fires. In retaliation, the Israeli Defense Forces carried out
22 strikes and fired 49 missiles against what they said were Hamas targets in the G aza
Strip, injuring two women and damaging property. On 16 August, armed groups fired
at least one rocket from Gaza towards Israel. No injuries or damages were reported.
23. Beyond the human tragedy for both Palestinians and Israelis, and the physical
damage of 11 days of fighting, the economic impact of the hostilities in May further
exacerbated the existing humanitarian crisis in the Occupied Palestinian Territory and
severely weakened the economy of Gaza. On 6 July, the United Nations, the World
Bank and the European Union published the Rapid Damage and Needs Assessment.
According to the Assessment, damages in Gaza are estimated at between $290 million
and $380 million, while economic losses may reach nearly $200 million. The social
21-11714

9/15

A/76/299
S/2021/749

sector was hit hardest, significantly weakening the safety net of the most vulnerable.
The immediate and short-term recovery and reconstruction needs, over the first
24 months, are estimated at between $345 million and $485 million. Also on 6 July,
a technical meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the
International Assistance to Palestinians was held to align donor efforts to help address
both the aftermath of the May escalation and the significant fiscal crisis facing the
Palestinian Authority.
24. By 2021, 9,566 of 11,000 houses destroyed during the 2014 conflict in Gaza had
been rebuilt and the construction of another 639 houses was under way. Overall, it is
estimated that the May conflict resulted in damages to approximately 4,100 housing
units, 1,600 of which were destroyed and 2,500 of which were partially damaged.
Total damages are assessed at between $130 million and $160 million. Over 113,000
Palestinians were temporarily displaced in UNRWA schools or with host families
during the hostilities, heightening the risk of the spread of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) owing to overcrowding. Approximately 600 families (3,600 individuals)
have remained internally displaced for more than six years, since the 2014 conflict.
25. During the May conflict, damage was inflicted on 181 schools, including 41
UNRWA schools, in addition to 116 kindergartens and 16 health facilities. Electricity
supply across the Gaza Strip was further reduced from an average of 15 hours a day
to 5–6 hours per day owing to damage to key electricity feeder lines, transformers
and networks, as well as to Israel barring entry for fuel delivered through the United
Nations for the Gaza power plant, causing disruptions to the provision of basic
services, including water, sanitation and health care. About 800,000 people
temporarily lacked regular access to safe piped water as a result of damage to
infrastructure and the reduced electricity supply. Israel reopened the Kerem Shalom
crossing on 17 May to facilitate the entry of a shipment from Jordan of medical aid
and of medical personnel. The crossing came under mortar fire from Gaza, however,
and was closed.
26. Following the ceasefire, Israel gradually lifted some restrictions on the import
and export of goods. On 28 June, fuel deliveries for the Gaza Power Plant again
resumed through the Kerem Shalom crossing under the existing United Nations
framework overseen by the United Nations Office for Project Services with support
from Qatar, returning electricity supply to its previous level, rou ghly 14 hours per
day, at the end of July. The entry of construction material is still restricted, preventing
urgent repairs to hundreds of sites, including schools, hospitals and water facilities.
In addition, Israel reinstated the designated fishing zone off the coast of Gaza, which,
as of 18 August, stands at 12 nautical miles.
27. In the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, clashes, attacks, search and-arrest operations and other incidents resulted in the death of 66 Palestinians,
including 14 children, and injuries to 13,011 Palestinians, including at least 696
children and 48 women. Two Israelis, including one woman, were killed and 109 were
injured in the course of these events.
28. Throughout the reporting period, protests and violent clashe s took place
throughout the occupied West Bank almost daily. During clashes in May, Israeli
security forces regularly used live ammunition against Palestinian protesters,
resulting in the killing of 24 Palestinians and injuries to 744 others. Israeli secur ity
forces also continued to conduct search-and-arrest operations and to detain
Palestinians, including children. The Palestinian Authority continued to arrest
individuals associated with Hamas and political parties other than Fatah, intensifying
such actions in April, prior to scheduled Palestinian elections, and again in May,
following the postponement of elections on 30 April. Hamas authorities in Gaza also
summoned and, in some cases, detained Fatah affiliates. Since September 2020, the
10/15

21-11714

A/76/299
S/2021/749

Israel Prison Service has not responded to freedom-of-information requests by Israeli
non-governmental organizations for monthly statistics concerning Palestinians held
in Israeli detention. According to Palestinian sources, however, as of 5 August ,
540 Palestinians were being held by the Israeli authorities in administrative detention.
29. Increasingly, Israel restricted freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and
association, including by arresting and prosecuting through the military courts
Palestinian civil society actors, human rights defenders, students and political figures.
Of particular concern was the detention, including administrative detention, of
members of Palestinian civil society organizations on broad charges of membership
of “unlawful” or terrorist organizations, and other attempts to discredit the work of
civil society organizations and undercut their funding. OHCHR has raised serious
concerns about allegations of ill-treatment during the arrest, interrogation and
detention of Palestinians.
30. On 24 June, Nizar Banat, a prominent political activist and former parliamentary
candidate, died following his arrest and detention by the Palestinian Security Forces.
According to his family, he was severely beaten during his arrest. Following the
incident, Palestinians held demonstrations across the occupied West Bank. In
Ramallah, on 26 June and 5 July, the Palestinian Security Forces beat protesters with
batons and indiscriminately fired tear gas and stun grenades. On 26 June, the
Palestinian Security Forces also failed to stop violent acts by groups of persons not
in uniform reportedly acting in a coordinated manner with security personnel. Those
acts resulted in violence targeting journalists and human rights monitors, including
one United Nations staff member. Women present at the demonstrations reported
having been subjected to sexual harassment and gender-based threats on social media
afterwards. In the following weeks, several prominent activists, electoral candidates,
journalists, human rights defenders and lawyers were also arrested by Palestinian
forces. All were subsequently released.
31. During the reporting period, the Israeli authorities advanced or approved plans
for some 6,600 housing units in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
marking a decrease compared with some 8,000 units during the previous reporting
period. On 14 and 15 October, in one of the largest collective advancements in recent
years, the Israeli authorities approved plans for the construction of some 5,000
housing units in Area C, approximately 80 per cent of which are planned to be built
in settlements in outlying locations, deep inside the occupied West Bank, in areas
further impeding the contiguity of a future Palestinian State. As at 18 August, citing
the absence of Israeli-issued building permits, which remain almost impossible for
Palestinians to obtain, the Israeli authorities demolished or seized 908 structures,
displacing 1,084 people, including 608 children and 239 women, and otherwise
affecting about 9,500 others. During the reporting period, a total of 79 newly built
structures were demolished on the basis of Military Order 1797, which authorizes an
expedited process for the removal of structures. Structures can thus be demolished as
early as 96 hours after the delivery of a notice, thereby preventing most owners from
being heard before a judicial body. An additional 72 structures were demolished by
their owners, displacing 140 people, including 69 children and 35 women. The Israeli
authorities also demolished structures and homes built by settlers in unauthorized
settlement outposts.
32. On 2 August, the High Court of Justice of Israel again adjourned an appeal
hearing requested by four Palestinian families that were under threat of eviction from
their homes in the Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood in East Jerusalem. The hearing had
originally been scheduled for 10 May but was postponed amid heightened tensions in
East Jerusalem. In addition, several judicial proceedings related to the eviction of
Palestinian families in the East Jerusalem neighbourhood of Silwan were under way.
Additional legal developments are expected towards the end of 2021.
21-11714

11/15

A/76/299
S/2021/749

33. During the reporting period, 133 violent incidents involving Israeli settlers were
recorded, resulting in 485 Palestinians being injured, including 13 women and
304 children. Of the total, 136 injuries were attributed to Israeli settlers and the
remainder to subsequent clashes with the Israel Defense Forces. There were also
304 incidents by Israeli settlers which involved damag e to Palestinian property.
During the same period, there were 49 violent incidents by Palestinians against Israeli
settlers and other civilians in the occupied West Bank, resulting in the killing of two
Israelis and injuries to 69 Israelis.
34. On 5 February, the Pre-Trial Chamber of the International Criminal Court
decided that the Court’s territorial jurisdiction in Situation in the State of Palestine
extends to the Occupied Palestinian Territory. On 3 March, the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court confirmed in a statement that her office had initiated an
investigation regarding the situation in the State of Palestine covering crimes within
the jurisdiction of the Court alleged to have been committed since 13 June 2014.
35. In its resolution S-30/1, the Human Rights Council decided to establish an
ongoing independent, international commission of inquiry to investigate in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and in Isra el all alleged
violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights law
leading up to and since 13 April 2021, and to investigate also the underlying root
causes of recurrent tensions, instability and protraction of conflict, including systematic
discrimination and repression based on national, ethnic, racial or religious identity.
36. The fiscal situation of the Palestinian Authority continued to be a source of
significant concern. The budget gap for the current budget year is expec ted to be of
more than $1 billion. On 11 July, the Government of Israel approved the freezing of
approximately $180 million in annual clearance revenues collected by Israel on behalf
of the Palestinian Authority in monthly instalments. The amount to be wit hheld is
equal to the amount that the Israeli authorities allege that the Palestinian Authority
paid during 2020 to security prisoners, detainees and the families of Palestinians
killed while carrying out attacks against Israelis.
37. The socioeconomic situation of Palestinians was further compounded by
COVID-19. The rising number of infections continues to pose grave risks in Gaza and
the occupied West Bank. The impact of COVID-19 on populations in these areas was
exacerbated by the overall political climate, which presented challenges to response
efforts, and by the imposed closures on Gaza.
38. During the reporting period, the World Health Organization (WHO), the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the humanitarian partners of the United
Nations supported COVID-19-related diagnoses, case management, infection
prevention and control, communication on the risk posed by COVID -19, community
engagement and vaccine strategy development and roll-out. With support from WHO
and UNICEF through the global COVAX Facility, the Palestinian Authority was able
to deliver a first batch of some 60,000 vaccines to the West Bank and Gaza on
17 March. By 25 July, the Palestinian Ministry of Health had received 1,541,620
vaccines through the COVAX Facility (supported by WHO, UNICEF and the Gavi
Alliance) and bilateral arrangements, and had vaccinated 495,621 people in the West
Bank and Gaza by 2 August. Israel also vaccinated East Jerusalemites and
approximately 100,000 Palestinians holding permits to ent er Israel.

III. Observations
39. During the reporting period, I delivered four reports to the Security Council on
the implementation of Security Council resolution 2334 (2016), in which I expressed

12/15

21-11714

A/76/299
S/2021/749

my concern regarding the continued lack of implementation of the provisions of the
resolution. In my reports, I took note of international efforts and reiterated the
commitment of the United Nations to supporting Palestinians and Israelis to resolve
the conflict and end the occupation, in line with relevant United Nations resolutions,
international law and bilateral agreements, and to realizing the vision of two States –
Israel and Palestine – living side by side in peace within secured and recognized
borders on the basis of the pre-1967 lines, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States.
40. The rapid escalation of violence in May, the violent attacks against Palestinian
and Israeli civilians and the incitement to violence spiralled quickly out of control
and into a devastating exchange between Israel and armed groups in Gaza on a scale
not seen in years. These events have only deepened the divisions between Israelis and
Palestinians and made progress towards peace an even greater challenge.
41. The indiscriminate launching of rockets, mortars and incendiary devices
towards Israeli civilian population centres, including from highly populated civilian
neighbourhoods, by Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad and others must cease. I recall
that international humanitarian law prohibits indiscriminate attacks and requires
parties to a conflict to distinguish between civilians and combatants, and between
civilian objects and military objectives. Although Israel took a number of precautions,
such as giving advance warning of attacks in some cases, air strikes in densely
populated areas resulted in a high level of civilian fatalities and injuries and in the
widespread destruction of civilian infrastructure. Such strikes raise concerns about
compliance by Israel with the principles of distinction and proportionality under
international humanitarian law. Israel must abide by its obligations under
international humanitarian law and take all feasible precautions to spare the civilian
population and civilian objects in the conduct of military operations.
42. I am particularly appalled that children continue to be victims of violence. I
reiterate that children should not be the target of violence or be put in harm’s way.
They should be afforded special protection from any form of violence and be detained
only as a measure of last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of time.
43. I am deeply concerned by the multiple instances in which officials exacerbated
the tensions and violence through unacceptable rhetoric or pro vocative actions. Some
such statements and actions contributed to the deadly escalation. As stated in my
reports to the Security Council on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), I
continue to urge leaders on all sides to refrain from incitement and to condemn,
consistently and unequivocally, acts of terror and violence in all their forms.
44. I welcome the cessation of hostilities agreed on 21 May and recognize the
important efforts of Egypt, Qatar and the United States in support of ending the
violence. I also wish to thank my Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process for his efforts. Nevertheless, the situation in Gaza remains deeply worrying,
including in respect of the severe emotional trauma and suffering experienced by the
people of Gaza owing to years of prolonged Israeli closures and severe economic and
movement restrictions, the nature of Hamas rule and the ongoing threat of violence.
Although the agreement on the cessation of hostilities continues to hold, it is fragile
and the risk of a major escalation is ever present.
45. On 27 May, the Deputy Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and United Nations Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator for the
Occupied Palestinian Territory launched an inter-agency flash appeal, having
identified a need for around $95 million for critical programming. As at 18 August,
some $45 million have been raised. I thank donors for their generous support and
encourage additional contributions so that pressing humanitarian needs can be
addressed. I also encourage support to be provided to meet the immediate and short term recovery and reconstruction needs, estimated at between $345 million and
21-11714

13/15

A/76/299
S/2021/749

$485 million over 24 months. More support, including from Israel, is also needed for
the Palestinian response to COVID-19, to ensure that Palestinians throughout the
Occupied Palestinian Territory receive a fair and timely share of the vaccines.
46. Humanitarian and economic support alone, however, will not help to overcome
the challenges in Gaza. These challenges require political solutions and the will to
pursue them. It is vital that Hamas and other factions end their militant activities and
military build-up. Taking into consideration its legitimate security concerns, I urge
Israel to ease restrictions on the movement of goods and people to and from Gaza, in
line with Security Council resolution 1860 (2009), with the goal of ultimately lifting
them. Only by fully lifting the debilitating closures can we hope to sustainably resolve
the humanitarian crisis. Meanwhile, the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism remains
critical for facilitating reconstruction and supporting vital infrastructur e projects to
bolster water and energy networks in Gaza.
47. Reports of violent incidents throughout the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, remain of concern. I unequivocally condemn all attacks on Palestinian and
Israeli civilians and call upon all sides to refrain from violence and to clearly and
unequivocally condemn attacks when they occur. All perpetrators must be held
accountable for their crimes.
48. I reiterate the call for the status quo at the holy sites to be respected and upheld
in line with the special and historical role of Jordan as custodian of the Muslim and
Christian holy sites in Jerusalem.
49. The postponement of the Palestinian election process has had significant
implications, both for the security situation on the ground and the future of the
Palestinian national project. I commend the tireless efforts of the Palestinian Central
Elections Commission, which, throughout the process, ensured that all the technical
aspects were effectively implemented. The holding of elections in the occupied West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, and Gaza would be a crucial step towards Palestinian
unity, giving renewed legitimacy to national institutions, including a democratically
elected Parliament and Government. Moreover, setting a new and tim ely date for
elections would be important for reassuring the Palestinian people that their voices
will be heard. I reiterate that Palestinian unity is crucial for reaching the larger
objective of a Palestinian State and lasting peace.
50. The general state of human rights and freedoms in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory remains of concern. I reiterate my earlier calls to end the practice of
administrative detention and either to charge detainees, where there are grounds to do
so, or to release them immediately. All children should be treated with due
consideration for their age and be detained only in situations justified under the
applicable rules of international humanitarian law and international or applicable
human rights law. Freedom of expression, association and peaceful assembly must be
respected by Israel and any restriction must be imposed in accordance with the
relevant provisions of international human rights law. Accusations of terrorism must
be made in accordance with the framework defined in article 14 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, including respect of fair trial guarantees.
51. I call upon the Palestinian Authority to ensure that allegations of
disproportionate use of force by the Palestinian Security Forces ar e investigated and
that all perpetrators are held to account. The Palestinian people must be able to
exercise their rights to freedom of expression, opinion and peaceful assembly.
Arbitrary and politically motivated arrests must cease.
52. I remain deeply troubled by the continued settlement activities in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem. I reiterate that the establishment by Israel of
settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem,
14/15

21-11714

A/76/299
S/2021/749

has no legal validity and constitutes a flagrant violation of international law. I urge
the Government of Israel to stop the advancement of all settlement plans immediately.
53. Continued violence between Palestinians and Israeli settlers and other civilians
in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, is of deep concern. I urge Israel,
as the occupying Power, to ensure the safety and security of the Palestinian
population. All incidents must be investigated and those responsible must be held
accountable.
54. The impact on women of the ongoing humanitarian and economic crisis in Gaza
is of particular concern. The proportion of women participating in the labour force in
Gaza, where about 70 per cent of women are unemployed, is among the lowest in the
world. These poor employment prospects result in female-headed households facing
greater poverty and food insecurity. In turn, poverty and a lack of economic
opportunities are key factors driving violence against women in Gaza, while the
humanitarian crisis has resulted in numerous health issues for women. According to
the Palestinian Ministry of Women’s Affairs, gender-based violence has soared by
300 per cent since the COVID-19 pandemic began; the proportion of women
participating in the labour force has shrunk to 16 per cent and only 14 per cent of
senior positions in the public sector are held by women. The United Nations continues
to assist Palestinian women and girls in a broad range of areas, but much more needs
to be done to address their needs and vulnerabilities.
55. I would like to reiterate that the fate of two Israeli civilians and the bodies of
two Israel Defense Force soldiers held by Hamas in Gaza remains an important
humanitarian concern. I call upon Hamas to provide the family members of those
civilians with any information it has on their fate, as required by international
humanitarian law. I also remain deeply concerned at the continued Israeli practice of
holding the bodies of Palestinians killed while carrying out or allegedly carrying out
attacks against Israelis and call upon Israel to return withheld bodies to their families.
56. I remain extremely concerned by the shortfall of $100 million in the UNRWA
programme budget. I welcome the resumption of funding from the United States last
April and call upon Member States to ensure that the agency has the liquidity to
conduct operations. UNRWA is vital to the region’s stability, especially in the
aftermath of a devastating conflict. I also welcome efforts by Jordan and Sweden to
organize an international conference on UNRWA in October. Investing in UNRWA
remains indispensable for achieving regional stability and peace in the Middle East.
57. I would like to express my deep appreciation to my Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Tor Wennesland, for his outstanding service in what
remains a challenging context. I am also grateful to the Commissioner-General of
UNRWA, Philippe Lazzarini, and to UNRWA staff for the remarkable work carried
out on behalf of Palestine refugees. I pay tribute too to all United Nations staff who
work under difficult circumstances in the service of the Organization.
58. I will continue to ensure that the United Nations works towards a resolution of
the conflict that would end the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and establish an
independent, democratic, contiguous, sovereign and viable Palestinian State living
side by side with Israel in peace, security and mutual recognition, with Jerusalem as
the capital of both States, in line with United Nations resolutions, i nternational law
and previous agreements.

21-11714

15/15
