A/60/PV.53

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixtieth session

53rd plenary meeting
Wednesday, 23 November 2005, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Eliasson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In the absence of the President, Mr. Swe
(Myanmar), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 112
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(c) Election of the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme
Note by the Secretary-General (A/60/553)
The Acting Chairman: In his note, the
Secretary-General informs the General Assembly that
in its decision 56/312 of 21 November 2001 the
Assembly re-elected Mr. Klaus Töpfer as Executive
Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP) for a four-year term, beginning on
1 February 2002 and ending on 31 January 2006.
In accordance with section II, paragraph 2, of
General Assembly resolution 2997 (XXVII) and
bearing in mind Mr. Töpfer’s decision not to seek a
further term as Executive Director of the Programme,
the Secretary-General proposes a two-month extension
of Mr. Töpfer’s appointment until 31 March 2006,
which would allow time to identify a suitable successor
and ensure continuity in the work of UNEP and its
Governing Council.

(Sweden)

Accordingly, may I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to extend Mr. Klaus Töpfer’s
appointment as Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme for two months, until
the end of March 2006?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 112.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on
agenda items 113 (a) to (e), 138 and 145.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Fifth
Committee that are before it today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that:

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

05-61599 (E)

*0561599*

A/60/PV.53

“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, that is, either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in the plenary meeting is
different from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance.
I therefore hope that we may proceed to adopt
without a vote those recommendations that were
adopted without a vote in the Fifth Committee.
Agenda item 113

It was so decided.
(b) Appointment of members of the Committee on
Contributions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/543)
The Acting President: In paragraph 7 of its
report, the Fifth Committee recommends that the
General Assembly appoint the following persons as
members of the Committee on Contributions for a
three-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2006:
Ms. Sujata Ghorai of Germany, Mr. Vyacheslav
Anatolievich Logutov of the Russian Federation,
Mr. Richard Moon of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Mr. Hae-yun Park of the
Republic of Korea, Mr. Henrique da Silveira Sardinha
Pinto of Brazil and Mr. Wu Gang of China.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint those persons I just mentioned as members
of the Committee on Contributions for a three-year
term of office beginning on 1 January 2006?
It was so decided.

Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments

(c) Confirmation of the appointment of members of
the Investments Committee

(a) Appointment of members of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/544)

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/542)
The Acting President: The Fifth Committee
recommends in paragraph 4 of its report that the
General Assembly appoint the following persons as
members
of
the
Advisory
Committee
on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions for a threeyear term of office beginning on 1 January 2006:
Mr. Guillermo Kendall of Argentina, Mr. Igor
Khalevinski of the Russian Federation, Ms. Susan
McLurg of the United States of America, Mr. Tommo
Monthe of Cameroon and Ms. Christina Vasak of
France.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint those persons as members of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
for a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January
2006?

2

The Acting President: The Fifth Committee
recommends, in paragraph 4 of its report, that the
General Assembly confirm the appointment by the
Secretary-General of the following persons as members
of the Investments Committee for a three-year term of
office beginning on 1 January 2006: Mr. Madhav Dhar
of India, Mr. Nemir A. Kirdar of Iraq and
Mr. Masakazu Arikawa of Japan.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to confirm the appointment of those persons I just
mentioned as members of the Investments Committee
for a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January
2006?
It was so decided.

A/60/PV.53

(d) Appointment of a member of the Board of
Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/545)
The Acting President: In paragraph 4 of its
report, the Fifth Committee recommends that the
General Assembly appoint the Auditor-General of the
Republic of South Africa as a member of the Board of
Auditors for a six-year term of office beginning on
1 July 2006.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to appoint
the Auditor-General of the Republic of South Africa as
a member of the Board of Auditors for a six-year term
of office beginning on 1 July 2006?
It was so decided.
(e) Appointment of members of the International
Civil Service Commission
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/546)
The Acting President: In paragraph 4 of its
report, the Fifth Committee recommends that the
General Assembly appoint the following persons as
members of the International Civil Service
Commission for a four-year term of office beginning
on 1 January 2006: Mr. Minoru Endo of Japan,
Mr. Gilberto Paranhos Velloso of Brazil, Ms. Lucretia
Myers of the United States of America, Mr. Wolfgang
Stockl of Germany and Mr. Gian Luigi Valenza of
Italy.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint those persons I just mentioned as members
of the International Civil Service Commission for a
four-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2006?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-items (a) to (e) of agenda item
113 and of agenda item 113 as a whole?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 138
Financing of the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/540)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/17).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
138.
Agenda item 145
Financing of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/541)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/18).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
145.
Reports of the Sixth Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will consider the reports of the Sixth Committee on
agenda items 78 to 80, 82, 153, 155, 156, 158 and 159.
The reports of the Sixth Committee on agenda items
83, 108 and 116 will be considered at a later date, to be
announced.
I request the Rapporteur of the Sixth Committee,
Ms. Shermain Jeremy of Antigua and Barbuda, to

3

A/60/PV.53

introduce in one intervention the reports of the Sixth
Committee before the General Assembly.
Ms. Jeremy (Antigua and Barbuda): Today I
have the honour to present to the General Assembly the
reports of the Sixth Committee on 9 of the 11
substantive agenda items allocated to it, namely, items
78 to 80, 82, 153, 155, 156, 158 and 159. Item 108,
“Measures to eliminate international terrorism”,
remains open, and the report on that item will be
introduced at a later date. The report on item 83,
“Scope of legal protection under the Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel”,
and the report on a procedural item — agenda item
116, “Revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly” — will also be considered at a later date.
I would first like to draw the Assembly’s
attention to agenda item 78, “United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International
Law”. The relevant report of the Committee is
contained in document A/60/514, and the draft
resolution recommended to the Assembly for adoption
is reproduced in paragraph 7 thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would, inter alia, approve the
guidelines and recommendations regarding the
execution of the Programme for the biennium 20062007 and authorize the Secretary-General to carry out
in the biennium the activities specified in section III of
the report of the Secretary-General on the Programme.
It would also request the Secretary-General to continue
to provide the necessary resources to the budget for the
Programme for the next and future bienniums.
Furthermore, the Assembly would recognize the
importance of United Nations recurrent legal
publications listed in the report of the SecretaryGeneral and strongly encourage their continued
publication.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote, and I hope that the Assembly will be in
a position to do the same.
I turn now to the report of the Sixth Committee
on agenda item 79, “Report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its thirty-eighth session”. The report is contained in
document A/60/515, and the two draft resolutions
recommended to the General Assembly for adoption
are reproduced in paragraph 10 thereof.

4

Under the terms of draft resolution I, entitled
“Report of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law on the work of its thirty-eighth
session”, the General Assembly would, among others
things, endorse the efforts and initiatives of the
Commission, as the core legal body within the United
Nations system in the field of international trade law. It
would also reaffirm the importance, in particular for
developing countries, of the work of the Commission
concerned with technical assistance in the field of
international trade law reform and development and
would, in this connection, appeal to Governments, the
relevant bodies of the United Nations system,
organizations, institutions and individuals to make
voluntary contributions to the relevant trust fund and to
support the technical assistance programme of the
Commission.
Furthermore, the Assembly would encourage the
Commission to further explore different approaches to
the use of partnerships with non-State actors in the
implementation of its mandate, in particular in the area
of technical assistance. The Assembly would also take
note with appreciation of the preparation of digests of
case law relating to the texts of the Commission and
would welcome the Commission’s decision to hold a
congress on international trade law.
I am pleased to note that draft resolution II under
this agenda item contains the annex to the United
Nations Convention on the Use of Electronic
Communications in International Contracts. Under the
terms of the draft resolution, the General Assembly
would, after expressing its appreciation to the
Commission for preparing the draft Convention, adopt
the Convention and request the Secretary-General to
open it for signature. It would also call upon States to
consider becoming parties to it. In accordance with its
article 16, the Convention shall be open for signature
by all States from 16 January 2006 until 16 January
2008.
The Sixth Committee adopted the two draft
resolutions without a vote, and it is hoped that the
Assembly will do the same.
I now invite the Assembly’s attention to agenda
item 80, “Report of the International Law Commission
on the work of its fifty-seventh session”. The relevant
report of the Sixth Committee is contained in document
A/60/516, and the draft resolution, which the

A/60/PV.53

Committee recommends to the Assembly for adoption,
is set out in paragraph 8 thereof.
By the terms of the draft resolution, the General
Assembly would, inter alia, take note of the report of
the International Law Commission on the work of its
fifty-seventh session and encourage the Commission to
complete work on those items which are near
completion at its fifty-eighth session. The Assembly
would draw the attention of Governments to the
importance for the International Law Commission of
having their views on the draft articles and
commentary on diplomatic protection and on the draft
principles on allocation of loss in the case of
transboundary harm arising out of hazardous activities,
both of which were adopted at the fifty-sixth session of
the Commission in 2004.
The General Assembly would also invite
Governments to provide information on other topics, as
requested in chapter III of the Commission’s report.
Furthermore, the Assembly would approve the
Commission’s conclusions regarding summary records
of the Commission and reaffirm its previous decisions
concerning the documentation and summary records of
the International Law Commission.
The Assembly would also encourage Member
States to consider being represented at the level of
legal adviser during the first week in which the report
of the International Law Commission is discussed in
the Sixth Committee — International Law Week — so
as to enable high-level discussions on issues of
international law. In addition, the Assembly would
decide that the next session of the Commission would
be held at the United Nations Office at Geneva from 1
May to 9 June and from 3 July to 11 August 2006.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote, and it is hoped that the Assembly will
do the same.
I turn now to agenda item 82, entitled “Report of
the Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the
Organization”. The report of the Sixth Committee on
this item is contained in document A/60/517. The draft
resolution which the Sixth Committee recommends for
adoption by the General Assembly is reproduced in
paragraph 10 of the report.
By the terms of the draft resolution, the General
Assembly would, among other things, request the

Special Committee, at its next session in 2006, to
continue its consideration of all proposals concerning
the question of the maintenance of international peace
and security in all its aspects in order to strengthen the
role of the United Nations. The Special Committee
would also be requested to continue to consider, on a
priority basis and in an appropriate substantive manner
and framework, the question of the implementation of
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
related to assistance to third States affected by the
application of sanctions under Chapter VII of the
Charter and to consider, also on a priority basis, ways
and means of improving its working methods and
enhancing its efficiency.
Furthermore, the Special Committee would be
requested to consider, as appropriate, any proposal
referred to it by the General Assembly in the
implementation of the decisions of the High-level
Plenary Meeting of the sixtieth session of the General
Assembly in September 2005 that concern the Charter
of the United Nations and amendments thereto.
Additionally, the Assembly would welcome the
establishment of the trust fund to eliminate the backlog
of the Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs
and would encourage States to make voluntary
contributions to it. It would also endorse the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to eliminate the backlog of the
Repertoire of the Practice of the Security Council and
would encourage contributions to the trust fund for its
updating. It would further request the SecretaryGeneral to submit a report on both publications to the
General Assembly at its sixty-first session.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote, and I hope that the Assembly will be in
a position to do likewise.
Let me now turn to agenda item 153, “Report of
the Committee on Relations with the Host Country”.
The report of the Sixth Committee on this item is
contained in document A/60/520. The draft resolution
recommended to the Assembly for adoption is set out
in paragraph 8 thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
Assembly
would,
inter
alia,
endorse
the
recommendations and conclusions of the Host Country
Committee; consider that the maintenance of
appropriate conditions for the normal work of
delegations and missions accredited to the United
Nations and the observance of their privileges and

5

A/60/PV.53

immunities are in the interest of the Organization and
all Member States; and request the host country to
continue to solve, through negotiations, problems that
might arise, and to take all measures necessary to
prevent any interference with the functioning of
missions.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote, and it is hoped that the Assembly will
be in a position to do so as well.
I would like to draw the Assembly’s attention to
agenda item 155, “Observer status for the Latin
American Integration Association in the General
Assembly”. The relevant report of the Committee is
contained in document A/60/521, and the draft
resolution recommended to the Assembly for adoption
is reproduced in paragraph 7 thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would decide to invite the Latin
American Integration Association to participate in the
sessions and the work of the General Assembly in the
capacity of observer. It would also request the
Secretary-General to take the necessary action to
implement the present resolution.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote, and I hope that the Assembly will be in
a position to do the same.
I now turn to agenda item 156, entitled “Observer
status for the Common Fund for Commodities in the
General Assembly”. The relevant Committee report is
contained in document A/60/522, and the draft
resolution recommended to the Assembly for adoption
is reproduced in paragraph 7.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would decide to invite the Common
Fund for Commodities to participate in the sessions
and the work of the Assembly in the capacity of
observer. It would also request the Secretary-General
to take the necessary action to implement the present
resolution.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote, and I hope that the Assembly will be in
a position to do the same.
I now turn to agenda item 158, entitled “Observer
status for the Hague Conference on Private
International Law in the General Assembly”. The
relevant report of the Committee is contained in

6

document A/60/533, and the draft resolution
recommended to the Assembly for adoption is
reproduced in paragraph 7 thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would decide to invite the Hague
Conference on Private International Law to participate
in the sessions and the work of the Assembly in the
capacity of observer. It would also request the
Secretary-General to take the necessary action to
implement the present resolution.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote, and I hope that the Assembly will be in
a position to do likewise.
Finally, I invite the Assembly’s attention to
agenda item 159, entitled “Observer status for the
Ibero-American Conference in the General Assembly”.
The relevant report of the Committee is contained in
document A/60/534, and the draft resolution
recommended to the Assembly for adoption is
reproduced in paragraph 7 thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would decide to invite the IberoAmerican Conference to participate in the sessions and
the work of the Assembly in the capacity of observer. It
would also request the Secretary-General to take the
necessary action to implement the present resolution.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote, and I hope that the Assembly will be in
a position to do the same.
That concludes my introduction of the reports of
the Sixth Committee at this stage. I would like to take
this opportunity to express my gratitude to Ambassador
Mr. Juan Antonio Yáñez-Barnuevo, Chairman of the
Sixth Committee, for his hard work and for the
commendable leadership he provided to the Committee
throughout this session. I also wish to thank the other
members of the Bureau — Mr. Mahmoud Hmoud,
Mr. Mahmoud Samy and Mr. Grzegorz Zyman — for
their cooperation and the support given to me. Finally,
thanks and appreciation are also due to all
representatives and colleagues for their invaluable
contributions to the success of this session.
The Acting President: If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it
that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the
reports of the Sixth Committee that are before the
Assembly today.

A/60/PV.53

It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Sixth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, that is, either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Sixth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to take decisions in the same manner as
was done in the Sixth Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. I therefore
hope that we may proceed to adopt without a vote
those recommendations that were adopted without a
vote in the Sixth Committee.
Agenda item 78
United Nations Programme of Assistance in
Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider
Appreciation of International Law
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/60/514)
The Acting Chairman: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/19).

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 78?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 79
Report of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law on the work of its thirtyeighth session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/60/515)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
two draft resolutions recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. We shall now
take a decision on them.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its thirty-eighth session”. The
Sixth Committee adopted draft resolution I without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 60/20).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “United Nations Convention on the Use of
Electronic
Communications
in
International
Contracts”. The Sixth Committee adopted draft
resolution II without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
60/21).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 79?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 80
Report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its fifty-seventh session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/60/516)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We shall now
take a decision on the draft resolution.

7

A/60/PV.53

The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/22).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 80?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 82
Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of
the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the
Role of the Organization
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/60/517)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/23).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 82?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 153
Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/60/520)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

8

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/24).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 153?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 155
Observer status for the Latin American Integration
Association in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/60/521)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/25).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 155?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 156
Observer status for the Common Fund for
Commodities in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/60/522)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/26).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 156?

A/60/PV.53

It was so decided.
Agenda item 158
Observer status for the Hague Conference on Private
International Law in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/60/533)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/27).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 158?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 159
Observer status for the Ibero-American Conference
in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/60/534)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/28).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 159?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of all the reports of the
Sixth Committee before it.

Agenda item 81 (continued)
Report of the International Criminal Court
Draft resolution A/60/L.25
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly held the debate on this agenda
item at its 46th plenary meeting, on 8 November.
I call on the representative of the Netherlands to
introduce draft resolution A/60/L.25.
Mr. Majoor (Netherlands): I have the honour to
introduce this morning draft resolution (A/60/L.25),
entitled “Report of the International Criminal Court”.
In addition to the countries listed in L.25, the
following have indicated their wish to be included as
sponsors: Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Colombia,
Georgia and Mali. That brings the total number of
sponsors for this resolution to 88.
On 8 November, the President of the International
Criminal Court presented the first annual report of the
Court to this body. We had a very constructive and indepth debate at that time, and I do not want to repeat
that discussion here today. Allow me, however, to
highlight just a few elements.
The report of the International Criminal Court
and the debate in this body a few weeks ago underlined
the important role that the Court plays in our common
multilateral system that aims to end impunity and to
establish the rule of law, to promote and encourage
respect for human rights and to restore and maintain
international peace and security. The establishment of
the Court was the most significant development in
recent years in the long struggle to eradicate impunity.
We are therefore very pleased that substantial progress
has been achieved in making the Court fully
operational. The annual report clearly demonstrates
that progress.
The Court is now at the beginning of the judicial
phase of its operations, involving both operations in
the field and courtroom proceedings. The issuance of
arrest warrants against five leaders of the Lord’s
Resistance Army is a clear indication of that fact. The
referral by the Security Council this spring of the
situation in Darfur to the International Criminal
Court’s Prosecutor and the opening of an investigation
into that situation by the Prosecutor were other
important milestones. The fact that all Security Council

9

A/60/PV.53

members were directly or indirectly supportive of that
referral was a very welcome development, and proof of
the growing support for the Court. The President of the
International Criminal Court in his address to the
General Assembly stressed the fact that cooperation
between the Court and the United Nations and
cooperation with States, international organizations and
civil society are fundamental to an effective and
efficient functioning Court, especially now that the
Court has started the judicial phase of its work. We call
on all concerned to heed his call.
While all States are free to choose whether to
become a party to the Rome Statute or not, recently we
were happy to welcome the one-hundredth ratification
of the Statute by Mexico. We will continue to strive for
a universal membership to the Rome Statute and it is
therefore our sincere hope that more States will soon
ratify it.
The draft resolution before us today serves three
main objectives: first, to indicate political support for
the International Criminal Court as an organization, for
its aims and for the work it carries out.
Secondly, it underlines the importance of the
relationship agreement concluded with the United
Nations, which serves as a framework for the close
cooperation between the two organizations. Thirdly, it
serves to remind States of the need to cooperate with
the International Criminal Court as it carries out its
tasks.
The Netherlands hopes that the adoption of the
draft resolution today will lead to even greater support
for the International Criminal Court in its fight against
impunity and in its attempts to hold those accused of
very serious crimes accountable for their actions. In
that context, we look forward to the second annual
report of the International Criminal Court and its
consideration during next year’s session of the General
Assembly.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/60/L.25. Before giving the
floor to the speakers in explanation of vote before the
vote, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Ms. Willson (United States of America): Our
concerns about the Rome Statute and the International
Criminal Court (ICC) are well known. They include the

10

Court’s assertion of jurisdiction over nationals of
States not parties to the Rome Statute, including United
States nationals, and the lack of adequate oversight of
the Court’s activities, including those of the Prosecutor,
who may initiate cases without first seeking approval
of the Security Council.
As in past years, those concerns require the
United States to disassociate itself from consensus on
the draft resolution. While our concerns about the
Court have not changed, we would like to move
beyond divisiveness on the issue. We share the
commitment of parties to the Rome Statute to bring to
justice those who perpetrate genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity. While we have honest
differences on how accountability is best achieved, we
must work together to ensure that perpetrators of the
atrocities are held accountable for their actions.
The actions of the United States demonstrate
clearly that we have been and continue to be among the
most forceful advocates of the principle of
accountability for war crimes, genocide and crimes
against humanity. We demonstrated our willingness to
work instructively on those matters in connection with
Darfur, where it was the United States that concluded
that genocide had occurred and it was the United States
that called for and supported the creation of the
International Commission of Inquiry on Darfur.
While we would have preferred a different
mechanism, we believed it was important for the
international community to speak with one voice and to
act decisively. Consequently, we accepted referral of
the Darfur situation by the Security Council to the
Court. Those events demonstrate that there can be
common ground when both sides are willing to work
constructively.
I would like to emphasize today what we have
said in the past. We respect the right of other States to
become parties to the Rome Statute. We ask in return,
however, that other States respect our decision not to
do so. With respect to the draft resolution, we made
good faith efforts to work with supporters of the Court
on language that would reflect that simple principle.
We were deeply disappointed that our efforts to turn a
new page were rejected.
As we move forward, we urge Court supporters to
reciprocate our efforts to seek common ground and
avoid divisiveness. In our view, that begins with an
acknowledgement that there are honest differences of

A/60/PV.53

view on the issues and an acknowledgement of the
right of the United States and other States to decide not
to become Parties to the Court and not to subject their
citizens and officials to its jurisdiction. That should not
be too much to ask.
We have noted in the past the importance we
attach to the principle adopted by the General
Assembly in resolution 58/318 that the costs of any
assistance or services provided by the United Nations
to the Court must be fully reimbursed to the United
Nations. We are pleased that the sponsors of the draft
resolution were willing to make that clear in the draft.
Efforts to include language in resolutions of the
General Assembly or Security Council that are
inconsistent with the basic respect for the honest
differences of views about the Court serve only to
exacerbate divisions and make it more difficult for the
international community to pursue common approaches
in the fight against impunity. Not every issue needs to
be turned into a debate about the role of the Court. It is
our hope, as we move forward, that efforts by all
parties to work constructively and in good faith will
allow us to spend less time arguing over the Court and
more time working together to ensure accountability
for serious crimes.

The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote before the vote. The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/60/L.25. May I take it that the Assembly decides to
adopt draft resolution A/60/L.25?
Draft resolution
(resolution 60/29).

A/60/L.25

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 81?
It was so decided.
Programme of work
The Acting President: I would like to inform
members that, in addition to the items already
scheduled for Monday morning, 28 November, the
General Assembly will resume its consideration of the
following agenda items, to take action on several draft
resolutions: agenda item 41, “Report of the Economic
and Social Council”, to take action on draft resolutions
A/60/L.21 and A/60/L.24; and agenda item 120,
“Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit”, to take action on draft resolution A/60/L.26.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

11
