V.

32/160.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Seeond Committee

Transport ami (:ommunications Decade
in Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its rcsolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October
1970 containing thc International Developmcnt Strategy
for the Second United Nations Dcvelopment Decade,
3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New Intcrnational
Economic Order and 3362 (S-VIT) of 16 September
1975 on devclopment and international economic cooperation, and in particular the need to narrow the
gap between the industrialized and the developing countries,
Recalling al.so Economic and Social Council resolution 2097 (LXIII) of 29 July 1977 on the Transport
and Communications Decadc in Africa,
Recognizing the urgent necd to improve substantially
the transport and communications infrastructurc in
Africa in particular,
Noting with satisfaction the initiative of the Organization of African Unity and the Economic Commission
for Africa in the establishment of an integrated African
road network and the rationalization of Africa's railway
systems and othcr transport systems in arder to facilitate
the promotion of multinational economic co-operation
in Africa, intra-African trade and the political, social
and economic integration of Africa,
Commending rcsolution 291 (XIII) entitled "Transport and Communications Decade in Africa" adopted
on 26 February 1977 by the Economic Commission
for Africa at its thirtecnth ses:,ion and fourth meeting
of the Confcrencc of Minister~.rn
N oting section III D of the annex to thc report of
the Conference on lnternational Economic Co-operation 76 on infrastructurc, in particular paragraph 8
thereof dealing with Africa,
Convinced that effective support is requircd from the
international community in order to promote the principle of collective self-reliance for the purpose of solving
African problems in thef,e sectors,
Convinced furtllEr of the need to adopt an integrated
approach in the formulation of a global strategy for the
development of transport and communications in Africa, taking into account ali the problems facing the
continent in this field,
Noting with appreciation the progress made in the
development of a pan-African telecommunication network, which is jointly sponsored by the Organization of
African Unity, the International Telecommunication
Union and the Economic Commission for Africa,
W elcoming the continuing interest of the specialized
agencies in the application of communications technologies and services, in particular that of thc International Telecommunication Union, which, as the lead
agency, has the responsibility for the regulation, coordination and harmonization of activities in this field,
1. Endorses the recommendation madc in paragraph
1 of resolution 291 (XIII) of the Economic Commission for Africa 75 and proclaims a Transport and Com75 See

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 7 (E/5941 ), part III.
76See A/31/478/Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.l.

97

munications Decade in Africa during the years I 9781988, with a view to:
(a) Giving active support to the preparation and
implementation of a global strategy for the development
of transport and communications in Africa, for the
purposc of solving thc problcms of the continent in
this field;
( h)
Mobilizing the tcchnical and financia! resources
requircd for this purposc;
2. Decides that, in accordance with its rcsolution
31/93 of 14 December 1976, the mobilization of the
neccssary financia! and technical rcsources required
to make the Decade a success constitutcs a prcssing
necd of an unforeseeable nature;
3. Requests the Sccretary-GeneraL in co-operation
with thc executive hcads of the agencies concerned, to
providc ali possiblc assistance to the African States in
thc prcparation of a detailed plan of action for the
Decade and to co-ordinate the mobilization of the neccssary tcchnical and financia! rcsources requircd to
make the Decade a success;
4. Calls upan ali Membcr States, in particular the
developed countries and others in a position to do so,
to participate effectively in the implementation of programmcs for achieving thc objectives of the Decadc;
5. Requests the Secretary-Gcneral, in consultation
with thc International Telecommunication Union and
othcr specialized agencies concerned, to propase for
consideration, as appropriate, one year during the Decadc as a World Communications Year, in vicw of
the importance of transport and communications to
other rcgions of the world, and to submit a report to the
Economic and Social Council at its sixty-fifth scssion
containing a dctailcd programme of mcasures and activities to be carricd out during such a Y car;
6. Furthcr requests the Secretary-Gencral to submit
to thc General Assembly at its thirty-third session,
through thc Economic and Social Council at its sixtyfifth session, a dctailed progress report on the implementation of thc prcsent resolution and to submit thereafkr annual progrcss rcports.
107th plenary meetinR
19 December 1977
32/ 161.

Permanent sovercignty over national
resources in the oc,·upied Arah territories

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind thc rclcvant principles of intcrnational law and the provisions of thc international convcn tions and regulations. in particular thc Hague Convention IV of 1907 77 and the fourth Gcneva Convention
of 12 August 1949 ,rn conccrning the obligations and
responsibilities of the occupying Power,
Recalling its prcvious resolutions on permanent sovereignty over natural resourccs, particularly their provisions supporting resolutely the efforts of the devcloping countries and the peoples of the territories under
77 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Tlze Hague
Conventions and Declarations 1899-1907 (New York, Oxford
University Press, 1915), p. 100.
7 8 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.
