S/PV.9413

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9413

th meeting
Thursday, 7 September 2023, 3.10 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Moretti
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Shino
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Wood

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-26290 (E)
*2326290*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9413

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peace Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I welcome this opportunity to brief
the Security Council in the context of resolution
2378 (2017), on the progress made and the challenges
encountered in the implementation of Action for
Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative and its implementation
strategy, Action for Peacekeeping Plus.
We are five years into A4P. The Declaration of
Shared Commitments stands as a testimony to a global
consensus and ambition to strengthen missions and
make our peacekeepers safer and more effective. A4P+,
launched in 2021, focuses our energy on catalytic issues
that are critical for achieving A4P’s aims.
Today I will briefly speak to results thus far.
For more details, I refer members to our latest A4P+
progress report, circulated to the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations, to the brief summary in
front of members and to the Secretary-General’s report
on peacekeeping performance, recently submitted to
the Council.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
underscore the extent to which we need stronger,
more consistent and unified support by Member
States to fulfil the ultimate goals of United Nations
peacekeeping, that is, helping to establish and provide
the space for durable peace.
As we have always conveyed, A4P is a collective
effort, and peacekeeping is only as strong as the unity
and support of our Member States. Growing divisions
among Member States, combined with the increased
complexity of today’s conflicts, poses a formidable
challenge to peacekeeping and the broader task of
maintaining peace and security.
2/20

07/09/2023

Peacekeeping is not a magic wand to help a country
return to stability, but with the support of a unified
international community, political processes and peace
agreements have been successfully implemented. It
also took the assistance of peacekeeping missions in
the various countries that I will mention. As a result,
countries such as Sierra Leone, Cambodia, Namibia,
Côte d’Ivoire, Timor-Leste and many more were able
to transition from conflict to peace with the support of
United Nations peacekeeping. Of course, it took not only
peacekeeping missions, but also the strong and united
support of Member States for those political processes.
Even where political solutions to conflicts seem
distant, which is much more often the case nowadays,
peacekeepers continue to protect the lives of hundreds
and thousands of civilians in the countries and regions
in which they are deployed. It is the case, for example,
with the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and
with the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), which protects hundreds of thousands
of civilians under direct threat of violence, in spite of
daunting challenges and limitations.
United Nations peacekeeping is also working
to keep civilians out of harm’s way by preserving
ceasefires and preventing the resumption of hostilities
in places such as southern Lebanon and Cyprus. As we
are all too aware, incidents in those regions can easily
escalate into the resumption of hostilities. I encourage
the Council to consider the alternative and to imagine
how those situations would evolve if peacekeepers
were not present to undertake those daily efforts. With
that said, I must note that while peacekeeping plays a
critical role in reducing violent conflict, as outlined in
the New Agenda for Peace, peace enforcement is a step
too far for peacekeeping and needs to be carried out
under different modalities.
In an era of increasing complexity, the environment
in which our peacekeepers are deployed is ever evolving.
Last year, the number of conflict-related deaths
worldwide reached a 20-year high. A convergence of
global phenomena — geopolitical tension, climate
change and transnational organized crime point to a
future of overlapping crises. But we must continue to
strengthen the effectiveness of peacekeeping, which
is one of the most powerful multilateral tools at our
disposal to manage and help resolve conflict. And as
the reports I mentioned earlier attest to, we are doing
our utmost.
23-26290

07/09/2023

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Political strategies that have coherent and collective
support from key actors are a cornerstone of A4P and
A4P+. Political solutions must be at the heart of all
efforts. That approach is evident in the engagements
undertaken by our missions, often in conjunction with
regional organizations and other partners leading on
political processes.
In the Central African Republic, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) is advancing
the peace process through the implementation of a
multi-year political strategy, coupled with a robust and
proactive security approach to deter armed groups.
In Mali, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
was instrumental in its assistance to the international
mediation team supporting the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, particularly in negotiations
among the parties. And here, I wish to affirm that
even as the Mission pursues its withdrawal in line
with resolution 2690 (2023), the United Nations has
expressed its readiness to continue its support to the
implementation of the peace agreement, which remains
critical for peace and stability in Mali.
Even where peacekeeping mandates do not
explicitly confer the task of supporting political
processes, missions often have a pivotal role in enabling
conditions conducive to the pursuit or resumption of
negotiations. That is the case in Cyprus, for example,
where the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
works closely with the Secretary-General’s goodoffices mission to foster intercommunal cooperation
and facilitate trust and confidence-building measures.
Effective peacekeeping also requires the right
capabilities and mindset. We continue to utilize the
Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System (PCRS)
to accelerate deployment timelines. Since November,
seven units have been deployed from the PCRS,
including two to the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei as part of the mission’s reconfiguration.
We also continue to adapt training and deployment
to the needs of missions, for instance through
implementing the recommendations of the Independent
Strategic Review of the United Nations Response
to Explosive Ordnance Threats (see S/2021/1042).
Among other actions, that has included revising
requirements for units deploying to three missions to

S/PV.9413

ensure that contingents can effectively operate in their
threat environments.
However, our work is far from complete.
Caveats, especially when undeclared by troop- and
police-contributing countries’ can significantly
hamper our missions’ effectiveness and lead to
operational setbacks. They also create risk for troopand police-contributing countries that are willing to do
their utmost to implement the mandate. I would like to
reiterate our position that undeclared caveats have no
place in United Nations peacekeeping.
I also appeal to Member States to fill existing
capability gaps. The Peacekeeping Ministerial meeting
in Accra on 5 and 6 December will be a pivotal
opportunity to reaffirm and make new commitments
to peacekeeping. I invite all Member States to review
the pledging guide and capability requirement paper
we have issued in order to tailor their pledges at the
Ministerial meeting to the precise needs we have. The
Ministerial meeting will also be a critical opportunity
for Member States to express their political support for
United Nations peacekeeping.
Accountability to United Nations peacekeepers
remains a core priority, in line with resolutions 2518
(2020) and 2589 (2021). As documented in the three
A4P+ progress reports published to date, we continue
to make notable strides in enhancing the safety and
security of United Nations peacekeepers, despite the
increasingly complex security environments in which
we operate.
Efforts such as the Action Plan to Improve the
Security of Peacekeepers and the implementation of
the review on explosive ordnance threats have fostered
progress in areas such as force protection, integrated
base defence and countering improvised explosive
devices. Advances in peacekeeping intelligence and
situational awareness are helping missions foresee
and address threats, whereas enhanced field crisis
management capabilities, such as regular casualty
evacuation trainings and stress-testing, contribute to
improving the safety and security of peacekeepers.
Further progress hinges on sustained Member State
support, especially in the form of specialized skills,
equipment and expertise.
But the death of one peacekeeper is always one too
many. We must remember and honour the sacrifices
made by our peacekeepers worldwide, including the
18 peacekeepers killed by malicious acts since my

23-262903/20

S/PV.9413

United Nations peacekeeping operations

briefing last September (see S/PV.9123). In the context
of MINUSMA’s drawdown, the Mission’s operating
environment remains particularly dangerous. The risk
of attacks by non-State armed groups persists. Five out
of seven peacekeepers killed by malicious acts so far,
in 2023, were serving in Mali. I appeal to all Council
members to help ensure that we can proceed with the
drawdown of MINUSMA in a safe and orderly manner.
The accountability of peacekeepers aims for
the highest level of performance by all personnel,
uniformed and civilian. That includes responsible
action towards host countries and their populations,
not only in conduct and discipline, but in missions’
environmental footprints.
In line with resolution 2436 (2018) and as
documented in the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on the overall performance of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, we continue our efforts
to strengthen the performance of United Nations
peacekeeping at all levels, including at Headquarters,
within missions and within uniformed and civilian
components. Performance-assessment tools have been
improved, as has the way we actively follow up on
underperformance reports and take remedial actions.
We also continue to take all necessary measures
to address allegations of all forms of misconduct, both
past and present. Ending impunity for all forms of
misconduct remains a central goal and we have taken
drastic measures in the case of serious allegations,
including through repatriation of units where needed.
Consistent numbers of allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse continue to be reported annually, although
many of these have related to events from past years.
Together with Member States, we must work to ensure
preventive measures, enforce zero-tolerance of all
misconduct and, most importantly, uphold the rights
and dignity of victims.
As we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of United
Nations peacekeeping, we are reflecting not only on
milestones achieved, but also on how we communicate
and engage with the public and communities, explain
our mandates and dispel falsehoods.
The recent strategic review of strategic
communications across United Nations peacekeeping
operations (S/2023/282) highlighted that effective
and proactive strategic communication helps to
manage expectations among host Governments and
populations. Several missions are now implementing
4/20

07/09/2023

regular perception surveys to better understand the
attitudes and expectations of local populations, and
we are working to further build capacity and expertise
in that area. Communicating peacekeeping’s aims and
achievements also supports collaboration with national
actors, which can enhance our effectiveness.
As a proactive measure, our global communications
Peace Begins with Me campaign demonstrates our
tangible impact on those we serve and our collective
commitment to peace. We are also working to step
up this kind of proactive media engagement at
Headquarters and within our missions. And we are
taking robust action against all forms of mis- and
disinformation that interfere with the work of our
missions. For example, within hours of its coming out,
MINUSCA recently identified and debunked a false
online story claiming that a peacekeeper had been
arrested for arms trafficking. More needs to be done,
including by ensuring that we have the right skill sets
both at Headquarters and in our missions to adequately
address mis- and disinformation.
The final A4P+ priority, cooperation with host
States, is undergirded by transparency, mutual respect
and open dialogue. Through proactive discussions
with national authorities, we have often been able to
address critical challenges, such as detentions of United
Nations personnel or restrictions on their freedom of
movement, but it is not always enough. As reaffirmed
by resolution 2518 (2020), reducing violations of statusof-forces agreements across missions is critical. In
order to strengthen our cooperation with host States,
we are working to better document and communicate
with the Council on status-of-forces violations. To that
end, it is essential to ensure the political engagement
of Member States and of the Security Council in
particular. I urge Council members to engage with host
countries where needed, to help us proceed with the
effective and unimpeded implementation of Security
Council mandates.
Advancing the women and peace and security
agenda, a core priority in peacekeeping, increases
peacekeeping effectiveness. Women’s participation
in political processes is critical to efforts to achieve
sustainable political solutions, and we are continuing our
efforts in support of that engagement. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, for example, MONUSCO
actively supported the participation of women in the
Nairobi process, leading to 40 per cent representation
in its third round of consultations between the
23-26290

07/09/2023

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.9413

Government and representatives of armed groups and
communities. We also continue to make great strides
in the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy. As of May,
women constituted 25.6 per cent of individual uniformed
personnel. As of today, 38 per cent of Heads and 33 per
cent of Deputy Heads of civilian-led peacekeeping
operations are women. We have also worked to foster
gender-responsive working and living conditions. I
once again call on Member States to intensify efforts
to remove barriers at the national level and increase the
participation of women in peacekeeping, including at
the civilian level. Technology and data are also critical
to the future of peacekeeping. Central to that is the
ongoing implementation of the Strategy for the Digital
Transformation of United Nations Peacekeeping. While
we have made progress towards ensuring tech-savvy,
data-informed peacekeeping forces, further investment
in data capabilities among personnel is required to
ensure that data can be properly leveraged for effective
decision-making.

including in protecting the lives of countless civilians,
preserving ceasefires and preventing escalations
and resumptions of hostilities, remain extremely
meaningful. For many populations at the front lines of
conflict, the presence of peacekeeping missions is an
important deterrent to an even grimmer reality. As we
continue to work to improve and update peacekeeping
to meet the evolving nature of threats to peace, we must
be diligent in assessing our added value and ensuring
that our capabilities and resources are aligned with our
objectives. The dedication of all stakeholders during
five years of A4P has brought results. But we cannot
be complacent. Let us recommit to peacekeeping
reform and build further on our shared successes. In
conclusion, I would like to thank the Member States for
championing A4P and the priority areas of A4P+.

We continue to proactively advance A4P
and A4P+ but also remain seized of the need to
continually review and expand our efforts to ensure
that peacekeeping remains fit for purpose. In the past
few years the Security Council has mandated us to
do so, notably through resolutions 2518 (2020) on the
safety and security of peacekeepers, 2589 (2021) on
accountability for crimes against peacekeepers, 2436
(2018) on peacekeeping performance and 2594 (2021)
on peacekeeping transitions. Most, if not all, of the
work I have mentioned is therefore indeed mandated
by Member States. As the drawdown from Mali creates
greater pressure for scalability, I would like to take this
opportunity to emphasize that upholding and fulfilling
our responsibilities, as stipulated in the resolutions,
requires both resources and political will. At its core,
peacekeeping is a political instrument. Its efficacy is
linked to robust political support from the Council.
While clear mandates with adequate resources are the
foundation for success, host nations’ cooperation and
a genuine desire among the parties to seek peace are
also crucial.

Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): As this is the first time that
we are taking the floor during your presidency of the
Security Council, Sir, we would like to congratulate
you and your team and wish you the very best for your
term. Let me also thank Under-Secretary-General JeanPierre Lacroix for his briefing to the Council against
the backdrop of the Secretary-General’s comprehensive
report on United Nations peacekeeping operations.

As we reflect on the past 75 years, there are many
examples of successful political processes supported
by United Nations peacekeeping. Currently, as the
international community has grown increasingly
divided, peacekeeping efforts in support of political
processes are looking at a less consistent track record.
Nonetheless, the intermediate goals of our missions,

The Secretary-General’s report examines where
we are with United Nations peacekeeping operations,
including the parameters used to assess peacekeeping
performance, details on progress in the implementation
of the Action for Peace Plus (A4P+) priority areas and
recommendations for further improving United Nations
peacekeeping to ensure that it can realize its full

The President: I thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

Despite the fact that present-day peacekeeping
operations are complicated by dangerous environments
and challenging circumstances, Ghana continues to
assert the importance of the role of the United Nations
in maintaining international peace and security and
of peacekeeping operations as instrumental to those
efforts. We recognize the significant contributions
made by peacekeepers and peacekeeping around the
world and pay tribute to all the Blue Helmet personnel
who have made the ultimate sacrifice for the cause of
peace. At this time, we remember the gallant men and
women who have fallen in the line of duty and urge all
warring parties to consider their sacrifice and recommit
to peace.

23-262905/20

S/PV.9413

United Nations peacekeeping operations

potential. We welcome the report and associate ourselves
with the Secretary-General’s call for the Security
Council and the General Assembly to holistically reflect
on the limitations and the future of peacekeeping. That
reflection is particularly necessary considering the
contexts of the conflicts that peacekeeping is called
on to respond to today. As the Secretary-General’s
report points out, today’s conflict environments are
often marked by geopolitical tensions, the proliferation
of armed groups, exclusion, inequalities, social and
political marginalization, climate insecurity, violent
extremism, terrorism and the spread of misinformation
and disinformation, as well as food insecurity. In some
instances, those circumstances demand that we pivot
away from the traditional peacekeeping paradigm
where it is appropriate to do so. For today’s briefing,
we would like to highlight three key points.
First, we emphasize the need to ensure the primacy
of politics in peacekeeping missions’ mandates, and
for the Council itself to work to streamline mandates
to ensure that they are realistic and commensurate
with the known capabilities of what peacekeeping
missions can deliver. In that regard, we must work in
a manner that can support peacekeeping missions in
harnessing relevant partnerships to deliver a coherent
and unified political strategy for resolving conflicts,
while also closing the gaps between the expectations of
local populations and what peacekeeping missions can
realistically deliver.
Secondly, we underscore the need to prioritize
peacekeeping operations as an integral part of the
broader processes for peace, not an activity in isolation.
While they may not have the capacity to fully address
the underlying causes of conflicts, the historical
evidence shows that peacekeeping operations can have
a transformative impact. Peacekeeping should therefore
be carefully structured and implemented to achieve
sustainable conflict-management outcomes and foster
an environment conducive to lasting peace and stability.
Thirdly, we urge for a stronger strategic approach to
the question of transitions. Peace processes do not end
when the last peacekeeper leaves, and neither should our
commitment. Before, during and after a peacekeeping
mission, we must take full advantage of the existing
peace toolbox, as well as centralize peacebuilding in
breaking the cycles of underdevelopment, inequitable
growth and flawed or militarized political systems.
Moreover, the huge gap between the resources we put
at the disposal of peacekeeping missions and what we
6/20

07/09/2023

are prepared to give United Nations country teams to
carry over residual tasks and functions that support
peace should be narrowed and more resources given for
such tasks.
Ghana remains committed to advancing the
effectiveness of peacekeeping and looks forward,
as the Under-Secretary-General also mentioned,
to hosting a successful Peacekeeping Ministerial
meeting in Accra on 5 and 6 December. We encourage
the participation of all delegations and are ready to
facilitate such participation.
We are optimistic that, underpinned by the four
preparatory meetings, the last of which will be held
next month in Kigali, the five themes chosen for the
ministerial meeting — namely, the safety and security
of uniformed personnel; strategic communication,
including hate speech and misinformation and
disinformation; the mental health of peacekeepers;
the participation of women in peacekeeping and the
protection of civilians — will engender the necessary
pledges to support the implementation of the Action for
Peacekeeping Plus initiative.
In conclusion, and as highlighted by the SecretaryGeneral in his policy brief on A New Agenda for Peace,
the Council and the wider United Nations need to
embrace African-led peace support operations, funded
from United Nations assessed contributions, if we are
to be effective and successful in silencing the guns on
the African continent. As a reliable regional partner,
the African Union’s resolve to assist the Council in
maintaining continental peace and security holds the
best prospects for preserving the credibility of United
Nations peacekeeping and maintaining peace where
limitations in peacekeeping are evident. We therefore
look forward to the adoption of a framework draft
resolution on the matter.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix for his briefing and
continued leadership of United Nations peacekeeping.
The United Kingdom pays tribute to those
peacekeepers who lost their lives in pursuit of peace
this year. Peacekeeping relies on the determination and
dedication of United Nations personnel. As members
of the Security Council, we must support them, as
must all host nations and Member States, by providing
the necessary training and equipment, improving
awareness of threats and ensuring medical provision.
23-26290

07/09/2023

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The United Kingdom continues to play its part,
training thousands of United Nations peacekeepers
each year. As a top contributor of extra-budgetary
funds — more than $2.8 million in 2022 — we remain
committed supporters of peacekeeping reform.
We are also dedicated to advancing the participation
of women in peacekeeping and peace processes, through
our support for the Senior Women Talent Pipeline and
the Elsie Initiative Fund, to which we have contributed
$9 million to date. We look forward to discussing
those issues further at the Peacekeeping Ministerial
conference in Ghana in December.
United Nations peacekeeping operations have
faced continued challenges, as we have heard today.
Disinformation campaigns against United Nations
peacekeeping missions are on the rise, undermining
their ability to implement mandates safely and
effectively. We are grateful to our co-hosts — Rwanda,
the Netherlands and Indonesia — for their support
ahead of the planned Peacekeeping Ministerial
preparatory conference on countering misinformation
and disinformation next month.
Missions also continue to suffer from restrictions on
the freedom of movement and from violations of statusof-forces agreements, including in Mali, the Central
African Republic, Lebanon and Western Sahara. It is
not only peacekeeping missions that suffer when host
Governments neglect their obligations; it is the people
peacekeepers protect who often pay the price. Host
States must allow the safe and effective implementation
of mission mandates.
With the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali withdrawing
from Mali and the transition of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo approaching, we should
implement lessons learned from past peacekeeping
transitions. Particularly, we should be wary of
time-based, rather than conditions-based, withdrawals
of peacekeeping operations, which can put lives and
peace processes at risk.
In conclusion, let me underscore the continued
importance the United Kingdom places on United
Nations peacekeeping, which remains an essential tool
for responding to peace and security challenges. As the
Council, we must continue to ensure that peacekeeping
is fit for modern challenges and receives our full
support. Nationally, we remain fully committed to

S/PV.9413

the Action for Peacekeeping Plus agenda and its eight
priority commitment areas.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix for his insightful briefing.
Today’s debate comes at a time when peacekeeping
operations are confronted with growing challenges due
to the exacerbation of armed conflicts and the escalation
of violence and incitement against peacekeeping forces,
as explained by Mr. Lacroix. As we look forward to
discussing those challenges during the United Nations
Peacekeeping Ministerial meeting, scheduled to be held
in Ghana at the end of this year, we believe that today’s
meeting presents an opportunity to exchange views
on ways to improve peacekeeping operations while
considering the Secretary-General’s New Agenda for
Peace. Accordingly, I would like to address four points.
First, the Security Council must renew the mandates
of peacekeeping operations in a manner that responds
to developments on the ground. That is particularly
important when missions face serious challenges that
limit their ability to implement their mandates, such
as the imposition of restrictions on their movement by
armed groups. It is therefore critical for peacekeeping
missions to be appropriately resourced and equipped in
order to strengthen their resilience to challenges and
fully assume their responsibilities.
Secondly, it is essential to reach a common
and clear understanding with host countries on the
mandates of peacekeeping operations. That would
ensure the effective implementation of peacekeeping
mandates and the safety and security of peacekeepers,
along with implementing successful transitions. The
Secretary-General has made cooperation with host
countries one of the seven main pillars of his Action
for Peacekeeping Plus initiative. It is therefore critical
to take that into consideration and conduct transparent
and practical discussions with host Governments to
build the confidence needed for durable cooperation.
In addition, utilizing alternative approaches, such as
co-deployment and providing clearer definitions of host
Governments’ role and engagement in peacekeeping
mandates will enhance cooperation on the ground and
help manage the expectations of local communities.
Thirdly, the international community must continue
developing its methods to confront hate speech,
extremism and the proliferation of misinformation and
disinformation, which have an impact on the safety and

23-262907/20

S/PV.9413

United Nations peacekeeping operations

security of peacekeepers and fuel conflicts and tensions
between communities, as acknowledged by the Security
Council in resolution 2686 (2023), adopted in June. We
underscore the need to implement that resolution, which
requests United Nations peacekeeping and special
political missions to monitor hate speech, racism and
extremism and to include information about those
issues in their regular reports to the Council. A better
understanding of those threats is crucial to countering
them. The practical implementation of the resolution
requires empowering and supporting host communities
by considering the deployment of strategic media
experts in peace missions.
Fourthly, we stress the importance of increasing the
participation of women in peacekeeping operations due
to their pivotal role in supporting the success of those
operations. The United Arab Emirates supports efforts
to advance that aim, including the ongoing efforts to
implement the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy.
We commend the progress made on mainstreaming
gender perspectives in peacekeeping operations in a
comprehensive manner. That must include expertise to
adequately respond to conflict-related sexual violence.
The United Arab Emirates continues to increase
women’s participation in peace and security, including
through Sheikha Fatima Bint Mubarak Women, Peace
and Security Initiative, in cooperation with UN-Women.
That Initiative builds the capacities of women from Asia
and Africa in the areas of military and peacekeeping.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms
its commitment to coordinating international efforts
to contribute to improving the performance of
peacekeeping operations. In that context, we look
forward to the outcomes of the discussions that will
take place during the second United Nations workshop
on managing the performance of United Nations police
commanders in peacekeeping operations”, which the
United Arab Emirates will host next week. In addition,
I want to express our appreciation to all peacekeepers
and to honour those who have died while performing
their noble duties in the service of peace.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix for his thorough briefing. We would like to
take this opportunity to thank the military, police and
civilian personnel of United Nations peacekeeping
missions for their unwavering commitment to fulfilling
their noble duty in extremely difficult and dangerous
circumstances, risking their lives on a daily basis. We
8/20

07/09/2023

also offer our condolences to the States and families of
those killed in action.
United Nations peacekeeping is an important tool
for strengthening international peace and security. For
75 years, thanks to the Blue Helmets, we have succeeded
in creating the conditions necessary for establishing and
maintaining lasting peace in many countries. During
that time, United Nations peacekeeping operations have
come a long way, from compact observation missions
that still exist to this day to complex multidisciplinary
presences numbering tens of thousands of military,
police and civilian professionals. It is that readiness
to adapt to changing circumstances that has always
distinguished peacekeeping and enabled it to fulfil its
mandates effectively and with dignity.
At the same time, the challenges facing United
Nations peacekeeping efforts today are a source of
serious concern about the future of peacekeeping
operations. The drawdown of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali, and the demands from Kinshasa for the
withdrawal of the United Nations presence from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to begin by the end
of the year, have compelled us to think about the real
reasons for the dissatisfaction among States that had
originally consented to the deployment of peacekeepers
on their territory. Those reasons include insufficient
consideration of the wishes of host States and some
mistaken priorities, with a shift in focus to secondary
issues such as human rights, gender and climate. An
additional factor is the so-called multidimensional
nature of modern peacekeeping operations, which
often distracts them from their core tasks and results in
diminished internal coordination. It is not unheard of
for different units within the same mission to differ in
their understanding of their roles.
United Nations peacekeeping operations have
been present for many years in a number of regions,
becoming part and parcel of the domestic political
context and the conflict-management process rather
than a tool for resolving that conflict. As a result — and
we have seen it increasingly often of late — there is
growing public dissatisfaction with the way in which
peacekeepers are carrying out their mandate. In many
country situations, we see a patronizing approach and
an arbitrary interpretation of such concepts as the
imperative of unconditional respect for the sovereignty
of host States and strict adherence to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
23-26290

07/09/2023

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the basic principles of peacekeeping — ensuring the
consent of the parties and impartiality and refraining
from the use of force, except in self-defence and to
defend the mandate. Unfortunately, that approach has
done nothing except worsen relations.
The issue of increasing disinformation and
misinformation about the United Nations, which has
recently been the subject of such active discussion in
various forums within the Organization, is closely related
to that. It requires a complex approach, since negative
responses to United Nations missions are certainly
not always attempts to tarnish the Organization’s
reputation, and countering disinformation should not
be used as a pretext for censoring fair criticism of Blue
Helmets. Where peacekeepers are doing a good job of
performing their functions, no one listens to slander. But
the fact is that critical assessments are often evidence
of the disappointment of host States’ populations with
missions’ work. That is why major attention should be
paid to the concerns and priorities of the host country
and the local population. United Nations peacekeeping
missions should explain their mandates, work more
actively with the population through radio, television
and social networks and implement a variety of local
quick-impact projects. All of that can help to establish a
constructive relationship with the local population and
reliable contacts, and thereby strengthen the authority
of the United Nations.
Another serious problem is the discrepancies
between the tasks that peacekeepers are assigned and
the resources available to them for doing them, which
creates inflated expectations among the population. We
believe that peacekeepers’ main focus should continue
to be on achieving reconciliation through dialogue and
creating favourable conditions to political processes.
The quest for political solutions should be based on
reaching agreement on the reasons for the emergence
of the conflict. Without defining the goal it is difficult
to identify the proper resources. Unfortunately, we are
seeing situations in which opinions on those issues
differ significantly between the warring parties, the
main regional players and outside stakeholders, as well
as in the Security Council. Without political solutions
it is impossible to agree on clear and realistic mandates,
gain the trust of host States and ensure effective
support for regional efforts. One of the consequences of
such disagreements in a number of regions around the
world is that the lack of results produced by the United
Nations presence leads countries to pursue regional or

S/PV.9413

other bilateral options. We believe that in situations
where peace is lacking and terrorist threats are elevated,
involving regional players at the host State’s request is
an effective way to establish peace and security.
United Nations cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations is an integral element of the
current international agenda in general and the Security
Council in particular. We have consistently advocated for
developing such cooperation on the basis of the Charter
of the United Nations, especially its Chapter VIII. We
believe firmly that regional integration associations,
first and foremost the African Union, which have a
first-hand acquaintance with the problems of their
members, can play a constructive role in supporting the
aspirations of States to ensure the security and welfare
of their citizens. An overall assessment by the countries
of the region of existing threats and ways to deal with
them, a willingness to take on the risks of doing that
and the creation of a coherent and effective commandand-control system based on trust and cooperation are
the keys to the success of regional efforts. In addition,
an undeniable advantage of regional efforts compared
to United Nations peacekeeping operations is the ability
to respond rapidly to emerging challenges and threats.
Constructive cooperation with host States is a
key prerequisite for the effective implementation of
peacekeeping operations. After all, it is they that bear
the chief responsibility for the protection of civilians,
the elimination of the causes of the crisis and the
achievement of post-conflict recovery. We should
never forget that resolving a country’s internal crisis
is a complex, painstaking and often lengthy process
that must be national in nature and take into account
the interests of every sector of the population. There
is no universal formula. What is needed is a unique
approach based on the social, historical, cultural and
civilizational specificities of each society. Only the
Government of the State itself can ensure that stable
social contract. We consider the situation in the
Central African Republic a positive example of the
establishment of cooperation with the authorities of the
host State. The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Valentine Rugwabiza, has succeeded
in establishing a close dialogue with Bangui. In that
regard we should all remember that one of the basic
principles of peacekeeping is the consent of the parties.
Without it the work of peacekeeping is impossible.
In conclusion, we want to emphasize that the
main platform for discussing major developments in

23-262909/20

S/PV.9413

United Nations peacekeeping operations

United Nations peacekeeping activities should remain
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
of the General Assembly (C-34). Its decisions draw
their legitimacy from the universal composition of its
membership, which includes all active participants
in peace processes, and from the consensus nature
of its work. The Secretariat should follow the course
of discussions within the C-34 closely and take their
outcomes into account in its work. That is especially
true for an issue as sensitive as peacekeeping
intelligence-gathering and information analysis. As we
know from the latest report of the Secretary-General
on the performance of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, the Secretariat has established a
peacekeeping intelligence academy. However, Member
States did not directly instruct it to establish such an
academy, and it is not acceptable for the Secretariat to
ignore or arbitrarily interpret the conclusions of the
C-34 when taking administrative decisions. We expect
to see a similar approach with regard to agreement on
the Secretary-General’s initiative for a New Agenda for
Peace. It will be important for the full range of views of
Member States to be taken into account in developing
that initiative.
I would like to assure the Council that as one
of its permanent members, Russia bears a special
responsibility for the prevention and settlement of
armed conflicts and is focused on strengthening our
global Organization’s capacity for peacekeeping and
countering crises.
Mr. Moretti (Brazil): I join others in thanking the
Albanian presidency for organizing this meeting, as well
as Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing.
Brazil knows first-hand the importance of United
Nations peace missions. In the past 70 years, more
than 55,000 Brazilian military and police personnel
have participated in United Nations missions across
the globe. We fully appreciate and are immensely
grateful for those who often risk their lives in hostile
environments. They deserve our wholehearted support.
Men and women peacekeepers have a crucial task,
which is to help create the conditions for durable peace
and sustainable development. In our view, it is key to
invest in the security pillar while solidly laying the
ground for sustainable development initiatives, bearing
in mind that security and development are closely
interlinked and mutually reinforcing.
10/20

07/09/2023

We concur with the Secretary-General’s view
that peacekeeping remains a central component of
the continuum of United Nations responses to threats
to international peace and security. For that to be
maintained, peacekeeping must abide by the basic
principles of the consent of the parties, impartiality
and the non-use of force, except in self-defence and in
defence of the mandate.
The United Nations peacekeeping system is at a
critical juncture. Tensions between missions and host
countries and recurring violent incidents point to an
increasingly challenging environment for peacekeeping.
We have recently witnessed worrisome events involving
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, as
well as the decision to withdraw the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali. In the Sudan, the deteriorating conditions have
affected the capacity of the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan to discharge
its mandate. The reasons for and the magnitude of such
tensions vary considerably.
In any case, the Security Council should take
responsibility and react according to its duties under
the Charter of the United Nations. It must design
mandates that are both realistic and fit for purpose. And
it must oversee their implementation in a systematic
manner in order to adjust them in the light of changing
situations. For example, when dealing with complex,
multidimensional mandates — which is increasingly
the case — the Council should ensure that the missions
have the tools appropriate for the effective discharge
of their duties. It should also be able to detect in a
timely manner when conditions on the ground no
longer require, justify or allow for the presence of
United Nations peace operations. We commend efforts
to identify gaps and formulate updated policies, such
as those recommended by the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative of 2018 and the Action for Peacekeeping
Plus initiative.
We also support the approach proposed in the New
Agenda for Peace on the need to strengthen peace
operations and partnerships. In its assessment, the
Secretary-General rightly points out the evident gap
between United Nations peacekeeping mandates and
what missions can actually deliver. That is a pressing
task we have in our hands.
23-26290

07/09/2023

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The impact of the women and peace and security
agenda on operational performance is of particular
relevance, and we welcome the integration of that
agenda across the Action for Peace Plus priorities.
In the context of an increasingly hostile environment
for peacekeepers, we highlight the importance of
strategic communications as a powerful tool to improve
the overall performance of United Nations operations,
not only in countering disinformation but also in
promoting engagement with local communities.
Our commitment to adequately addressing those
issues and others raised today is crucial if we are to
preserve and enhance the effectiveness and legitimacy
of peacekeeping operations.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix for his briefing.
Peacekeeping operations are facing an increasingly
challenging environment, politically and operationally.
To uphold peacekeeping as one of the most effective
tools available to the United Nations in the promotion
and maintenance of international peace and security,
political support and commitment from all stakeholders
are required. The Security Council should remind itself
of the importance of its unified support to peacekeeping
and its responsibility to provide well-defined, realistic
and achievable mandates, while acknowledging the
limitations peacekeeping may have in delivering
those mandates, as noted in the most recent report of
the Secretary-General on the overall performance of
United Nations peacekeeping operations and his policy
brief on the New Agenda for Peace. As a stark reminder
to us in the Chamber, let me quote one powerful phrase
from the Secretary-General’s report:
“A lack of unity within the Security Council
can negatively impact the political leverage and
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations to support
peace processes”.
We join the Secretary-General in re-emphasizing
the need to continue to push forward peacekeeping
reforms in order to enable nimble adaptation to
dynamic environments. Japan reiterates its support
for the priorities of the Action for Peacekeeping and
Action for Peacekeeping Plus (A4P+) initiatives and is
encouraged by the collective efforts to date to strengthen
performance in line with them. All those priorities
remain important, including achieving gender parity,
as well as integrated performance tools and strategic

S/PV.9413

communication. The target period of A4P+ is the end of
this year. Therefore, in addition to taking stock of what
has been achieved, it is also imperative to identify the
areas that require a renewed focus in particular. In that
regard, we would like to highlight three areas.
The first is to further enhance partnerships.
Peacekeeping is built on partnerships among all
stakeholders, and the smooth functioning of resilient
partnerships is a foundation for improving mission
performance. The African Union in particular, among
other regional organizations, can play an increasingly
larger role in that regard, taking on ever-more ownership,
especially given the recent expansion of its institutional
capacity. Further strengthening partnerships between
the United Nations and the AU, including on capacitybuilding and expertise-sharing, is one of the issues
that needs to be properly taken into consideration to
improve overall peacekeeping performance.
The second is to enhance strategic and operational
integration, especially in response to the increase
in the number of missions undergoing transitions.
Peacekeeping operations need to contribute to achieving
sustainable peace and preventing the recurrence of
conflict. Therefore, their seamless handover to other
entities, such as United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, must be used as a critical parameter
for measuring their performance. In that vein, at the
Headquarters level, we call on the Council to better
utilize the Peacebuilding Commission’s advisory role
and ability to convene a wide range of stakeholders to
mobilize every available tool.
The third is to improve the safety and security of
peacekeepers. Risks to peacekeepers and missions are
becoming more wide-ranging, including improvised
explosive devices (IEDs), misinformation and
disinformation. The Secretariat and Member States
can support troop- and police-contributing countries’
efforts to ensure that their personnel are well-prepared to
mitigate those risks. Japan supports the United Nations
efforts to develop and provide training programmes
in areas such as countering IEDs, peacekeeping
intelligence and medical capacity. In the meantime,
new and yet-unknown risks will continue to emerge.
The Security Council needs to be mindful to reflect
them in its discussions on its various peacekeeping
missions, as appropriate.
With those areas in mind, Japan remains
committed to contributing to enhancing performance

23-2629011/20

S/PV.9413

United Nations peacekeeping operations

in peacekeeping and further engaging in discussions in
the Council.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing and
his leadership on peacekeeping reform.
In recent years, there has been a disturbing
trend of increasing threats of violence against
United Nations peacekeepers. Just this past month
in August, peacekeepers from the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus were physically
assaulted in Pyla. Violence perpetrated against United
Nations peacekeepers is unacceptable. We call on the
Secretary-General and Member States, particularly host
Governments, to do everything they can to promote the
safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers.
One of the largest and growing threats to that safety
is misinformation and disinformation. Misinformation
and disinformation campaigns, such as those we have
seen targeting the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, hinder missions’ abilities to protect civilians,
investigate human rights violations and facilitate
political dialogue. Misinformation and disinformation
breed mistrust of the mission by local populations,
which makes peacekeepers a target for violence.
Peacekeeping missions must proactively shape
public messaging to include factual information about a
mission’s mandate in local languages on accessible media
platforms. Host Governments must also increase their
efforts to combat misinformation and disinformation
campaigns targeting United Nations missions.
Environmental management is a cross-cutting issue
that impacts peacekeeper safety and security, mission
operations and the legacy that peacekeepers leave
behind. More reliance on renewable energy and less
reliance on diesel means fewer supply convoys which
expose peacekeepers to attacks and lessens the flow of
funding to conflict actors who control supply chains.
The bottom line is this: greener peacekeeping leads to
safer peacekeepers and safer and cleaner environments
for host communities.
To encourage greater support for those efforts,
the United States will host a side event for the 2023
Accra peacekeeping ministerial to explore innovative
partnerships with troop- and police-contributing
countries to meet key United Nations environmental
management goals.
12/20

07/09/2023

The United States underlines the importance of the
Secretariat and Member States continuing to work to
improve the performance of peacekeeping operations.
Improving peacekeeping performance is an integral part
of the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping and
Action for Peacekeeping Plus agenda, and resolution
2436 (2018) shows it is a priority for the Council as
well. The Council must continue to seek accountability
for underperformance in United Nations peacekeeping
and do its part to ensure that missions have the support
they need to succeed.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
Despite the challenges of the past year, peacekeeping
remains an irreplaceable instrument. It is often the only
possible response to contemporary security challenges.
Conflict prevention and peacebuilding are useful
levers but are unsuitable once crises have broken out.
To operate on the ground, a security presence remains
essential in many cases.
The role of the Security Council is paramount, and
few organizations offer equivalent force-generation and
logistical support capabilities. Where partnerships with
host States are functioning, peacekeeping operations
have continued to implement their mandates for the
benefit of international peace and security.
The success of peacekeeping operations depends
on the existence of momentum and strategy among the
parties on the ground. Host States must facilitate the
implementation of peacekeeping mandates, and they
must not give in to the temptation to make the United
Nations a scapegoat nor to the siren calls of mercenaries
who proliferate human rights violations and plunder
natural resources.
The results seen in 2023 owe a great deal to the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. In 2023, France
increased its efforts by allocating nearly €4 million
in voluntary contributions. In particular, we have also
supported the digital transformation of peacekeeping,
efforts in strategic communications and the fight
against information manipulation, as well as the fight
against improvised explosive devices. France is also
working to strengthen language skills. We continue
to encourage a significant increase in the number of
women in peacekeeping operations, particularly in
managerial positions.
23-26290

07/09/2023

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The Accra ministerial meeting in December must
reaffirm a political vision of peacekeeping. That will
require the collective commitment of the SecretaryGeneral, troop-contributing countries and all partners.
The momentum generated by the New Agenda for
Peace must be maintained. France will continue to play
its full part.
The
future
of
peacekeeping
strengthening partnerships.

lies

in

S/PV.9413

limitations of ambitious mandates without adequate
political support.
The recent request by the Malian transitional
Government for the withdrawal of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and the recent demonstrations against the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo bear testimony to the
challenges facing some peacekeeping operations today.

I am referring to the partnership with the African
Union and the financing of African peace operations
from United Nations assessed contributions. France
will continue its engagement this year to bring positions
together and to make progress towards the adoption of a
framework resolution.

We are mindful that peacekeeping remains a
unifying force that brings Member States together
around a shared vision of maintaining or restoring
peace. Peacekeeping enjoys international legitimacy
that derives from the Security Council mandate and
broad international backing.

I am also referring to partnerships with the European
Union (EU). EU member States deploy more than 5,000
personnel and EU operations and financial instruments
complement the work of the United Nations and the
African Union. The EU has also allocated €1.5 billion
in support of conflict prevention and security efforts in
sub-Saharan Africa for the period 2021-2027.

In that connection, we are reminded of the
successful experience of the United Nations Operation
in Mozambique (ONUMOZ), established under
resolution 797 (1992). The Security Council created
ONUMOZ within the framework of the General Peace
Agreement for Mozambique, also known as the Rome
Accords, of which the Mozambican Government and
the Mozambique National Resistance (RENAMO) were
the signatories on the 4 October 1992.

Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Mozambique wishes to
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for his important
and insightful briefing.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on the overall performance of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations, as well as the timely
recommendations for improving their performance. We
highly appreciate the fact that, since 1948, more than
70 United Nations peacekeeping operations, involving
more than 88,000 uniformed and civilian personnel,
have been deployed. They have contributed enormously
and continue to work towards the cessations of
hostilities or the prevention of the resurgence of violent
conflicts. We wish to take this opportunity to commend
the positive and complex work of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. Furthermore, we pay tribute
to the men and women who have served or are still
serving to keep peace, security and stability in different
places on the planet.
The challenges posed by long-standing and
protracted conflicts, without peace to keep, driven
by complex domestic, regional, geopolitical and
transnational factors, serve as a stark illustration of the

ONUMOZ led to a successful completion of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process,
which ended up demobilizing Government soldiers and
RENAMO armed men. It laid the foundation for the
creation of the new army — the Mozambique Defence
Armed Forces. ONUMOZ also guided the peaceful
transition of the political process in the country,
creating conditions conducive to the holding of the first
multiparty general elections, in 1994.
It is our understanding that the success of the
Mozambican peacemaking and peacekeeping processes
were largely due to a combination of enabling factors:
the political will of the parties and the overwhelming
support of the Mozambican people themselves; clear
and well-defined goals by the parties to the conflict,
as contained in the Rome General Peace Accords;
the strong support of the southern African region,
the Secretary-General, along with the cohesion and
unity of the Security Council and of the international
community at large, with regard to the mandate; and
the necessary resources — human, material and
financial — made available for the process.

23-2629013/20

S/PV.9413

United Nations peacekeeping operations

It is fair to say that behind every successful
peacekeeping operation, one will find some or all of the
elements listed above. Therefore, insights and lessons
that can be drawn from the Mozambican experience
clearly indicate that a peacekeeping operation cannot
succeed in its primary objectives when there is
insufficient political will for peace among the main
stakeholders, when the people are not involved, when
the international community is not constructively
engaged or when the resources, including financial
resources, are lacking.
Mozambique wishes to reaffirm our support for the
integration of the women and peace and security agenda,
in line with resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security. We believe that the resolution has
had a positive impact on the operational effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing and congratulate him on his recent successful
visit to China.
United Nations peacekeeping operations are an
important means of maintaining international peace
and security. As we speak, nearly 90,000 peacekeepers
are united under the banner of the United Nations in
mission areas around the world. They are bringing
peace to conflict areas and hope to local people. I would
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to all the
Blue Helmets serving on the front line of peacekeeping.
The international situation is undergoing profound
changes, with hotspot issues emerging one after another
and geopolitical conflicts continuing unabated. United
Nations peacekeeping operations are facing new and
increasingly prominent problems, tasks and challenges.
Not long ago, Secretary-General Guterres put forward
his New Agenda for Peace, which provided an important
reference for Member States to discuss the cause of
peace and further improve peacekeeping operations.
Under such new circumstances, peacekeeping
operations should have clearly defined roles and address
their weaknesses and shortcomings so as to better serve
Member States and the international community.
With a view to advancing the New Agenda for
Peace, I would like to make four points.
First, peacekeeping operations must remain
political. Peacekeeping operations are a complement
to political and diplomatic efforts, a means rather
14/20

07/09/2023

than an end. In his New Agenda for Peace, SecretaryGeneral Guterres emphasized that peace operations
must be deployed on the basis of and in support of a
clear political process. Starting with the creation and
deployment of mandates to their implementation and
conduct of operations, peacekeeping missions must not
lose sight of the fundamental goal of serving political
settlements and must not deviate from the overall
direction of supporting diplomatic efforts.
Host Governments and their people are the driving
force of peace and development in their own country.
Gaining the trust of the host Government and the
support of the local people is the basis and prerequisite
for the smooth conduct of peacekeeping operations
and a requirement to ensure the political process is
served. The recent withdrawal of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) has attracted the attention of all
parties, and the resistance encountered by the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in carrying out its
mandate was worrisome. The United Nations should
draw the appropriate lessons and continue to improve
its peacekeeping efforts. That is also why we support
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
in further strengthening its communication with the
Lebanese Government and army in the discharge of
its mandate.
Secondly,
peacekeeping
operations
should
strengthen their partnerships. Peacekeeping operations
are closely connected to the development, social,
humanitarian and human rights and other work of
the United Nations and cannot be successful without
coordination and cooperation among the Security
Council, the Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing
countries, donors, host countries, regional organizations
and other stakeholders. The New Agenda for Peace also
stresses that peace operations should fully leverage the
range of capacities and expertise of the entire United
Nations system and its partners as part of a system of
networked multilateralism and enhanced partnerships.
It is necessary to enhance coordination between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Peacebuilding
proposals should be considered during the initial
phase of deploying peacekeeping operation, and
transition strategies must be formulated to support host
countries in improving their capacity for independent
development and lay a solid foundation for durable peace
and stability. We must enhance coordination between
23-26290

07/09/2023

United Nations peacekeeping operations

peacekeeping operations and the United Nations
resident agencies so as to enable them to implement
their respective mandates in the fields of sustainable
development, humanitarian assistance, women and
children and other areas and fully leverage their
comparative advantages in order to achieve synergy.
There is also a need to strengthen coordination between
the United Nations and regional organizations in order
to support efforts to rely on regional capacities to
resolve regional issues. We should support the African
Union and other regional and subregional organizations
in efforts to improve their independent peacekeeping
capabilities and create synergies with United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
Thirdly, peacekeeping operations should use
force with caution. Over the past few decades, the
practice and doctrine of United Nations peacekeeping
operations have continued to evolve, but the three basic
principles remain unchanged, namely, the consent
of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of force,
except in self-defence or to protect the mandate. In
the current context, there is a strong need to define the
line between peacekeeping and peace enforcement. We
must adopt a very cautious approach towards allowing
peacekeeping forces to carry out offensive tasks or
supporting relevant regions or countries in carrying out
military operations. Every effort must be made to avoid
scenarios where the mission’s rules of engagement are
too broad or where the imprudent use of force triggers
conflicts between the parties, both of which would put
peacekeepers in danger.
In highly exceptional circumstances, the Council
could authorize the launching of peace enforcement
operations or grant peacekeeping operations an offensive
mandate, but that must only be the last resort after all
other options have been exhausted. The scenarios,
mandates, responsible bodies and exit strategies must be
clearly defined, and robust accountability mechanisms
must be in place. As Secretary-General Guterres
highlighted in his New Agenda for Peace, any peace
enforcement action authorized by the Council must be
fully in line with the Charter of the United Nations,
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
Fourthly, peacekeeping operations must keep up
with the times. We have seen the rapid development
and broad application of emerging technologies in
recent years. United Nations peacekeeping operations
must adapt to new developments and accelerate their

S/PV.9413

digital transformation. On the one hand, emerging
technologies should be used to enable peacekeeping
operations to improve their situational awareness,
strategic communication and other capacities. On the
other hand, it is important to ensure that they are safe
and reliable, and every effort must be made to avoid
their abuse, misuse or use for malicious purposes. The
increasing risks to peacekeepers have been a major
issue for peacekeeping operations in recent years. A
helicopter unit from the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei was fired on during its operations
not long ago. UNIFIL personnel have been harassed
while conducting patrols. MINUSMA has come under
attack while carrying out its mandated withdrawal.
Every one of those incidents sounds an alarm for us.
When they are faced with new threats and challenges,
United Nations peacekeeping operations must adapt
and respond proactively. As co-Chair of the Group of
Friends of the Safety and Security of United Nations
Peacekeepers, China stands ready to make greater
efforts to fully implement resolution 2518 (2020) and
foster discussions with all the relevant parties to jointly
safeguard the safety and security of Blue Helmets.
China has been an active participant in and
significant contributor to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. For more than three decades we have
dispatched more than 50,000 peacekeepers to operations
in more than 20 countries, bringing peace and hope to
people in conflict areas. China will continue to actively
support, facilitate and participate in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and ramp up its contribution
to maintaining international peace and security.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking Mr. Lacroix for his
briefing today, and the Secretary-General for his report
on peacekeeping operations, and by paying tribute to
all the men and women who are serving or have served
in them for more than 75 years, in difficult conditions,
while putting their own welfare and even their lives
at risk to fulfil one of the promises on which our
Organization was founded.
The many members of our armed forces who are
currently serving in several peacekeeping operations
are living proof of Ecuador’s historic support of that
work. Ecuador remains committed to the continued
improvement of peacekeeping operations and to
supporting the Action for Peace initiative, which
Secretary-General António Guterres has supported
for the past five years, and its Action for Peace Plus

23-2629015/20

S/PV.9413

United Nations peacekeeping operations

implementation strategy. A few weeks ago, the
Secretary-General presented us with a new document in
which he proposes measures to strengthen peacekeeping
operations and address the issue of peace enforcement.
The valuable recommendations set forth in the New
Agenda for Peace should be carefully analysed to
ensure that peacekeeping operations are more effective
and efficient and remain one of the most powerful tools
of the Organization, particularly the Security Council.
We believe, for example, that mandates must be clear,
prioritized and achievable and that Council members
should avoid proposing unrealistic mandates. We
must always bear in mind what the primary purpose
of a mission is and separate its primary from its
secondary tasks.
It is also vital to ensure that mandates are adequately
resourced and that the operations of regional and
subregional organizations are supported, especially
in Africa, where the proliferation of non-State armed
groups represents a threat. We also agree with the
Secretary-General that peacekeeping operations should
be deployed in support of clearly defined political
processes. We believe that the other basic principles
of peacekeeping, such as the consent of the parties,
impartiality and the non-use of force except in selfdefence and in the defence of a Council-authorized
mandate, are also key to operations’ success.
I would like to address the challenges and
opportunities that today’s rapid technological
developments present for peacekeeping operations,
particularly those related to communications.
Technological solutions can help United Nations
peacekeeping operations fulfil their mandates more
effectively in complex environments by facilitating
adaptation to changing conflict dynamics, among other
things. Technology can strengthen early-warning and
early-action capabilities and the security of camps and
convoys, with stable Internet connections and integrated
communication networks. It can also improve conflict
monitoring and analysis, enhance energy efficiency and
reduce environmental pollution. It is our responsibility
to promote and harness technological development as
an enabler of peace.
The security of peacekeepers is critical. With new
technologies have come new forms of harassment.
Every effort must be made to ensure not only the
physical security of peacekeepers but their protection
from virtual surveillance, privacy violations and
online threats. That requires combating the worrisome
16/20

07/09/2023

rise in mis- and disinformation and their negative
impact on the safety of peacekeeping personnel and
on mandate implementation more generally. Strategic
communication has always been an important tool
for our Organization. Rapid technological change and
the digital revolution have added an unprecedented
layer of sophistication and complexity, but they also
provide communication opportunities for fostering
improvement in the performance of peacekeeping
missions. For example, strategic communication
should be used to manage expectations among local
communities, counter mis- and disinformation, help
build trust between the members of peacekeeping
operations and the populations of the areas in which
they operate, dovetail effectively with the planning and
work of the mission and contribute to the protection of
civilians. Strategic communication efforts should make
effective use of all available technologies and seek
close coordination with regional, national and local
organizations, which are most familiar with the terrain
and the peculiarities of the communities concerned.
The recent Peace Begins with Me campaign initiative
is moving in the right direction, and according to
the Secretary-General’s report is already having
positive results.
I will conclude my statement by reminding us of the
importance of addressing the root causes of conflict,
because lasting peace is founded on development, the
creation of opportunities, the improvement of living
conditions and respect for the rule of law. That is the
only way that we will achieve long-term stability and
security and peacekeeping operations will become
less necessary.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
The idea of United Nations peacekeeping operations
was born when the Cold War imposed itself on the
work of the Security Council. Those operations have
saved the lives of millions of civilians over the past few
decades. I would therefore like to begin by thanking
the Blue Helmets for doing extraordinary work every
day, often in difficult conditions and at times at great
personal cost.
As many of my colleagues have underscored, since
the concept of peacekeeping operations was established
75 years ago, the nature of conflicts and the mandates of
missions have changed considerably. That is why in his
New Agenda for Peace, as my colleague from Ecuador
just mentioned, the Secretary-General states that
23-26290

07/09/2023

United Nations peacekeeping operations

“the gap between United Nations peacekeeping
mandates and what such missions can actually
deliver in practice has become apparent”.
We therefore need to adapt our instruments to swiftly
close that gap. That is a task for the Council, the United
Nations itself and all Member States. I thank the UnderSecretary-General for Peace Operations, Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, for his briefing, in particular for reminding us
of all the peacekeeping success stories. I welcome the
third progress report on the implementation of the Action
for Peacekeeping Plus initiative. The initiative must
continue, and we fully support it. Recommendations
from the Secretariat show that we need to reflect in
depth on peacekeeping reform. I would like to outline
three points that we consider essential.
First, it is up to the Council to ensure that peace
operations are guided principally by politics and that
those operations support a clearly defined political
process, which, of course, includes women. It also
entails reimagining partnerships with regional
organizations in general and the African Union in
particular, in order to develop modular and flexible
mission models. In that respect, Switzerland recognizes
that predictable, sustainable and flexible funding for
African Union-led peace-support operations would be
an important instrument for the Council. Needless to
say, we will support all of the efforts that our colleague
from Ghana just described. That is also why, during
our presidency, we organized a debate on the subject
presided over by our Vice-President (see S/PV.9315).
Secondly, the protection of civilians in the broadest
sense must remain at the centre of our focus. All
missions authorized by the Council have an obligation to
respect the Charter of the United Nations, international
humanitarian law, human rights and refugee law. That
must be a precondition for the provision of funding
and support by the United Nations and it requires
adequate structures, processes and resources. The
United Nations human rights due-diligence policy is
particularly relevant now, for example in the context of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in which the
question of support to non-United Nations forces has
been raised.
Thirdly, there are now legitimate expectations for
proof of the effectiveness of missions. Effectiveness is
not only a first line of defence against disinformation but
a moral responsibility to the populations affected and to

S/PV.9413

our taxpayers. Switzerland’s provision of an expert in that
area to the Department of Peace Operations underlines
our support for the implementation and development
of the Comprehensive Planning and Performance
Assessment System. The aim is to strengthen the
link between performance assessment, planning and
budgeting. We also welcome developments in the area
of environmental performance, in line with the strategy
of the Department of Operational Support. That helps
to reduce the environmental footprint of peacekeeping
operations and better manage natural resources.
Greening the missions is now a guiding principle.
Switzerland is committed to an in-depth discussion
of peacekeeping reform. That is why we organized
a workshop on the subject with the International
Peace Institute during our presidency. The discussion
highlighted the need to develop the capabilities of
regional forces, strengthen current structures and
rationalize mandates. As Karin Landgren, Executive
Director of Security Council Report and former head
of several peace missions, said at the debate on peace
operations in November last year,
“Peace operations fit for contemporary times need to
devise new approaches that include responsiveness
to the underlying causes and drivers of conflict”
(S/PV.9181, p.7).
The New Agenda for Peace provides us with a unique
opportunity to do so, and Switzerland will continue to
contribute to it actively and constructively. Or, as was
said on the occasion of the seventy-fifth anniversary of
peacekeeping, “Peace begins with me, with you, with
all of us”.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix for his comprehensive and informative briefing.
Let me begin by emphasizing that United Nations
peacekeeping missions play a pivotal and invaluable role
in promoting stability and protecting civilians in some
of the most complex and dangerous theatres around
the world. The courage, sacrifices and commitment
of United Nations peacekeepers enable missions to
continue to operate in increasingly difficult political
and security contexts. Malta remains steadfast in its
commitment to the security and safety of peacekeepers.
We strongly condemn all attacks on peacekeeping
missions, some of which may amount to war crimes
under international law. We are concerned about the
growing challenges that peacekeepers are facing on
the ground. They are a constant threat to their security

23-2629017/20

S/PV.9413

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and hinder their ability to implement mandates. In that
regard, we deplore the recurring instances of restrictions
on freedom of movement and the increasing presence of
mercenaries in operating areas. We welcome the latest
report of the Secretary-General and strongly support
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative and the Action
for Peacekeeping Plus (A4P+) implementation plan. We
believe that a comprehensive approach to those crosscutting issues is the best way to improve peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, we would like to highlight
four key areas of implementation.
First, having clear, credible and realistic mandates
is a prerequisite for the success of peacekeeping
missions. Mandates should be rooted in a broader
political strategy that gives priority to child protection,
women and peace and security and climate action,
which are central to achieving sustainable peace.
Malta attaches great importance to the protection
of civilians and respect for human rights as core
responsibilities of peacekeeping missions. While the
primary responsibility for those tasks lies with the host
State, we stress that close cooperation with all local,
regional and multilateral stakeholders is key and should
be supported.
Secondly, we reaffirm the importance of ensuring
the integration of the women and peace and security
agenda across A4P+ priorities. The catalytic impact
of that agenda on the operational effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations has strengthened early
warning and increased the protection of women and
girls through gender-responsive patrols and community
engagement, including with young people. Promoting
and supporting gender parity in peacekeeping
requires support mechanisms for deployed women
and gender-responsive leadership, and we commend
the Secretariat’s ongoing efforts in that area. Lasting
peace can be achieved only through the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women in all facets of
peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
Thirdly, Malta acknowledges the potential
adverse effects that peacekeeping operations may
have on the environment, local economy and relations
with host communities. To that end, it is essential to
ensure that the Security Council increases its focus
on environmental management and deploys green,
responsible missions that achieve maximum efficiency
in their use of natural resources. We stress the need
to comprehensively address the environmental impact
of peacekeeping operations in close coordination
18/20

07/09/2023

with the parties involved, including troop- and
police-contributing countries.
Fourthly, it is crucial to ensure that peacekeeping
missions have adequate and predictable funding.
We would like to remind the Council that European
Union member States have always contributed to
United Nations peacekeeping operations and together
constitute the second largest financial contributor to
the peacekeeping budget.
In conclusion, while we recognize that there is still
more work to be done to meet new and fast-changing
operational challenges, we reaffirm our readiness to
support efforts to improve peacekeeping operations at
all levels.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing on
peacekeeping around the world.
The effectiveness of peacekeeping operations has
been tested for a number of years, while the vital need
to adapt them to today’s many security challenges
has become clear. It is particularly important in the
circumstances to make a clear diagnosis of the strengths
and limitations of peacekeeping operations and to
reinvent them with concrete and appropriate solutions
in order to be able to respond effectively to the specific
realities of each situation on the ground.
As the backbone of the United Nations security
strategy, peacekeeping operations have long been an
important asset, particularly in terms of the protection
of civilians, the promotion of the rule of law and conflict
prevention and peacebuilding. In a number of countries
in Africa and other regions of the world, peacekeeping
operations have made a significant contribution to
overseeing peaceful political transitions, reducing
hostilities, promoting reconciliation and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes and in some
cases helping to establish the rule of law. However,
the complexity of new threats to international peace
and security — such as those posed by terrorism
and violent extremism, cybercrime, the pillaging
of resources and climate change — has gradually
atrophied the performance of peacekeeping operations
and highlighted the limits of mandates, which are often
out of touch with the realities on the ground.
The hasty departure of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, only 10 years after its deployment, at a time when
23-26290

07/09/2023

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.9413

the country is still facing major security challenges;
the questioning of the presence of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, considering the persistent
insecurity in the east of the country; and the increase in
public complaints about peacekeeping missions, not to
mention violence against peacekeepers, are all realities
that are sounding alarm bells and forcing us to learn
lessons and reconfigure our solutions.

that can boost the performance of missions and help
build trust with host countries. They also contribute
to the safety and security of personnel and facilitate
interaction with local communities. In that regard,
I commend the International Organization of la
Francophonie, which has been supporting Frenchspeaking participation in peacekeeping operations for
almost two decades now, particularly through capacitybuilding for contingents from Francophone countries.

First, it is essential to develop innovative mandates
that are adapted to specific theatres of operations.
Of course, in order to be more effective, we need to
improve the processes for preparing peacekeepers
for deployment.

Finally, I want to pay tribute to the Blue Helmets
deployed around the world, who demonstrate such
commitment and courage, and to honour the memory
of those peacekeepers who have died in the line of duty.

Secondly, it is essential to listen to the countries
concerned and the populations who legitimately aspire
to the restoration of peace by providing unified and
diversified responses that can enable fragile States
to emerge from the multidimensional cyclical crises
they face.
The African Union’s willingness to contribute to
resolving the security crises undermining the continent
can no longer be questioned and has been demonstrated on
numerous occasions. In the light of the challenges facing
United Nations operations, peacekeeping operations
led by the African Union or hybrid configurations, such
as the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur, are key elements that could represent the
future of the maintenance of international peace and
security in Africa. There is therefore an urgent need
to define a more effective partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union that can be
consolidated with appropriate, predictable and reliable
funding for the African Union’s peace and security
efforts. For Gabon, that United Nations-African Union
cooperation, in line with the principle of subsidiarity,
offers a concrete solution to the issues of preventing
conflicts, managing the challenges linked to terrorism,
especially in the Sahel, and building peace in the Horn
of Africa in particular.
I want to reiterate my country’s commitment to the
promotion of women’s participation in peacekeeping
operations and to the digital transformation of those
operations, as well as to the Secretary-General’s
initiatives of Action for Peacekeeping Plus and the
New Agenda for Peace. I also want to call for a greater
inclusion of multilingualism and interculturality in
peacekeeping operations. Language skills are factors

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for
his thorough briefing. We welcome the report of the
Secretary-General, which highlights efforts to enhance
the efficiency of United Nations peacekeeping missions.
We strongly support the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative and the subsequent Action for Peacekeeping
Plus (A4P+) plan for 2021–2023.
United
Nations
peacekeeping
missions
unquestionably remain an indispensable means for
sustaining peace and pursuing political solutions in
many parts of the world. As of June of this year, close
to 90,000 personnel continue to serve and more than
70 United Nations peacekeeping operations have been
deployed in different parts of the world, dedicated to
maintaining peace and preventing further violence
and conflicts. Throughout history, those missions have
been pivotal to promoting human rights, supporting
accountability initiatives and advancing governance,
security and justice reform.
There are many success stories. The United
Nations Mission in South Sudan’s intervention in
Tambura during the 2021 conflict was instrumental in
establishing a temporary base to halt hostilities, protect
civilians and facilitate dialogue. The United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) has worked
tirelessly to create stability since the 2018 elections,
safeguarding more than 100,000 internally displaced
persons. The United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic facilitated peace negotiations and the delivery
of humanitarian aid to nearly 2 million people in 2022.
The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon has

23-2629019/20

S/PV.9413

United Nations peacekeeping operations

successfully maintained the ceasefire since 2006 and
is rightly credited for its role in deterrence. The United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) has contributed
significantly to the protection of civilians despite the
difficulties faced in terms of patrols, convoys and static
and temporary bases. Peacekeepers’ outposts have
often served as a haven for those displaced by violent
conflict and terrorist acts.
But it is a fact that conflicts have grown increasingly
complex, influenced by domestic, geopolitical
and transnational factors, exposing gaps between
United Nations peacekeeping mandates, practical
implementation and sometimes the expectations of
host countries. Matching mandates with operational
realities, especially in difficult and extended conflicts,
has become very challenging. That has led to increased
and sometimes unrealistic expectations, and when
those expectations are not met, they are followed by
growing criticism and in some cases even hostile
attitudes. Understanding, cooperation and support
from host countries are therefore essential to ensuring
that peacekeepers can implement their mandates and
enjoy freedom of movement so that they can execute
their missions safely. When trust is broken, it is the
implementation of the mandate and, ultimately, peace
and the protection of civilians that will pay the price.
At the request of the host country, MINUSMA
is being withdrawn. MONUSCO will soon begin its
transition phase. We remain worried that the security
crisis that has already been precipitated by activity
in various places by notorious mercenaries, known
for their lack of care for innocent lives, risks further
aggravating weakened peace and stability after the
United Nations withdraws. While United Nations
missions and their mandates are not beyond criticism,
unhappy Governments must know that resorting to
mercenaries should not be done lightly. It may prove
wrong, treacherous, costly and even dangerous.

20/20

07/09/2023

As many speakers have mentioned today, in the age
of social media, disinformation and misinformation
pose a significant threat. To counter false information
and distorted narratives, peacekeeping missions need
to work closely with local communities so that the
people can see and understand that United Nations
missions are not there to implement some theoretical
and opaque mandate but to help and protect them in
every way they can; that they are not there just because
they are mandated to be, but because they are needed;
and that while they represent the United Nations, they
work only for the people. The safety of peacekeepers is
paramount, and the increase in national investigations
addressing acts of violence against them demonstrates
our commitment to justice. We must bring justice for
fallen peacekeepers and deter future acts of violence
against those serving with the Blue Helmets. The same
goes for improving peacekeeping performance and
transparency in standards and evaluation systems, as
outlined in the A4P+ initiative.
Finally, the involvement of women in peacekeeping
ensures inclusivity, brings diversity and favours gender
equality. It enhances conflict resolution and sustainable
peace efforts through diverse perspectives, negotiation
skills and the protection of vulnerable groups in conflict
zones, particularly women and children. Promoting
gender equality aligns with United Nations principles
emphasizing women’s active roles and rights in society.
In conclusion, we salute the dedication and bravery
of United Nations peacekeepers worldwide and pay
tribute to those who have made the ultimate sacrifice
in the service of the noble cause of peace over the past
75 years.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

23-26290
