A/72/392–S/2017/783

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
15 September 2017
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-second session
Agenda item 39
The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council
Seventy-second year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2344 (2017), in which I was requested to report
every three months on developments in Afghanistan.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including political, humanitarian, development and human rights
efforts, since the issuance of my previous report on 15 June 2017 ( A/71/932S/2017/508). It also provides a summary of key political and security developments
and regional and international events relating to Afghanistan. In the interim , a
special report on the strategic review of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) was issued on 10 August 2017 (A/72/312-S/2017/696).

II. Relevant developments
3.
The National Unity Government faced increasingly vocal opposition from a
variety of political figures, who became more active in mobilizing supporters
following the announcement of an electoral date for 2018. The formation of the
“Council for the Salvation of Afghanistan”, which unites leading figures from three
major political parties, created an opposition bloc with a support base predominately
in the north of Afghanistan as well as affiliations in other parts of the country. The
Independent Election Commission announced 7 July 2018 as the date for
parliamentary and district council elections and made progress on electoral
preparations, including steps towards improving the credibility of the electoral
process, despite persistent public scepticism. The security situation remained highly
volatile, as the Government and the Taliban exchanged control of several district
centres during the reporting period, with casualties on both sides. A number of high profile security incidents, including a suicide attack on a Shia mosque in the city of

17-15798 (E)

190917

*1715798*

A/72/392
S/2017/783

Herat on 1 August, mass killings in Sari Pul Province from 3 to 5 August and a
suicide attack on a Shia mosque in Kabul on 25 August, drew widespread
condemnation while prompting fears of rising sectarian tension and further
intensifying public criticism of the Government for not being able to provide
security. Civilians continued to suffer disproportionately from the conflict, with
continuing high levels of civilian casualties and displacement. Relations between
Afghanistan and Pakistan showed signs of improved cooperation in some areas.
Afghanistan continued its regional engagement both bilaterally and through
multilateral forums, in particular with the five Central Asian States. There was no
tangible progress towards a peace process between the Government and the Taliban.

A.

Political developments
4.
My previous periodic report was issued in the middle of a month of political
crisis, precipitated by the massive truck-borne suicide attack on 31 May, which was
carried out in the heart of the city of Kabul. The attack resulted in demonstrations
against the Government, which was accused by protestors of failing to protect its
citizens. This perception was further exacerbated when several demonstrators were
killed during the protests, allegedly by security officials. A subsequent attack at the
funeral of one of the deceased protestors could have led to the killing of a number
of key members of the Jamiat-e Islami political party, including the Chief
Executive, Abdullah Abdullah, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Salahuddin
Rabbani. This led prominent Jamiat-affiliated politicians to publicly accuse the
Government of a conspiracy and prolonged public demonstrations and street
blockades in Kabul. Mr. Abdullah declined to resign, despite calls to do so from
some prominent Jamiat-e Islami members. On 20 June, the Government forcibly
removed the last street blockades in Kabul, during which one protestor was killed
and five others injured by Afghan security forces, leading to fea rs of escalating
violence. This did not materialize, and the Eid holidays marking the end of
Ramadan gave way to a period of relative calm. However, the events of the month
had caused a significant shift in the political climate, with a marked rift in the
relationship between the President, Ashraf Ghani, and key members of the Jamiat -e
Islami party.
5.
In this political and security context, a new political dynamic emerged,
characterized by a consolidation of authority within the National Unity Government
around the President. Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullah reached consensus on high -level
appointments, which had previously represented a source of contention between the
two leaders. During the reporting period, the President nominated several new
ministers, including a new Minister of the Interior and a new head of the
Independent Directorate of Local Governance, and replaced all nine commissioners
of the Independent Administrative Reform and Civil Service Commission. However,
the parliamentary approval process for ministers remained challenging, as the
legislature continued to assert its prerogatives against the executive branch; a
number of ministers are currently serving in an acting capacity.
6.
Relations between the President and Jamiat-e Islami were further exacerbated
following a tense stand-off in Mazar-e Sharif on 14 August between a member of
the Provincial Council, Asif Momand, and forces loyal to the Governor of Balkh
Province, Atta Noor, who is also the Chief Executive of the Jamiat party. The
incident culminated in a shoot-out between the Governor’s forces and armed Hizb-i
Islami affiliates, who supported Mr. Momand. Subsequently, Mr. Momand was
transferred to the custody of the National Directorate of Security, where he
remained until his release on 17 August.

2/14

17-15798

A/72/392
S/2017/783

7.
Relations also remained tense between the President and the Junbish -e Milli
party, whose leader, the First Vice-President, Abdul Rashid Dostum, remains under
indictment for the alleged arbitrary detention and sexual assault of a political ri val
in November 2016. Despite persistent rumours of his imminent return and an
aborted attempt to do so on 17 July, Mr. Dostum remained in Ankara, where he has
officially been undergoing medical treatment since 19 May. On 9 July, pretrial
proceedings began in the case against the First Vice-President and nine
co-defendants, none of whom appeared before the court.
8.
On 22 June, the Independent Election Commission announced 7 July 2018 as
the date for parliamentary and district council elections. The announ cement had a
galvanizing effect on political actors and provided a new outlet for political activity,
including among groups that had previously called for non -constitutional measures
to replace the National Unity Government. In the following weeks, a numb er of
opposition figures and groups began to build coalitions aimed at contesting the
elections. These emerging opposition coalitions coalesced around criticism of the
Government and the deteriorating security and economic situation, as well as
perceptions of a growing concentration of power within the Presidential Palace.
9.
The largest new group announced itself in Ankara on 29 June, as Mr. Dostum,
Mr. Noor and the Second Deputy Chief Executive, Mohammad Mohaqiq, declared
an alliance, the “Coalition for the Salvation of Afghanistan”, which unites figures
from the Jamiat-e Islami, Hezb-i Wahdat Islami Mardum-e Afghanistan and
Junbish-e Milli parties and draws from sizeable constituencies within the Tajik,
Uzbek and Hazara communities. The cooperation betwe en Jamiat and Junbish was a
particularly notable development, given the parties’ long and occasionally violent
rivalry. To date, the alliance has mobilized its northern support base while
attempting to forge links with other opposition figures. Mr. Noor le d a coalition
rally in Mazar-e Sharif on 1 August, which was attended by some 3,000 people;
Jamiat figures such as Mr. Abdullah and Mr. Rabbani were absent. Another rally
was held in Jalalabad on the same day to inaugurate the “Council of the East”,
consisting of parliamentarians from the eastern provinces, who subsequently
travelled to Mazar-e Sharif for discussions with Mr. Noor. Yet another group of
opposition figures announced the formation of Mehwar -e Mardom-e Afghanistan
(“Axis of the People of Afghanistan”), which features a number of Cabinet officials
from the former Karzai administration.
10. Other groupings also appeared energized by the announcement of an election
date. The Afghanistan Protection and Stability Council, which includes the former
Minister of the Interior, Umar Daudzai, and the former mujahidin leader, Abdul
Rasul Sayyaf, made public statements and began to seek out allies. Similarly, the
leader of the New National Front, Anwar ul-Haq Ahady, held several meetings with
other opposition figures, including with Mr. Dostum and representatives of the
Afghanistan Protection and Stability Council. The Hizb -i Islami political grouping
also took steps towards election preparations. At a press conference on 6 July, its
founder, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, announced the unification of the registered party
Hizb-i Islami Afghanistan with his own Hizb-i Islami Gulbuddin faction. He also
stated that the new party would continue to support the political system. However,
the two wings of the party continued to retain separate party structures in many
provinces.
11. Street demonstrations decreased in size and intensity during the reporting
period. Following the removal of its protest tents from the streets of Kabul in late
June, the Tajik-dominated Uprising for Change movement redirected its focus on
initiating cooperation with parts of the political establishment. On 23 July, the
President met with activists of the Hazara-dominated Enlightenment Movement and

17-15798

3/14

A/72/392
S/2017/783

promised a joint commission to explore development opportunities in the Hazaramajority Central Highlands.
12. Following the announcement of an election date, technical and operational
preparations commenced. On 7 August, the Independent Election Commission
launched an assessment to ensure that polling stations were optimally located in
public buildings to serve all communities. With the assistance of the United Nations,
on 14 August, the Commission submitted specifications for biometric voter
registration technology to the National Procurement Authority, a nd on 17 August,
the Authority initiated a limited tendering process for the technology. The
reregistration of eligible Afghan voters with biometric technology would allow the
Commission, for the first time, to compile polling station -specific voter lists.
13. Key political decisions for the elections remain pending. According to the
Independent Election Commission road map, presented on 5 July, they included
decisions on electoral constituencies, the use of technology for voter verification,
polling and results management and funding modalities for the electoral process.
Meanwhile, many parties and civil society organizations have expressed scepticism
about the will and the capacity of the Government to organize credible elections,
citing both security concerns and doubts about the independence of the Independent
Election Commission.
14. No discernible progress has been made in fostering negotiations between the
Government and the Taliban. The High Peace Council, under its new Chair, Karim
Khalili, continued to revise its strategy and workplans within the overall framework
of the President’s vision for peace as outlined to international donors in April.
UNAMA has continued its formal dialogue with the Taliban in an effort to seek a
political solution to the continuing conflict. The Joint Executive Commission,
responsible for the implementation of the peace agreement between the Government
and Hizb-i Islami Gulbuddin, has been folded into the High Peace Council. As part
of its efforts to support local-level peacebuilding, UNAMA facilitated three local
peace initiatives covering six different provinces during the reporting period,
including a dialogue between elders from two districts of Kandahar Province and a
series of consultations with independent religious figures in Khost Province.

B.

Security
15. The conflict continued unabated throughout the country. The United Nations
recorded 5,532 security-related incidents from 15 June to 31 August 2017,
representing an increase of 3 per cent compared with the same period in 2016. By
the end of August 2017, the United Nations had recorded more than 16,290 security related incidents for the first eight months of the year. The continuing high numbers
are attributed mainly to armed clashes, which represent 64 p er cent of the total
security incidents and have increased by 5 per cent since 2016. The record level of
armed clashes seen during 2017 reinforced the shift in the conflict evident since
earlier in the year, away from asymmetric attacks towards a more trad itional conflict
pattern characterized by often prolonged armed clashes between government and
anti-government forces. Asymmetric attacks, such as detonations of improvised
explosive devices, suicide attacks, assassinations and abductions, decreased by 3 p er
cent compared with the same period in 2016 but remained the main cause of civilian
casualties. The eastern region experienced the highest number of incidents, followed
by the southern region.
16. The conflict has further evolved because of the Governme nt’s strategic
decision, as a result of Taliban gains in rural areas, to focus its resources on
defending population centres and disrupting the consolidation of Taliban control

4/14

17-15798

A/72/392
S/2017/783

over strategic areas. This change has led to an increasing number of clashes fo r
control over lines of communication and vital infrastructure. In addition, the more
secure hold of the Taliban over some rural areas has allowed them to undertake
more frequent attacks in the north of Afghanistan.
17. The Taliban maintained their ability to contest territory across the country,
compelling the Government to devote significant resources to maintain the status
quo. In contrast with 2016, the Taliban have not launched any major attempts to
capture a provincial capital since the announcement of their Operation Mansouri
offensive in April. However, the Taliban were able to overrun and temporarily hold
several district centres, including Taywara in the western province of Ghor,
Kohistan and Ghormach in the northern province of Faryab and Jani Kh el in the
eastern province of Paktiya. The Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
recaptured Taywara and Kohistan within a week, while control of Jani Khel changed
three times during the reporting period. In the north-east, the Taliban put intense
pressure on Qaramol, Dawlat Abad, Shirin Tagab and Khwajah Sabz Posh districts
along the Maimana-Andkhoy highway in Faryab Province. In the south, the Taliban
intensified their attacks on districts adjacent to the provincial capitals of Kandahar
and Lashkar Gah, as well as on the Kabul-Kandahar highway. On 17 July, Afghan
forces recaptured Nawah-ye Barakzai district in Helmand Province, which had been
under Taliban control since October 2016.
18. The Government continued to implement its four-year plan on security sector
reform, with the goals of increasing the capability of government forces, fighting
corruption, improving security leadership and aligning operations with overall
policy objectives, which was approved by presidential decree in May 2017. As part
of the plan, the authority over the Afghan Border Police has been authorized for
transfer from the Ministry of the Interior to the Ministry of Defence. On 20 August,
the Special Forces of the Afghan National Army were elevated from division to
corps level, which has as a target to double its personnel to 30,000 by the end of
2017. Nevertheless, the Government continued to face increasing challenges owing
to the high levels of attrition in the Afghan National Army and the Afghan National
Police as a result of casualties and desertion as well as difficulties in securing new
recruits, in particular at the officer entry level.
19. While Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province (ISIL-KP)
operations remain mostly limited to eastern Afghanistan, the group claimed
responsibility for eight significant attacks nationwide during the reporting period.
The group consolidated its presence in Kunar Province and succeeded in
re-establishing operational capacity in areas of Nangarhar Province that previously
had been cleared by Afghan security forces. Elsewhere, alleged ISIL -KP activities
were reported in the northern provinces of Jowzjan and Sari Pul, as well as in the
western provinces of Herat and Ghor, indicating that the group may have attracted
affiliates in areas beyond its stronghold in the east.
20. Several high-profile security incidents during the reporting period led to a
further deterioration of public confidence in the Government’s security
arrangements. The attack on a Shia mosque in Herat on 1 August killed over
90 people and drew widespread condemnation from both the Afghan public and the
international community. The Taliban and self-proclaimed ISIL-KP affiliates
launched an attack on the Mirza Olang area of Sayyad district in Sari Pul Province,
leading to clashes from 3 to 5 August with local pro -government militia and
allegations of mass killings of civilians. A subsequent investigation by UNAMA,
including a fact-finding mission to the affected district, indicated that at least
36 people had been killed in the attack, many of them civilians or personnel hors de
combat. As in Herat, the majority of the documented casualties were Shia. Another

17-15798

5/14

A/72/392
S/2017/783

attack on a Shia mosque occurred in Kabul on 25 August, killing 28 civilians, with
ISIL-KP claiming responsibility.
21. At a summit of defence ministers of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), held in Brussels on 29 June, NATO allies and partners reaffirmed their
commitment to Afghanistan until the end of 2020 and several allies announced
increased troop contributions to the NATO Resolute Support Mission. However,
troop deployment numbers remain significantly below the authorized levels. On
21 August, following the conclusion of a policy review by the United States of
America on South Asia, the President of the United States, Donald Trump,
announced a new strategy for Afghanistan and that United States troops would
remain in Afghanistan in line with conditions on the ground.
22. Following the suicide attack near the diplomatic “Green Zone” in Kabul on
31 May, the Government upgraded security arrangements in the centre of the city.
Several diplomatic missions had scaled down their staffing levels in the capital after
the attack, leading to a significant overall decrease in the international footprint.
UNAMA remained staffed at full capacity. During the reporting period, there were
five incidents involving United Nations personnel, including three incidents of
intimidation, one criminal case and one incident of abduction. On 13 August, two
United Nations staff members who had been abducted on 8 June in Paktiya Province
were released.

C.

Regional cooperation
23. The bilateral relationship between Afghanistan and Pakistan showed some
signs of improved cooperation, as both countries took steps to improve relations.
During a visit by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of China, Wang Yi, on 24 and
25 June, Afghanistan and Pakistan agreed to establish a crisis control mechanism for
emergency communications, and, as a result, the three countries created a
ministerial-level trilateral dialogue mechanism. On 2 July, Pakistan appointed a new
Ambassador to Afghanistan, a post that had been vacant for several months.
Following a visit by a senatorial delegation from the United States to Islamabad and
Kabul from 2 to 4 July, Afghanistan and Pakistan agreed to conduct coordinated
security operations against terrorist groups along the border, with monitoring and
verification by the United States. On 15 August, the Foreign Secretary of Pakistan,
Tehmina Janjua, visited Kabul on one of her first foreign trips, meeting with the
President of Afghanistan to discuss ways of building mutual trust.
24. The Government continued its multilateral engagement through mechanisms
such as the Heart of Asia — Istanbul Process. An expert meeting of the Process, on
trade, commerce and investment opportunities, was held in Delhi from 6 to 8 August,
with participants reaffirming their commitment to enhancing economic and
connectivity cooperation. The Government focused increasingly on it s relationship
with the five Central Asian States, as the President made a number of visits to the
region. The President visited Turkmenistan on 3 July, where he signed several
bilateral transport agreements, and on 6 July he visited Dushanbe for a trilate ral
dialogue between Afghanistan, Pakistan and Tajikistan.
25. Negotiations restarted on a bilateral comprehensive strategic cooperation
agreement between Afghanistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran, which is aimed at
improving cooperation in the areas of security, the economy, refugees, culture and
education. On 17 and 18 June, the first meeting of five technical committees was
convened in Tehran. However, water remained an issue of contention between the two
countries. On 3 July, at the International Conference on Combating Sand and Dust
Storms, the President of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Hassan Rouhani, criticized the

6/14

17-15798

A/72/392
S/2017/783

construction of dams in Afghanistan. The remarks generated a public backlash in
Afghanistan, with street demonstrations in the cities of Herat, Kabul, Kandahar and
Jalalabad. The remarks were interpreted as undermining the right of Afghanistan to
manage its own water resources. On 24 July, the National Security Adviser, Hanif
Atmar, visited Tehran for consultations with his counterpart on counter-terrorism
issues. On 5 August, President Ghani attended President Rouhani’s inauguration
ceremony in Tehran.

III. Human rights
26. On 17 July, UNAMA released its midyear report on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. Between 1 January and 30 June, the Mission documented
5,243 civilian casualties (1,662 deaths and 3,581 injured), on a par with civilian
casualty figures documented in the same period in 2016. Conflict -related violence
also destroyed livelihoods, homes and property, displaced thousands of families and
restricted access to education, health and other services. UNAMA attributed 67 per
cent of all civilian casualties to anti-government elements (43 per cent to the
Taliban, 19 per cent to unidentified anti-government elements and 5 per cent to
ISIL-KP), 18 per cent to pro-government forces (15 per cent to Afghan national
security forces, 2 per cent to international military forces and 1 per cent to
pro-government armed groups), 10 per cent to unattributed crossfire during ground
engagements between anti-government elements and pro-government forces, 4 per
cent to unattributed explosive remnants of war and 1 per cent to cross -border
shelling.
27. The indiscriminate and unlawful use of combined improvised explosive device
tactics by anti-government elements in civilian-populated areas, particularly suicide
bombs and pressure-plate devices, accounted for 2,079 civilian casualties (596 deaths
and 1,483 injured), or 40 per cent of all civilian casualties. Ground engagements
between pro-government forces and anti-government elements were the second
leading cause of civilian casualties (434 deaths and 1,375 injured). Women
casualties increased by 23 per cent compared with the same period in 2016. The
Mission documented 1,557 child casualties (436 deaths and 1,141 injured),
accounting for 30 per cent of the total civilian casualties.
28. During the first six months of 2017, UNAMA documented 32 con flict-related
incidents targeting or affecting access to health services or health -care workers,
which resulted in 58 civilian casualties (27 deaths and 31 injured) and 18 civilian
abductions. Most of the casualties occurred during the complex attack on th e Sardar
Mohammad Daud Khan Hospital in Kabul on 8 March. UNAMA documented a rise
in attacks and incidents impacting education facilities and education -related
personnel, with 24 incidents verified compared with 14 in the first quarter of 2017.
Six incidents directly targeted girls’ schools. During the second quarter of 2017,
UNAMA documented seven incidents of denial of humanitarian access; all were
attributed to armed opposition groups: six to the Taliban and one to ISIL -KP.
29. UNAMA verified the recruitment and use of 21 boys, including 15 by
anti-government elements (11 by ISIL-KP, 3 by the Taliban, 6 by the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces and 1 by an unidentified armed group). The
Mission received reports of up to 50 boys (10 verified to d ate) recruited by ISIL-KP
who were undergoing religious and military training in Ghor Province. UNAMA
continued sensitizing and training Afghan national security forces on the protection
of children in armed conflict. On 27 August, UNAMA and the United Nat ions
Children’s Fund jointly conducted a one-day training session on child rights for
17 district chiefs of police in the city of Kabul.

17-15798

7/14

A/72/392
S/2017/783

30. Justice and redress for women remained low amid the continued prevalence of
violence against women. The implementation of the national action plan on women,
peace and security remained slow despite efforts that were focused on law reform
and advocacy around violence against women and harassment and the strengthening
of the prosecutor’s office to address cases of violence against women. Of the
revised estimated $83.0 million required for the implementation of the national
action plan, $31.2 million is available, while the remaining amount has yet to be
secured from donors. The prosecution units for the elimination of vi olence against
women are now present in all 34 provinces, with 27 units staffed with at least one
female prosecutor. The Ministry of the Interior continued efforts to enhance
women’s participation in the security sector, in particular their recruitment and
promotion to leadership roles. With regard to women’s participation in peace and
reconciliation processes, six more women were introduced as members of the High
Peace Council, bringing the total number to 13 out of 52 members.
31. On 16 August, the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission
launched a national inquiry on the protection of the rights of victims of armed
conflict and terrorism. UNAMA will provide technical support for the normative
framework and the collection of data on civilian casua lties. On 22 August, the
Minister of Justice chaired an interministerial working group tasked with reviewing
the recommendations made by the Committee against Torture in its concluding
observations on the second periodic report of Afghanistan and preparing a follow-up
report and plan of action for submission to the Committee in May 2018. Civil
society actors continued to face intimidation and threats by anti -government
elements and also experienced a lack of cooperation by local authorities in relation
to those threats. UNAMA recorded one incident of intimidation of a human rights
defender in Badghis Province and one incident of intimidation against a civil society
actor in Herat Province. UNAMA also recorded one incident involving threats
against a local journalist by anti-government elements in Farah Province. In July,
civil society actors expressed concerns about the new draft law on gatherings,
strikes and protests that sets conditions for the duration and organization of protests
in certain areas and also maps out the authority of security forces in dealing with
protests.

IV. Implementation of the Kabul process and coordination of
development assistance
32. On 9 July, the National Unity Government convened the twentieth meeting of
the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board in Kabul, co-chaired by my Special
Representative and the Minister of Finance, Eklil Hakimi, with a focus on reform
and development commitments ahead of a meeting of senior officials set for later in
2017. In the area of democratic, transparent and accountable government,
ministerial speakers discussed election preparations, civil service reforms,
subnational governance, judicial reforms, security, civil society engagement and
anti-corruption. During a session on service delivery, speakers addressed the
importance of institutional reforms and discussed the Government’s commitments to
delivering basic services to returnees and internally displaced populations. With
regard to private sector growth and infrastructure, panellists iden tified measures to
enhance the business environment and the Government committed to prioritizing
private sector needs in the coming months.
33. In an effort to improve inclusivity, the Government took steps to engage civil
society in development and reform processes. Under the Open Government
Partnership, civil society representatives began work on a national action plan to
promote good governance, anti-corruption and transparency. UNAMA facilitated the
8/14

17-15798

A/72/392
S/2017/783

participation of civil society at the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board
meeting, where participants emphasized a greater role for civil society in monitoring
mutual commitments by the Government and the international community. The
national strategy on access to information, launched on 13 August, also called for
civil society and the media to play a role in promoting public awareness of the right
of citizens to access information and monitoring the implementation of the law on
access to information.
34. Economic growth remained slow in the face of ongoing security and
governance challenges. At a briefing on 11 July, the International Monetary Fund
reported slight downward adjustments of economic growth estimates for 2017 and
2018, to 2.5 per cent and 3 per cent, respectively. However, the Fund does not
expect the revisions to affect the Government’s attainment of other quantitative
targets, for which progress was reported to be on track. Despite persistently low
growth, domestic revenue collection reportedly exceeded targets, although receipt of
some operating grants from donors slowed. Key priorities in the Government’s
programme with the Fund will require parliamentary action in the coming months.
35. The Government continued to prioritize its anti-corruption efforts, in particular
at the policy level. Between 22 June and 16 August, the National High Council for
Rule of Law and Anti-Corruption convened four times, after remaining dormant for
the first half of 2017. Chaired by the President, the Council adopted institutional
reform plans for the Supreme Court, the Office of the Attorney General, the
Ministry of Justice and the Afghan Independent Bar Association. In late August, the
Government circulated its draft anti-corruption strategy, a commitment from the
Brussels Conference on Afghanistan, held in October 2016, which was due to be
adopted by June 2017. From 6 to 8 August, during a three -day joint conference on
combating corruption in the defence and security sectors in Afghanistan, the
Attorney General signed a memorandum of understanding with the M inistry of
Defence, the National Directorate of Security and the Ministry of the Interior, aimed
at developing joint mechanisms to combat corruption among the security institutions.
36. The Anti-Corruption Justice Centre has completed 21 cases at the trial and
appellate levels against 86 accused. Outcomes include the conviction and sentencing
to 20 years’ imprisonment of a General for fuel fraud and stealing equipment. The
security of Centre personnel remains an ongoing concern, and the presidential
decree of 6 June, which obligated the Ministries of the Interior and Urban
Development, the Office of the Attorney General and the National Directorate of
Security to contribute to the protection of Centre personnel against security threats,
has yet to be implemented.
37. With regard to local government accountability, on 30 July, the Government
issued the Provincial Council Oversight Regulations, which lay out an enhanced
role for the provincial councils in monitoring line departments and other
government entities. The President agreed to improve coordination with the
provincial councils by conducting regular regional meetings and inviting a
representative of the councils to attend Cabinet meetings.

V. Humanitarian assistance
38. Civilians continued to bear the brunt of the ongoing conflict. Between
mid-June and 15 August, more than 32,300 people were forced to flee their homes
as a result of fighting, bringing the total number of displaced persons to more than
202,000 in 2017. Internal displacement has affected 30 of the 34 provinces, with
Baghlan and Kunduz in the north, Nangarhar in the east and Uruzgan and Kandahar
in the south experiencing the highest levels of displacement. While there was an
17-15798

9/14

A/72/392
S/2017/783

overall reduction in the number of people displaced compared with the same period
in 2016, the deteriorating security situation has left many displaced communities in
an increasingly precarious situation, with no immediate prospect of returning to
their areas of origin. As at 31 August, the total funding for huma nitarian action in
Afghanistan stood at $235 million, of which $181 million was for activities
included in the Humanitarian Response Plan.
39. Under the voluntary repatriation programme of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, more than 14,000 registered Afghan
refugees who returned to Afghanistan during the reporting period were assisted.
Over 98 per cent of them were returning from Pakistan. Returning individuals
received an average of $200 per person to pay for transport and immediate
humanitarian needs.
40. The deportation and spontaneous return of undocumented Afghans from
Pakistan continued, with 15,567 arrivals (14,653 spontaneous arrivals and 914
deportees) between 15 June and 31 August, accounting for 19 per cent of the total
arrivals from Pakistan in 2017. Since 1 January, the total number of undocumented
returnees arriving from Pakistan rose to 83,505, down from 131,033 over the same
period in 2016. During the reporting period, 86,906 arrivals from the Islamic
Republic of Iran (29,044 spontaneous arrivals and 57,862 deportees) were
documented. Of the total returnee population, the International Organization for
Migration assisted 18,818 returnees (93 per cent) from Pakistan and 4,295 returnees
(5 per cent) from the Islamic Republic of Iran during that period. Between 15 June
and 31 August, the International Organization for Migration also assisted 479
returnees from Europe, compared with 995 for the same period in 2016. Separately,
from mid-June to August, the World Food Programme provided assistance to
117,940 returnees and internally displaced persons who had been displaced as a
result of conflict in various parts of the country, and joint Government-United
Nations verification assessments are ongoing to identify additional internally
displaced persons for assistance in the country.
41. From 15 June to 15 August, United Nations agencies and humanitarian
partners provided 67,527 displaced people with assistance. Across the country,
2.2 million people of the planned 5.7 million received humanitarian assistance in all
sectors from January to the end of June. However, constraints on humanitarian
access continued to be recorded, with a total of 40 incidents affecting the United
Nations and humanitarian partners registered during the reporting period and 214
since January. Three aid workers with Catholic Relief Services, a non -governmental
organization, were killed and two injured in an attack on their vehicle in Ghor
Province on 14 August. Since the start of 2017, 12 aid workers have been killed and
as many injured. Health workers and health facilities continue to be heavily
affected, with 26 incidents registered in the reporting period, bringing the total
incidents so far in 2017 to 88. From June to August, dozens of health facilities were
forced by armed groups to close down temporarily in Laghman Province, north of
Kabul, and in the western provinces of Farah and Bad ghis in an attempt to coerce
non-governmental organizations that are running the facilities to improve service
delivery for their combatants. Overall in 2017, around half a million people are
estimated to have at times been deprived of access to health car e as a result of these
tactics. Humanitarian partners continued to develop different modalities of
delivering humanitarian assistance to communities in need, regardless of which
party to the conflict is in control, and have increased sensitization efforts on
humanitarian principles, notably neutrality and operational independence.
42. The polio eradication programme made significant progress, particularly in the
northern province of Kunduz, where new importation from February 2017 was
successfully contained. However, in the southern region, local transmission as a
10/14

17-15798

A/72/392
S/2017/783

result of frequent cross-border movement gave rise to five polio cases in Helmand,
Kandahar and Zabul Provinces. Access for vaccinators in the southern region
remains fragile, and in July, a ban on subnational immunization day vaccination
campaigns in four districts of Kandahar resulted in 64,000 children remaining
inaccessible, along with another 60,000 from the eastern, south-eastern and northeastern regions.
43. The Mine Action Service of the United Nations continued with the transfer of
responsibility for the management of the Mine Action Programme for Afghanistan
to the Directorate of Mine Action Coordination and the Afghanistan National
Disaster Management Authority. The Service will continue to support both
institutions with capacity-building. The Mine Action Service and partners continued
to provide risk education at encashment and transit centres to alert returnees to the
danger posed by landmines, explosive remnants of war and abandoned p ressureplate improvised explosive devices. From 1 June to 31 July, 40,444 returnees
received such education. In addition, mine action partners, coordinated by the Mine
Action Service and the Directorate of Mine Action Coordination, declared
20 communities mine-free, which enabled approximately 20,000 individuals across
15.34 km 2 to move freely within their community. However, it is estimated that
3,378 minefields, 301 battlefields and 42 contaminated firing ranges remain,
affecting 1,464 communities. The average monthly incident rate from January to
June 2017 of 182 victims represents an increase compared with the monthly average
of 164 victims recorded from January to June 2016; the vast majority (97 per cent)
are due to explosive remnants of war and pressure-plate improvised explosive
devices rather than landmines. As part of the Afghan Civilian Assistance
Programme, the Mine Action Service assisted victims of large -scale improvised
explosive attacks during the reporting period, including the vehicle -borne suicide
attack of 31 May in Kabul, when some 550 families received immediate assistance
packages.

VI. Counter-narcotics
44. From 1 June to 26 August, Afghan law enforcement authorities conducted a
total of 629 counter-narcotics operations, which resulted in the seizure of 569 kg of
heroin, 9,644 kg of morphine, 4,841 kg of opium, 25.4 kg of methamphetamine,
2,867 kg of hashish, 7,868 kg of solid precursor chemicals, 20,338 litres of liquid
precursor chemicals and 722 K-tablets (synthetic drugs). In addition, three heroin
processing laboratories were dismantled and 103 vehicles, 34 weapons and
177 mobile telephones were seized. During the counter-narcotics operations, a total
of 708 suspects were arrested and one officer from the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces was wounded.
45. Regional cooperation on counter-narcotics continued during the reporting
period, with a meeting on precursor cases held on 30 August in Almaty, Kazakhstan,
within the framework of the Regional Intelligence Working Group on Precursors. At
the meeting, four cases were reviewed, and backtracking investigations were
launched at the regional level. The Ministry of Public Health, with the support of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, continued to work towards the
national adoption of the international standards for the treatment of drug use
disorders of the Office and the World Health Organization. As part of the process,
the Ministry launched a pilot of a quality assurance mechanism aimed at improving
the treatment of drug use disorders.

17-15798

11/14

A/72/392
S/2017/783

VII. Mission support
46. The Mission’s vacancy rate as at 31 July 2017 was 11 per cent, compared with
the approved vacancy rate of 14 per cent for international staff, and 4 per cent
compared with the combined approved average vacancy rate of 7.5 per cent for
national staff. Despite special measures granted for the Miss ion to recruit and retain
more national female staff, their representation remains very low, notwithstanding
an overall increase of 3 per cent from the previous reporting period. As at 31 July
2017, the female representation for each category of staff stoo d at: 30 per cent
(international); 36 per cent (United Nations Volunteers); 8 per cent (National
Professional Officers); and 7 per cent (Local level). Between 15 June and 15 August,
UNAMA conducted 155 road and 13 air missions, as well as 417 reverse outre ach
missions during which district representatives visited UNAMA field offices.
47. The Mission began planning a reconfiguration of its structure and staffing to
align its budget for 2018 with the recommendations made in my special report on
the strategic review of UNAMA. Additionally, opportunities for co -location
between UNAMA and United Nations system agencies, funds and programmes and
improved cost recovery procedures continued to be explored. The Mission also
continued to streamline support services, including medical and ground
transportation services, as well as air assets.

VIII. Observations
48. I remain deeply concerned about the security situation in Afghanistan. Attacks
in the western province of Herat, the northern province of Sari Pul, the southern
province of Helmand and the capital, Kabul, which killed dozens of people and
wounded many more, were a stark reminder of the heavy toll of the conflict on
civilians in Afghanistan. Thousands of Afghans are still being displaced each month,
losing their livelihoods and becoming separated from their communities as they flee
from violence. While the people of Afghanistan continue to demonstrate immense
courage and resilience in the face of adversity, their plight is a reminder, as always,
that achieving lasting peace must be the primary goal towards which all efforts must
be directed.
49. In this regard, I am also concerned by the lack of tangible progress towards a
peace process, which remains the most urgent imperative facing Afghanistan. As I
have stated in the past, the conflict has no military solution: peace can only be
achieved through direct negotiations between the Government and the Taliban,
which must form part of an inclusive, Afghan-led, Afghan-owned peace process. I
call upon all parties to create an environment in which such dialogue is possible.
Noting the critical importance of regional countries in order to move towards a
peace process, the Government’s continuing commitment to the Kabul Process for
Peace and Security Cooperation and the interest shown by the partners of
Afghanistan in continuing the initiative deserve support. For its part, following the
mandated strategic review of UNAMA in 2017, the United Nations stands with
renewed determination and with full respect for the sovereignty of Afghanistan to
support the Afghan people in their quest for peace. Only through the committed
engagement of all parties can an end to this long and costly conflict be achieved.
50. In a volatile security environment, the rise in sectarian attacks is particularly
troubling. The terrorist attacks against Shia mosques in the city of Herat on
1 August and in Kabul on 25 August, which killed dozens of civilians as they
prayed, were unconscionable acts of violence against a religious minority. Such
attacks not only cause great human suffering, but risk escalating tensions between
12/14

17-15798

A/72/392
S/2017/783

religious communities. In the wake of such incidents, the expressions of solidarity
from religious leaders in Afghanistan across sectarian lines are heartening and
provide examples that other community members may follow. Now, more than ever,
Afghanistan needs demonstrations of national solidarity in the face of common
threats and cynical attempts to promote further divisions.
51. The announcement by the Independent Election Commission of a date for
parliamentary and district council elections in July 2018 sets an important objec tive
that can contribute to democratic consolidation in Afghanistan. While the timelines
are ambitious, with concerted and sustained attention the election date remains
achievable, and both the Commission and the Government have demonstrated a
commitment to improving the credibility of the electoral process through the
implementation of several key reforms. If implemented, the introduction of
biometric voting cards and polling station-specific lists would constitute major
improvements to the country’s electoral system. Credible elections in 2018 will
provide a channel for the peaceful expression of political opposition in an
increasingly volatile political environment. I encourage the electoral institutions to
broaden their outreach to all stakeholders to build public support for elections and
the electoral reform process.
52. As elections become a more concrete reality, opposition groups have begun to
intensify their political activity and, in many cases, have become increasingly vocal
in their criticism of the Government. The emergence of new political alliances,
along with the persistence of youth protest movements, are indications of the
growing vibrancy of the still young democratic culture in Afghanistan. However, the
inflammatory rhetoric of some political figures exacerbates social tensions and can
undermine the fragile political consensus represented by the Constitution. If left
unchecked, it may risk destabilizing the political system. I therefore stress the
importance of responsible conduct by all stakeholders to ensure that political dissent
continues to be expressed peacefully and within the framework of the country’s
constitutional and democratic processes.
53. Despite enormous challenges, the Government has made progress on its
reform agenda, particularly in the realm of anti-corruption. A key component of this
is the work of the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre, which, since its inception in late
2016, has become an important pillar in overall efforts to combat impunity. As
demonstrated by recent convictions of high-level officials, the Centre is increasingly
handling complex cases. I commend the Government for its continued prioritization
of anti-corruption activities, which is a crucial element in its efforts to build
credibility among the population. The Government has also continued its regular
and constructive engagement with development partners, as demonstrated most
recently at the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board meeting in July. For its
part, the United Nations will redouble its donor coordination efforts, both to
improve the coherence of its development activities and to ensure their alignment
with the Government’s own priorities and more effective delivery.
54. Record numbers of civilians continue to be killed and injured by
indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks perpetrated by anti -government
elements. Yet I also note with concern the significant increase in civilian casualties
resulting from air strikes by pro-government forces. I remind all parties to the
conflict of their responsibilities to protect civilians during military operations and
stress the need for accountability for violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law. In this regard, I encourage the Government to formally endorse
the national policy on civilian casualty prevention and mitigation. I welcome the
ratification by the Government of Afghanistan of the Convention on Prohibitions or
Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed

17-15798

13/14

A/72/392
S/2017/783

to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects and all the protocols
thereto, including Protocol V, concerning explosive remnants of war.
55. As the Government considers how to implement the recommendations made
by the Committee against Torture in its concluding observations on the second
periodic review of Afghanistan, I encourage the Government to follow through on
its public commitments both to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
and to withdraw its reservations to the Convention, and all national institutions to
enact effective measures of implementation in compliance with the Constitution of
Afghanistan and international legal obligations.
56. Faced with significant challenges, the women of Afghanistan continue in their
steadfast determination to achieve full and equal participation in public life. In this
endeavour, the Government has proven itself to be a sincere and committed partner.
The increased representation of women in the High Peace Council and the concerted
efforts by the Government and its partners to address violence against women and
girls are positive developments. I urge the Government to take concrete measures to
strengthen the prosecution office and provincial units for the elimination of violence
against women and the implementation of the national action plan on women, peace
and security, including by allocating adequate resources, to ensure the effective
provision of justice and redress for survivors and the participat ion of women in
peace and reconciliation processes.
57. The reverberations of the suicide bombing of 31 May in Kabul continue to be
felt, both by Afghans and their international partners. Following the attack, which
was conducted in the city centre near the diplomatic enclave, many diplomatic
missions scaled back their presence, with development staff numbers particularly
affected. In this environment, the role of the United Nations on the ground has
become even more crucial. I am grateful to the Government for its efforts to
improve the security of the diplomatic community, which are being calibrated to
enable UNAMA and the agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations
system to continue to operate at full capacity.
58. The implementation of the recommendations from my special report on the
strategic review of UNAMA is under way, with the Mission looking to reconfigure
its current posture. With reference to the reservations expressed by the Government,
I wish to provide my personal assurance that the fundamental principles of Afghan
national sovereignty, national leadership and national ownership, defining the work
of the Mission, are unchanged. I would like to thank the Mission and its staff for its
support to the review and convey my appreciation to the Government for its
cooperation during the review.
59. I thank all United Nations personnel in Afghanistan and my Special
Representative, Tadamichi Yamamoto, for their continued dedication to fulfilling
our commitments in support of the people of Afghanistan under very challenging
conditions.

14/14

17-15798
