S/PV.9411

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9411th meeting

Thursday, 7 September 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Dautllari. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Moretti
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Betoe Ndojombouet
Mr. Boateng
Mr. Kitada
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Glukhov
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Azzam
Mr. Phipps
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 28 August 2023 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2023/637)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-26256 (E)
*2326256*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9411

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 28 August 2023 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2023/637)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/637, which contains the text of a
letter dated 28 August 2023 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: I thank Security Council
members for the opportunity to brief them once again
on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013), on the
elimination of the chemical weapons programme of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Since the Council’s previous consideration of this
matter (see S/PV.9372), and consistent with established
practice, the Office for Disarmament Affairs has been
in regular contact with its counterparts at the Technical
Secretariat of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) the on activities related
to resolution 2118 (2013). Since then, the OPCW
Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) has continued
its efforts to clarify all outstanding issues regarding
the initial declaration and subsequent declarations
submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic.
As previously reported, the last round of
consultations between the DAT and the Syrian National
Authority took place in February 2021. Since then, all
efforts to organize the next — the twenty-fifth — round
2/11

07/09/2023

of consultations have been unsuccessful. I have been
advised that, although the Syrian Arab Republic agreed
to the OPCW Technical Secretariat’s May 2022 proposal
to address the declaration-related issues through an
exchange of correspondence, the Technical Secretariat
has yet to receive from the Syrian Arab Republic
any declarations or other documents requested. That
includes the complete declaration of activities at the
Scientific Studies and Research Centre (SSRC) and
the declaration of quantities of nerve agents produced
at one chemical weapons production facility that was
declared by the Syrian Arab Republic as never having
been used to produce chemical weapons.
Due to this situation, and in a further attempt to
implement its mandate, the OPCW Technical Secretariat
deployed a reduced team comprised of several members
of the DAT to the Syrian Arab Republic to conduct limited
in-country activities. The first such deployment took
place from 17 to 22 January, and the second took place
from 12 to 19 April. The outcomes of the deployments
were reported to States parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention in March and July, respectively.
As the Council was previously informed, a
delegation from the Technical Secretariat met with
representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic in Beirut on
22 and 23 June. At that meeting, the OPCW Technical
Secretariat emphasized its priority of the resumption
of rounds of consultations, which would include all
experts designated by the Technical Secretariat. In that
regard, I understand that the matter was to be referred
to the head of the Syrian National Authority and that the
OPCW Technical Secretariat is awaiting that decision
in order to proceed with planning for the next round
of consultations.
The OPCW Technical Secretariat remains fully
committed to implementing its mandate, aimed at
verifying the fulfilment of the Syrian Arab Republic’s
declaration obligations under the Chemical Weapons
Convention, decisions by OPCW policymaking organs
and, of course, resolution 2118 (2013). However, as
has been previously emphasized, full cooperation by
the Syrian Arab Republic with the OPCW Technical
Secretariat is essential to closing all outstanding issues.
Considering the identified gaps, inconsistencies and
discrepancies that remain unresolved, at this time
the OPCW Technical Secretariat assesses that the
declaration submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic
still cannot be considered accurate and complete in
accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention.
23-26256

07/09/2023

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9411

With regard to the inspections of the Barzah and
Jamrayah facilities of the SSRC, I have been advised
that the OPCW Technical Secretariat continues to plan
the next round of inspections, to be held in 2023. I regret
to inform the Council that the Syrian Arab Republic
has yet to provide sufficient technical information or
explanations that would enable the OPCW Technical
Secretariat to close the issue related to the detection
of a Schedule 2 chemical at the Barzah facilities of the
SSRC in November 2018.

particularly to the victims, to identify those responsible
and ensure accountability for the use of those heinous
weapons. The United Nations will continue to support
all efforts to uphold the norm against chemical weapons
and to relegate those dreadful weapons to history.

In addition, I have been informed that during
the ninth round of inspections at the Barzah facility
of the SSRC in September 2022, the inspection team
observed a number of boxes containing a chemical
of a dual-use nature, stored in large quantities at the
facility’s chemical storage warehouse. Following the
inspection, the OPCW Technical Secretariat engaged
the Syrian National Authority on the matter and
requested information that would allow it to assess that
all activities conducted therein are for purposes not
prohibited under the Convention. The OPCW Technical
Secretariat has also requested information regarding the
unauthorized movement of the two cylinders related to
the chemical weapon incident that took place in Douma
on 7 April 2018, which were allegedly destroyed in an
attack on a chemical weapons production facility.

The President: I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.

I have been advised that the OPCW Fact-Finding
Mission continues to study all available information
related to allegations of the use of chemical weapons
in the Syrian Arab Republic. I understand that the
Fact-Finding Mission is currently preparing upcoming
deployments and will report to the Executive Council on
the results of its work in due course. The Investigation
and Identification Team also continues its investigations
into incidents in which the Fact-Finding Mission has
determined that chemical weapons were used or likely
used in the Syrian Arab Republic and will issue further
reports in due course.
Two weeks ago, on 21 August, the world marked the
tenth anniversary of the large-scale chemical weapons
attack that took place in the Ghouta district of Damascus.
In remembering that horrible incident, the United
Nations pays its respects to the victims of the attack,
which resulted in numerous casualties, particularly
among civilians and including many children.
As the Secretary-General has stated before, any
use of chemical weapons is unacceptable and a clear
violation of international law. We have a responsibility,

I urge the members of the Council to unite on
the issue and show leadership in demonstrating that
impunity in the use of chemical weapons will not be
tolerated. The Office for Disarmament Affairs stands
ready to provide whatever support and assistance it can.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I want to
thank High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing
today. I would also like to thank the teams at the Office
for Disarmament Affairs and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for the
steadfast leadership and exceptional work they bring to
this critical issue each day.
Syria continues to flagrantly flout its obligations
to comply with the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC). Syria continues to defy numerous Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2118 (2013).
It has grown clear that the Al-Assad regime believes
it can continue to operate with impunity, despite the
objective and evidence-based record of its chemical
weapons attacks.
Syria acceded to the Chemical Weapons Convention
in October 2013, a decade ago next month. In doing so,
it accepted, as all signatory States parties, to be bound
by the Convention’s obligations, including: first, never
to produce, develop, acquire, stockpile or use chemical
weapons; secondly, to submit timely, accurate and
complete declarations of its chemical weapons and
facilities; and thirdly, to cooperate with the OPCW in
the exercise of all its functions and provide assistance
to the OPCW Technical Secretariat.
Yet, 10 years after it undertook those obligations
by ratifying the Chemical Weapons Convention,
Syria continues to make false statements and flout
the authority of the Security Council. Time and again,
the OPCW has found that the regime’s declarations
regarding its chemical weapons programme, as
Director-General Arias succinctly puts it, still cannot
be considered accurate and complete. Moreover, the

23-262563/11

S/PV.9411

The situation in the Middle East

07/09/2023

Al-Assad regime continues to deny OPCW personnel
the unfettered access it is obligated to provide per the
Council’s decision. The Al-Assad regime has displayed
such obstruction for nearly a full decade, during which
time the OPCW and, before Russia’s Security Council
veto dissolved the body, the United Nations-OPCW
Joint Investigative Mechanism had found the regime
responsible for nine separate chemical weapons attacks
against its own people that occurred following Syria’s
accession to the CWC.

both at the OPCW and in other relevant United Nations
forums, while continuing to raise the issue here at
the Security Council. We keep pushing on this issue
because we remember the victims and survivors of
the horrific attacks by the Al-Assad regime. We will
continue to seek justice for the victims of the attacks
and to remind our fellow Council members that it is
our duty as members of the Council to do our part by
remaining seized of this issue and demanding, at long
last, real steps to end a serious chemical threat.

With full knowledge of that duplicity, Russia
continues to shield the Al-Assad regime from
appropriate oversight by the Security Council, depriving
the Council of its ability to promote international peace
and security by holding Al-Assad to account for his
despicable actions. In that regard, I note with particular
concern that for the second consecutive month, two
permanent members of the Council have indicated that
they will not even participate in our discussion of an
issue of this seriousness.

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs for
her briefing.

Despite Russia’s intransigence and Syria’s deceit,
the United States continues and will continue to raise the
issue in the Council. We will continue to call on Syria
to comply with its CWC obligations and its obligations
under resolution 2118 (2013). We will continue to seek
briefings by the Under-Secretary-General on the status
of those efforts, and we call on other Council members
to do the same.
Despite the efforts of Syria and Russia to impugn
the credibility and professional work of the OPCW and
distract us from the gravity of the issue, we commend
the OPCW’s investigations of chemical weapons use
in Syria. We continue to be impressed by the rigour
the OPCW brings to each of its investigative efforts,
meticulously collecting and analysing evidence from a
multitude of sources to reach irrefutable conclusions.
That important work is necessary so that those
responsible for the attacks can be held to account. There
can be no impunity for the use of chemical weapons.
Anything less would be turning a blind eye to a regime
that has chosen to manufacture, stockpile and, even
more horrifically, use chemical weapons repeatedly
against its own people.
The United States remains committed to holding
to account those responsible for Syria’s repeated use of
chemical weapons in violation of its obligations under
resolution 2118 (2013) and the Chemical Weapons
Convention. We will continue to press for progress
4/11

We are meeting once again because the Syrian
regime has used weapons of mass destruction against
its own population. Independent reports from the
United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) have established that on
nine occasions. In January, the OPCW confirmed that
the Syrian air force deliberately dropped two barrels
of chlorine on residential buildings in the Douma area,
resulting in the deaths of 43 people. Last month marked
the tenth anniversary of the chemical massacre carried
out by the Syrian regime on 21 August 2013 in the Ghouta
area of Damascus, which claimed more than 1,400 lives.
Almost 10 years after the adoption of resolution 2118
(2013), in defiance of its international obligations, the
Syrian regime has still not relayed all the information
related to the status of its chemical-weapon stockpiles.
We know, however, that they have not been completely
destroyed, as evidenced by their use by the Syrian
regime since 2013, which the OPCW has documented.
The Syrian regime continues to obstruct the work
of the OPCW Technical Secretariat. The latest report
by the Organization’s Director-General, issued in late
August (see S/2023/637), attests to that once again.
The OPCW continues to await a response from the
regime so that it can finally organize the twenty-fifth
round of consultations between the initial Declaration
Assessment Team and the Syrian authorities. I would
like to remind the Council that the previous round of
consultations took place in February 2021, that is to
say, more than two and a half years ago. Furthermore,
it is unacceptable that the regime continues to impose
restrictions on the deployment of OPCW personnel in
Syria. The OPCW must be able to fully implement its
mandate, and the limited deployment of members of the
Declaration Assessment Team is not a viable solution.
Next month, 14 October marks the tenth anniversary of
23-26256

07/09/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Syria’s accession to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
It is imperative that Syria stop obstructing the work of
the OPCW and comply with its obligations if it wants
to regain its rights and privileges under the Convention.
Despite those obstacles, France would like to pay
tribute once again to the tenacity of the Technical
Secretariat’s teams and their efforts to independently
and professionally carry out their work.
Lastly, I would like to remind everyone that the
regime’s use of chemical weapons against civilian
populations constitutes war crimes and crimes against
humanity. The international community cannot accept
impunity in such circumstances. The fight against
impunity is the cornerstone of the effectiveness and
credibility of the chemical-weapon ban’s regime, and
France will therefore continue to work resolutely with
its partners to that end.
Mr. Moretti (Brazil): I thank Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, for her briefing today.
As we have done in the past, we have read the latest
report (see S/2023/637) of the Director-General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) closely and have been unable to identify
any new information for the reporting period. We are
therefore forced to reiterate our suggestion that we
reconsider the frequency of these meetings.
In the absence of new developments, Brazil reaffirms
that chemical weapons are utterly incompatible with
international humanitarian law and therefore must
have no place in the practices and doctrines of today’s
world. The use of such weapons violates international
agreements and poses serious threats to international
peace and security. As always, Brazil firmly condemns
the development, storage and use of chemical weapons
anywhere, by anyone, in any circumstances. Incidents
must be addressed with transparency and subject to
thorough and impartial investigations, in accordance
with the Chemical Weapons Convention. We continue
to support action-oriented engagement between the
OPCW Technical Secretariat and the Syrian Arab
Republic as the only path towards resolving all
outstanding issues in the Syria chemical-weapon file.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I would like to begin
my statement by extending Mozambique’s warmest
congratulations to Albania on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of September.
We are also grateful to the United States for its

S/PV.9411

excellent presidency. We thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral and High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her briefing on
the implementation of the elimination of the Syrian
chemical-weapon programme. We welcome the
participation in today’s meeting of the representatives
of the Syrian Arab Republic, the Islamic Republic
of Iran and the Republic of Türkiye, and commend
the Secretary-General on the monthly report on the
activities of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (see S/2023/637), in compliance
with resolution 2118 (2013), covering the period from
24 July to 23 August 2023.
We reiterate our firm belief that the use of
chemical weapons anywhere, by anyone and in any
circumstances is to be condemned. Impunity for such a
heinous crime under international law is unacceptable.
While acknowledging some positive inputs for the
reporting period, we believe that our continuing
concerns are justified, considering that the document
under consideration illustrates no meaningful new
steps forward to ensure the complete elimination
of the chemical-weapon programme. In that regard,
Mozambique regrets that the efforts to convene
the twenty-fifth round of consultations between
the Declaration Assessment Team and the Syrian
National Authority have not materialized. We reiterate
our support for the continued efforts to clarify all
outstanding issues regarding the initial and subsequent
declarations submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic.
We are convinced that efforts by the Syrian Arab
Republic and United Nations bodies will continue to be
deployed, aimed at building confidence and providing
the necessary impetus to advance the various aspects of
the programme.
Mozambique remains committed to the imperative
against the use of chemical weapons and all efforts to
eliminate their production, storage or use. We reiterate
our support for resolution 2118 (2013).
Mr. Phipps (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Director-General Fernando Arias of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) for his most recent monthly report (see
S/2023/637) and the OPCW Declaration and Assessment
Team for their tireless efforts to resolve the outstanding
issues in Syria’s chemical weapons declaration. I would
also like to thank High Representative Nakamitsu for
her briefing today.

23-262565/11

S/PV.9411

The situation in the Middle East

As Mrs. Nakamitsu and others have said, 10 years
ago, in the early hours of 21 August 2013, Bashar
Al-Assad’s forces used sarin against the people of
Ghouta. More than 1,000 people were killed, many of
whom were women and children. The resulting United
Nations mission report (S/2013/553) described the
attack as the most significant confirmed use of chemical
weapons against civilians since Saddam Hussein used
them in Halabja, Iraq, in 1988. The Council expressed
its outrage, condemned the killing of civilians and
affirmed that any use of chemical weapons constitutes
a serious violation of international law. Collectively, we
called for accountability. Security Council resolution
2118 (2013) was subsequently adopted unanimously.
That resolution condemned chemical weapons use
in Syria and endorsed the implementation of the OPCW
Executive Council’s decision, setting out steps for the
destruction of Syria’s chemical weapons programme. It
was clear that the Syrian Arab Republic should not use,
develop, produce, otherwise acquire, stockpile or retain
chemical weapons. It compelled Syria to cooperate
fully with the OPCW and the United Nations, including
by providing personnel designated by the OPCW with
immediate and unfettered access to any and all sites that
the OPCW had grounds to believe to be of importance
for the purpose of its mandate.
Ten years later, the provisions of resolution 2118
(2013) have still not been met. As others have said
today, there have been nine further confirmed chemical
weapons attacks by the Syrian regime.
Next month will mark 10 years since Syria acceded
to the Chemical Weapons Convention. It is a moment for
all of us around this table to reflect on our responsibility
for the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). We
should discuss how we can move forward in support
of the OPCW’s efforts to resolve the outstanding
inconsistencies in Syria’s declaration. We owe that to
the victims of the attack in Ghouta and of all chemical
weapons attacks — including the attack carried out by
Russia five years ago in Salisbury, United Kingdom,
which resulted in the death of a British national,
Dawn Sturgess.
Syria’s chemical weapons will remain a threat to
international peace and security until they have been
fully and verifiably destroyed by the OPCW.
Mr. Azzam (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her
briefing today.
6/11

07/09/2023

I would like to reaffirm the United Arab Emirates’
rejection and explicit condemnation of the use of
chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere and under any
circumstances. Their use constitutes a flagrant violation
of the provisions of the Chemical Weapons Convention
and international law.
In the absence of tangible progress on the Syrian
chemical weapons file, I reiterate what my country said
about this file in our previous meetings.
Maintaining dialogue between the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and Syria remains
crucial to making progress on the file, but such dialogue
must be conducted in a constructive manner and includes
discussing all available means for holding the twenty-fifth
round of consultations and overcoming related obstacles.
Meanwhile, we stress that the threats of chemical
terrorism are concerns that cannot be overlooked and
must be given sufficient attention. That is critical as the
Da’esh organization continues its terrorist attacks and
does not hesitate to use any means to achieve its goals,
posing a serious threat to the security and stability of
Syria and the entire region. In that context, we express our
concern about the attacks that Da’esh continues to launch
in north-eastern Syria, in addition to its efforts to rebuild
its capabilities and networks, recruit fighters and release
its elements from prisons. We stress the need to continue
combating that group and to ensure that it does not acquire
dangerous and deadly weapons.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reiterates
the importance of making tangible progress on the Syrian
chemical weapons file, as well as on all other files related
to resolving the Syrian crisis.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
As Switzerland takes the floor in its national capacity
for the first time this month, I wish, like my colleague
from Mozambique, to express our gratitude to the United
States delegation for having guided the Council’s work in
August. I also wish to assure you, Madam President, of
our full support during your presidency.
Almost 10 years ago, as others have mentioned, Syria
acceded to the Convention on the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons. As the High Representative — whom I wish to
thank for her briefing — has just reminded us, its accession
came just a few weeks after the large-scale use of such
weapons in the suburbs of Damascus, in particular against
civilians, including children. It constitutes one of the most
devastating examples of the use of chemical weapons.
23-26256

07/09/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Over the past 10 years, obligations under the
Convention have been violated on several occasions,
and some 25 chemical attacks documented by the United
Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) have taken place in Syria.
The missions and mechanisms of those organizations
have concluded that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that nine of those attacks are attributable to
the Syrian Government. Among its obligations as a
State party to the Convention, Syria must provide
full cooperation to the OPCW. The Security Council
unanimously reaffirmed that obligation in resolution
2118 (2013), which was also adopted 10 years ago.
As the High Representative has just informed us,
despite recent contacts — notably in Beirut in June — the
OPCW’s Declaration Assessment Team is still waiting
to be able to deploy its full workforce to Syria and to
organize the twenty-fifth round of consultations with
the Syrian authorities. Switzerland calls for those
consultations to be held as soon as possible. We also
call on Syria to provide answers to the 20 points left
unresolved in its initial declaration. Those outstanding
answers constitute one of the conditions for Syria
to regain its rights and privileges as a State party to
the Chemical Weapons Convention. Providing those
answers is also an obligation to the Council.
Switzerland would like to reiterate its full
confidence in the OPCW and its support for all
its missions. Their work is fundamental, and their
integrity and professionalism are beyond doubt. Since
the adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), the regular
meetings of the Council have served as a reminder of a
central issue: preventing the development, production,
stockpiling and use of chemical weapons and ensuring
their transfer and destruction. Switzerland therefore
calls on all parties to the conflict to refrain from using
such weapons and to respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law.
Adopted 10 years ago, resolution 2118 (2013)
reminds us that “those individuals responsible for the
use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic
should be held accountable”. Their impunity remains
unacceptable to this day.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, the High Representative
of the Office for Disarmament Affairs, for her briefing.
We regret that once again the Security Council has
made no progress on the issue of chemical weapons in

S/PV.9411

the Syrian Arab Republic. As we have said before, any
incident involving the use of chemical weapons must be
addressed with absolute transparency and thoroughly
investigated, in accordance with the provisions of the
Chemical Weapons Convention.
Ecuador recognizes the efforts of the Technical
Secretariat of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW), through its Declaration
Assessment Team, to clarify all outstanding issues
regarding the initial declaration and subsequent
declarations submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic. We
call once again on the Syrian authorities to cooperate
with the OPCW and its technical teams by submitting
all the information required to clarify the gaps that
have been identified as soon as possible, in accordance
with the norms of international law that require them
to do so.
In the wake of the meetings held in Beirut in
June, we also urge that the Syrian Arab Republic
submit a favourable response to the proposal of
the OPCW Technical Secretariat for organizing a
twenty-fifth round of consultations, as that is the
best mechanism for obtaining results with regard the
Syrian chemical-weapon file and is an opportunity to
work together. Putting the proposal into action would
be a positive step towards ensuring accountability and
proper compliance by the Syrian Arab Republic with
its obligations under the Convention, the decisions of
the OPCW and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, within a framework of common understanding
through dialogue and transparency.
In conclusion, Ecuador reiterates its rejection of the
production and stockpiling of chemical weapons and
condemns in the strongest terms their use by anyone,
against anyone, anywhere and in any circumstances.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I too would like to begin by
congratulating Albania on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council and thanking the United States for
steering the Council’s work for the month of August.
I also thank High Representative Nakamitsu for her
informative briefing today.
The most recent report of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (see
S/2023/637), shows once again that no progress has
been made on the file. Regrettably, the Technical
Secretariat’s efforts to organize a twenty-fifth round
of consultations between the Declaration Assessment
Team and the Syrian National Authority have still

23-262567/11

S/PV.9411

The situation in the Middle East

not succeeded. We also note that no advances were
recorded on the 20 outstanding issues. The declarations
submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic therefore
still cannot be considered accurate and complete in
accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention
and resolution 2118 (2013). The lack of progress is
deplorable, and Syria bears complete responsibility
for it. We call on the Syrian Arab Republic to fully
cooperate with the Technical Secretariat, including
by granting full access to its personnel, and to submit
all the requested documents and declarations, in
accordance with resolution 2118 (2013).
Malta remains extremely concerned about the
repeated baseless assertions intended to undermine
the credibility of the OPCW and cast doubt on its
findings. The Council should address and rebut them
decisively. We reaffirm our full support to the Technical
Secretariat and its technical teams, which carry out
their mandates independently and impartially and in
accordance with the highest international standards.
The OPCW, including through its Investigation and
Identification Team, the Fact-Finding Mission and the
Declaration Assessment Team, plays a pivotal role in
the implementation of the global prohibition of chemical
weapons and in ensuring the complete elimination of
all chemical weapons in Syria.
Independent OPCW and joint United NationsOPCW investigations have concluded that the Syrian
regime has used chemical weapons against its own
people nine times. Malta strongly condemns those
attacks. There can never be a justification for the
use of chemical weapons, and the Council and the
international community must never look the other
way when confronted with such reprehensible acts. Nor
can we forget that in 2013 the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2118 (2013), establishing that those
responsible for the use of chemical weapons must
be held accountable. We stress that the use of those
weapons cannot and must not go unpunished.
In conclusion, we reiterate our full support to the
OPCW and our condemnation of the use of chemical
weapons by any actor in any circumstances. We remain
firm in our belief that the global norm on the prohibition
of chemical weapons, as mandated by the Convention,
must be universal.
Mr. Kitada (Japan): As this is the first time I take
the floor this month, I too would like to congratulate
the United States on its successful presidency of the
8/11

07/09/2023

Security Council in August and to wish Albania all the
best for this month. I would also like to thank UnderSecretary-General Nakamitsu, the High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, for her detailed and
insightful briefing.
It is truly regrettable that we have not witnessed
tangible progress on the Syria chemical-weapon file
since our previous meeting on this issue (see S/PV.9372).
In September 2013, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2118 (2013). As this month marks
10 years since its adoption, we would like to stress one
simple thing. Syria should comply fully and faithfully
with that resolution, and the Council should not remain
silent about its non-compliance. Resolution 2118 (2013)
prohibits Syria from using, developing, producing,
otherwise acquiring, stockpiling or retaining chemical
weapons. However, since then, on a total of nine
occasions, independent, impartial expert bodies
have repeatedly found that the Syrian Arab Republic
was responsible for the use of chemical weapons.
Regarding the horrific use of chemical weapons that
occurred in Douma, Japan once again condemns the
Syrian Government’s use of chemical weapons, as
concluded in the third report of the Investigation and
Identification Team.
Resolution 2118 (2013) also decided that Syria
should cooperate fully with the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and comply
with all aspects of the OPCW Executive Council decision
of 27 September 2013, including by accepting personnel
designated by the OPCW or the United Nations and
providing them with immediate and unfettered access
to and the right to inspect any and all chemical-weapon
sites. Nevertheless, as is described in the OPCW’s
most recent monthly report (see S/2023/637), Syria
has not provided any of the declarations or documents
requested by the OPCW Technical Secretariat to enable
it to resolve the outstanding issues. Syria’s refusal to
issue a visa to the Declaration Assessment Team’s lead
technical expert is another regrettable example of its
non-cooperation with the OPCW.
Japan once again calls on all Council members to
urge the Syrian Government to fully comply with its
obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention
and resolution 2118 (2013), including by completely
dismantling its chemical-weapon programme. We
should let the Council do its job before we witness
another victim of chemical weapons in Syria.
23-26256

07/09/2023

The situation in the Middle East

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
It is deplorable that the Syrian regime continues to
refuse to fully cooperate with the international community
regarding its chemical-weapon programme. It is time for
Syria to understand that it must fully declare and destroy
that programme in a transparent and verifiable manner.
There is no other alternative for Syria than to fully
cooperate with the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), in compliance with
resolution 2118 (2013) adopted unanimously by the
Council. Unfortunately, the 119th monthly report of the
Director-General of the OPCW (see S/2023/637) once
again confirms Syria’s position in that regard.
Since September 2022, the OPCW Technical
Secretariat has provided the Syrian Arab Republic with
the list of pending declarations and other documents
requested by the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT).
There are 20 outstanding issues that need to be clarified.
Thus far, the Syrian Arab Republic has refused to do it,
in violation of resolution 2118 (2013). We regret the fact
that, due to the uncooperative position taken by the Syrian
regime, the DAT has had to deploy a reduced team to carry
out limited activities in the country. At the same time, we
are waiting for the next round of consultations between the
DAT and the Syrian National Authority. Syria continues
to create artificial obstacles, such as the refusal to issue a
visa to the DAT’s lead technical expert since April 2021.
That is unacceptable.
The rounds of consultation should resume as soon as
possible and should include all experts designated by the
Technical Secretariat. Albania condemns Syria’s blocking
policy and calls on Syrian national authorities to fully
comply with its international commitments.
In that regard, we would like to highlight the work
of the Office of the Investigation and Identification Team
and its reports, which identify the perpetrators of the
use of chemicals as weapons in Syria. We fully endorse
the findings of its reports — that the Al-Assad regime is
responsible for the deadly chemical-weapons attack on
Douma on 7 April 2018.
Albania commends the work of the OPCW, which
verifies facts with objectivity, impartiality, independence
and professionalism. We reiterate our strong condemnation
of the repeated use of chemical weapons by the Syrian
regime. The use of chemical weapons is unacceptable

S/PV.9411

anywhere, by anyone and under any circumstances.
Albania stresses the importance of the Security Council
taking responsibility for implementing its own resolutions.
In that context, these regular meetings are a necessity.
Impunity for those who have used chemical weapons can
never be an option.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): First, my delegation expresses its great
astonishment at the insistence on holding this briefing
in the light of the lack of developments. We also wonder
what added value there could be from mentioning, in this
briefing, activities that took place months ago, namely, in
January and April. This approach is a clear waste of the
Security Council’s time and resources.
Second, my delegation categorically rejects the false
accusations, defamation and abuse campaigns levelled by
some countries, with the United States at the forefront,
against my country in the context of their attempts to cover
up the heinous crimes they have committed against the
Syrian people — primarily military occupation of Syrian
territories, the theft of Syria’s national resources and the
imposition of illegal and inhuman coercive measures.
Third, my delegation reiterates the Syrian Arab
Republic’s condemnation of the use of chemical weapons
at any time, anywhere, by whomever and under any
circumstances. We emphasize that the Syrian Arab
Republic has fulfilled its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
Fourth, my delegation affirms my country’s full
commitment to cooperating with the Technical Secretariat
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW). My country submits its monthly
reports on a regular basis and affirms its readiness to hold
the twenty-fifth round of consultations of the Declaration
Assessment Team as soon as possible in a manner that
will help close the outstanding issues. We are also ready
to hold the high-level meeting between the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Expatriates, who is the Chairman of
the Syrian National Authority, and the Director-General
of the OPCW, according to an agenda agreed upon by the
two parties.
Fifth, my delegation regrets the selectivity observed
in the monthly reports of the OPCW Technical Secretariat,
where focus is placed on specific issues, while other
important issues are ignored. For example, the most recent

23-262569/11

S/PV.9411

The situation in the Middle East

report issued by the Director-General (see S/2023/637)
did not refer to the response of the Syrian National
Authority, on 21 August 2023, to all the requests of the
Technical Secretariat, including Syria’s response to all
required documents about the dual-use material seen by
the inspection team at the Scientific Studies and Research
Centre in Barzah during the ninth inspection round.
Sixth, my delegation acknowledges the danger of
weapons of mass destruction falling into the hands of
terrorist organizations and attaches great importance to
that issue. In that context, I refer to reports by the Syrian
National Authority, submitted to the OPCW Technical
Secretariat in August, that a number of Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham terrorists present in Idlib governorate transported
a truck of chlorine and sarin gas from the Maarat Misrin
district to the Jisr Al-Shughur area, under the supervision
of the terrorists of the so-called “White Helmets”, with
the aim of using the gas later in that area against civilians
and then accusing the Syrian Arab Army of using, in an
attempt to serve the agendas of the countries that support
and fund them.
Seventh, my delegation expresses its regret at the
state that the OPCW Technical Secretariat has reached.
Through its handling of the Syrian issue, it has allowed
itself to become a tool in the hands of the United States,
French and British Administrations to apply their
destructive policies against countries that do not follow
them. That has greatly undermined the credibility and
professionalism of the OPCW.
Before I conclude, I would like to say to those who
speak of accountability in the Council that they must
fully realize that true accountability will only be achieved
by holding accountable the Governments of countries
that have allied themselves with terrorist and extremist
organizations and have been involved in the shedding of
Syrian blood. Those countries have fabricated incidents of
using chemical weapons to level accusations against the
Syrian State. Those countries continue to starve the Syrian
people by imposing unilateral coercive measures that are
neither legitimate nor humane. That is in addition to the
need to hold accountable the Governments of countries
that blatantly manipulate the provisions of international
conventions and resolutions in order to serve their selfish
interests, whether through enticement, intimidation or threat.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iran.
Mr. Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): We welcome
the presence of Mrs. Nakamitsu, High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, in today’s briefing. Since the
10/11

07/09/2023

previous meeting on this issue (see S/PV.9393), there have
been no significant developments or progress in the matter
of Syria’s chemical file, except Syria’s submission of its
monthly report to the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and its continued compliance
with its obligations. The report delivered by the OPCW
(see S/2023/637) has also not provided any fresh insight
into the current situation. In the meantime, the repetition
of statements at today’s meeting highlights once more
the inefficiency of holding regular and monthly meetings
on the matter, given the evident absence of substantial
progress or noteworthy developments.
In the recent open debate on the Security Council’s
working methods, held on 5 September, speakers
underscored the critical need to enhance the efficiency
and effectiveness of the Security Council (see S/PV.9410).
In that context, many speakers voiced their support for
improved working methods and advocated for a reduction
in the frequency of specific meetings, particularly those
related to Syria. That collective push for enhancement
is vital to upholding the Council’s credibility and
operational efficiency.
In line with that joint call for improvement, we
reiterate our call to the Security Council to increase
the effectiveness of its meetings focused on Syria. As
emphasized repeatedly by some members, the practice of
dedicating one monthly meeting solely to the repetition of
positions and unsupported allegations against Syria does
not contribute to the Security Council’s overall efficiency.
We agree with the idea offered by some Council members
to adjust the frequency of discussions on the subject
from a monthly to a quarterly basis. Such a modification
would enhance the Council’s efficiency, enabling it to
direct its attention more effectively towards matters of
immediate concern.
We fully support constructive dialogue between
Syria and the OPCW, setting a specific time frame to
address any remaining issues and bring the file to a
final and conclusive closure. Such an approach would
ensure transparency, accountability and a satisfactory
resolution to all outstanding issues. We commend Syria’s
commitment to convening a high-level meeting between
the Syrian Foreign Minister and the Director-General
of the OPCW. We believe that to ensure a successful
outcome, any investigation into chemical weapons
incidents must be conducted with utmost impartiality,
professionalism, credibility and objectivity, strictly
adhering to the requirements and procedures of the
Chemical Weapons Convention.
23-26256

07/09/2023

The situation in the Middle East

We reiterate our stance that the integrity and credibility
of the OPCW hinge on its ability to maintain neutrality
and objectivity, guided solely by scientific and technical
considerations. Therefore, complying with the obligations
outlined in the Convention is significant for fostering a
safer world, free from the looming threat of chemical
weapons. In that regard, we stress the importance of the
full, effective and non-discriminatory implementation of
the Convention by all Member States.
In conclusion, Iran once again condemns, in the
strongest possible terms, the use of chemical weapons at any
time, anywhere, by anyone and under any circumstances.
The use of such weapons is a flagrant violation of
international law, constituting a crime against humanity
and posing a serious threat to global peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mrs. Özgür (Türkiye): We thank High Representative
Nakamitsu for her briefing.
The use of chemical weapons is a grave violation of
international law, and it is our collective responsibility
to address that issue with the utmost diligence.
Considering the Syrian regime’s track record in the use
of chemical weapons, we believe that the Council should
remain actively seized of the matter. In that regard, the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) also plays a pivotal role.
Türkiye supports close cooperation between the
Security Council and the OPCW on this file. We commend
the impartial, independent and professional work of the
OPCW Technical Secretariat and investigative bodies of
the OPCW towards the elimination of Syria’s chemical
weapons programme. Yet we are concerned that the
efforts of the Technical Secretariat and the investigative
bodies have not been reciprocated by the Syrian regime.
The Technical Secretariat is awaiting the regime’s
decision to proceed with the planning of the next round
of consultations. The Technical Secretariat also has
yet to receive a response from the regime regarding the
unauthorized movement of two cylinders used in the
Douma chemical attack in 2018. Furthermore, the regime
has yet to provide sufficient technical information or
explanations concerning the detection of a Schedule
2 chemical at the Barzah facilities in November 2018.
As a result, and as we have heard, once again, from the
High Representative, the declaration submitted by the

S/PV.9411

Syrian regime still cannot be considered accurate and
complete owing to the identified gaps, inconsistencies and
discrepancies that remain unresolved.
We would like to reiterate that the use of chemical
weapons anywhere constitutes a major threat to
international peace and security. We call on the Syrian
regime to comply with its obligations and fully cooperate
with the Technical Secretariat and the investigative
bodies of the OPCW, in line with the Chemical Weapons
Convention and resolution 2118 (2013).
The President: The representative of the United
Kingdom has asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Phipps (United Kingdom): I apologize for
requesting to take the floor again, but I felt compelled to
do so after the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic
referred to the White Helmets as a terrorist organization.
To be clear, the White Helmets are a life-saving,
search-and-rescue organization that is estimated to have
saved more than 115,000 lives and provided essential
services to more than 4 million Syrians throughout the
conflict. Allegations linking the White Helmets to terrorist
groups are baseless and part of a concerted disinformation
campaign by the Syrian regime and by Russia that
seeks to undermine the White Helmets’ valuable work.
One has only to look at the hundreds of videos of the
White Helmets pulling people from the rubble of war
to know that those accusations are complete nonsense.
The President: The representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic has asked for the floor to make a
further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): In fact, I am not surprised that the representative
of the United Kingdom took the floor to defend the
terrorist organization known as the White Helmets,
because that terrorist organization was established,
supported and funded by Britain. Therefore, it is no
surprise that the representative of the United Kingdom
is defending that terrorist organization. It is a terrorist,
terrorist, terrorist organization.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

23-2625611/11
