S/2000/399

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 May 2000
Original: English

Letter dated 8 May 2000 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 5 May 2000,
which I have received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

00-42248 (E) 080500
`````````

S/2000/399

Annex to the letter dated 8 May 2000 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I attach the
monthly report on operations of the Stabilization Force (SFOR). I would appreciate
your making this report available to the Security Council.
(Signed) Lord Robertson

2

S/2000/399

Appendix
Monthly report to the United Nations Security Council on SFOR
operations
1.
Over the reporting period (13 March-12 April 2000), there were just over
23,500 troops deployed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, with contributions
from all the NATO allies and from 15 non-NATO countries. SFOR troops continued
to conduct reconnaissance and surveillance operations in theatre by means of ground
and air patrols. Operations across the SFOR area included area security, monitoring
the border with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, monitoring the Entity Armed
Forces (EAF), conducting weapons storage-site inspections, providing support to the
international organizations in theatre, and collecting weapons and ammunition in the
framework of Operation HARVEST 99 which has been prolonged.
2.
SFOR troops continued to monitor compliance with the provisions of Security
Council resolution 1160 (1998) which prohibits the transport of weapons into the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, by providing an intensified presence on the ground
in order to enforce the embargo. No violations were reported.
3.
SFOR also continued to monitor the movement of controlled petroleum
products into the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia by establishing traffic control
points. No violations were reported.
4.
On 3 April, SFOR troops in Multi-National Division (South-East) detained a
Bosnian Serb, Momcilo Krajisnik, indicted for war crimes by the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. 1 Krajisnik was subsequently transported to The
Hague.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
5.
Over the reporting period, the situation remained relatively stable, with the
Entities in substantial compliance with the military provisions of the peace
agreement. The farmers’ demonstration in Multi-National Division (South-East)
between Gorazde and Kopaci continued well into the reporting period, with an
apparent agreement reached after a meeting between the mayors of the two towns.
6.
Other demonstrations and protests related to land distribution, and evictions
took place in Multi-National Division (North) at Janjari, Ugljievik, Bijeljina and
Brcko, but they passed without violence. In Multi-National Division (South-West)
an anti-evictions rally in Bos Novi was dispersed by local police.
7.
Some sporadic violent incidents did occur, mainly involving explosions of
grenades and other ordnance. In Multi-National Division (South-West) on 21 March
at Prnjavor, a grenade was thrown through the window of a house, injuring the
owner. Also on 21 March, in Drvar a house was burned down; on 23 March in Banja
Luka a device exploded under a trailer at a cattle market; on 2 April in Prnjavor
grenades were thrown into a restaurant, causing extensive damage; on 8 April in
Glamoc an explosion took place in a bar; on 9 April in Kotor Varos an explosion
blew out the front of a building. No injuries were sustained in these incidents.

__________________
1 The Russian Federation confirms its special position on this matter.

3

S/2000/399

8.
In Multi-National Division (South-East) on 8 April near Rajlovac, an
explosion of an anti-personnel mine left in a refuse bin injured two people. On 9
April at Vraca, Sarajevo a mine exploded, killing three children. In Multi-National
Division (North) on 3 April in Modrica a hand grenade, believed to be thrown from
a passing vehicle, exploded in front of the lead vehicle of an SFOR patrol, causing
minor injury to an SFOR soldier. The perpetrator was not found.
9.
Over the reporting period, SFOR troops conducted 370 military weapons
storage-site inspections. No violations were reported.
10. SFOR monitored 1,029 training and movement activities: 288 Bosniac; 59
Bosnian Croat; 573 Bosnian Serb; and 109 Federation. The training and movement
ban on the Republika Srpska Police Anti-Terrorist Brigade remains in force until
further notice. The training and movement ban on elements of the 3rd Bosnian Serb
Army Corps was lifted by Multi-National Division (North) on 20 March. A training
and movement ban imposed on an element of the Bosnian Serb Army, after an
eviction incident on 24 March in Bijeljina (Multi-National Division (North)), was
lifted one day later.
11. There were three unauthorized checkpoints established by local police in Buna,
Bijeljina and near Travnik during the reporting period. All three were removed by
the International Police Task Force (IPTF) and SFOR.
12. During the reporting period, 90 mine clearance activities were monitored, and
between 13 and 15 March, SFOR provided a demining course for the Entity Armed
Forces (EAF) counter mine teams.
Cooperation with international organizations
13. Within capabilities, and in accordance with its mandate, SFOR continues to
provide assistance to the international organizations in theatre, including the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), IPTF, the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, OHR, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
14. Over the period, SFOR responded to requests from UNHCR to support
minority returnees and refugees. During the month of March 5,347 minority returns
were reported, and SFOR monitored 3,185 house cleanings and assessment visits.
15. Municipal elections were held throughout Bosnia, with the exception of Brcko,
on 8 April, with SFOR providing support to preserve safety and security. SFOR
assisted local police to maintain freedom of movement for voters and OSCE
personnel. An initial analysis indicated overall voter turnout at approximately 70 per
cent.
16. The 20th meeting of the Standing Committee on Military Matters (SCMM)
took place on 3 April and addressed the further reduction of 15 per cent in the Entity
Armed Forces (EAF) due to be achieved by the end of 2000. This planned reduction
follows the 15 per cent reduction achieved at the end of 1999. In addition, SCMM
discussed the planned participation in United Nations peacekeeping operations of 15
EAF military observers (five from each major ethnic group) who were due to be
trained and deployed later this year.

4

S/2000/399

17. SFOR continued to provide assistance to OHR to open airfields in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Although theft of equipment at Sarajevo international airport impaired
the instrument landing system, security measures have been implemented to prevent
any recurrence.
Outlook
18.

SFOR restructuring is expected to be complete by the end of May.

5
