S/PV.9321

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9321st meeting

Monday, 15 May 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Baeriswyl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Switzerland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Sénéchal de Goffredo Junior
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mrs. Hackman
Mr. Ishikane
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-13548 (E)
*2313548*

S/PV.9321

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Denmark,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania and Ukraine to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite His
Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I am speaking today from Geneva.
When I last briefed the Security Council about the
situation in Ukraine in March (see S/PV.9286), I
highlighted the humanitarian impact of the fullscale war not only on the people of Ukraine, but on
the wider world already struggling with a myriad of
shocks. In that context, at that time, I emphasized the
overwhelming need for a political solution to the war
on Ukraine and, indeed, for peace to be returned to its
people. I therefore note with regret — which is, I am
sure, shared by everyone on the Council — that the
hostilities, including missile strikes, currently appear
to be escalating on both sides of the front line. Airraid sirens continue to ring out in cities and towns
across Ukraine. Civilians continue to seek protection
in bunkers, some for days on end. As Ukraine emerges
from a hard winter, civilian casualties have been
rising to their highest levels in months. The High
Commissioner for Human Rights has now verified a
staggering 23,600 civilian casualties since 24 February
2022, but we all know perfectly well that the actual toll
is probably very much higher.
2/24

15/05/2023

The humanitarian impact is extensive, as those of
us who have had the awful privilege to visit Ukraine
have seen first-hand. Many communities along the
north-eastern border with the Russian Federation and
near the front line are encircled, cut off from water,
food and medical care by heavy fighting on the ground
and blocked roads. Only last week in Kherson, which
I visited some months back, residential buildings, a
school, an outpatient hospital and a care facility for
the elderly were reportedly damaged, leaving scores
of civilians needing shelter and health care. Missile
strikes in Odesa hit a humanitarian storage warehouse.
A Ukrainian Red Cross mobile hospital in Mykolayiv
was also hit. Humanitarian supplies and vital medical
equipment were destroyed.
Fortunately, on those occasions, no humanitarian
staff or volunteers were injured. But the threat to
humanitarians and civilians represented by the latest
wave of attacks is persistent. I am once again compelled
to remind the Council that under international
humanitarian law, parties must take constant care to
protect all civilians and civilian objects, including
homes, schools, hospitals and other essential
infrastructure, as well as humanitarian facilities and
assets. Even as that law is breached, the essential
quality of it must be a reminder to all of us.
As we can see, the humanitarian operating
environment remains complex and dangerous.
Nonetheless, thanks to the courage of humanitarian
workers, particularly and mostly local workers, the
United Nations and its national and international
partners continue to deliver life-saving assistance to
front-line areas and elsewhere across Ukraine. Nearly
3.6 million people received humanitarian assistance in
Ukraine in the first quarter of this year, including cash
assistance, food, health care and livelihood support.
Around 43 inter-agency convoys have delivered supplies
in heroic moments to around 280,000 people in frontline areas so far this year. That is a particular feature of
the humanitarian operation in Ukraine, and I would like
to pause here for a second to pay tribute to those brave
people taking those convoys to where they need to be.
Of course, those who then take the commodities from
those convoys for the so-called last-mile delivery are
always national partners — Ukrainian organizations
and Ukrainian people.
There are still limitations on our ability to deliver
aid to all in need. More is needed to take our efforts to
scale. The biggest challenge remains the impediments
23-13548

15/05/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

to reaching all the areas in Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson
and Zaporizhzhya that are currently under Russian
military control. The humanitarian notification system,
together with direct engagement with key interlocutors
in Moscow and Kyiv — in practice, that is — has been
in place since the early days of the war. It was set up to
maximize the opportunity for the safe and unimpeded
passage of inter-agency convoys to those areas.
However, despite 14 months of notifying the
partners of our intentions through the system, we have
not been able to deliver assistance to communities along
the front line in the areas under the military control of
the Russian Federation — not once. Access options to
those areas, including different response modalities,
therefore continue to be explored through engagement
with all parties. It is imperative that we explore all
options to reach civilians, wherever they are. As I have
said before, under international humanitarian law,
all parties must allow for safe, rapid and unimpeded
passage of humanitarian relief for civilians in need and
must ensure that personnel engaged in such work have
the freedom of movement required for such work. I urge
the parties to reinforce and strengthen their facilitation
efforts so that we can reach all civilians in need.
Food exported under the Black Sea Initiative, as
well as food and fertilizer exports from the Russian
Federation, continue to make a crucial contribution to
food security at the global level. More than 30 million
metric tons of cargo have been safely exported from
Ukrainian ports under the Initiative — a level that was
achieved as we were meeting in Istanbul, discussing the
Initiative’s future, just the other day. Of those 30 million
metric tons, just over 600,000 metric tons of wheat
have been transported by the World Food Programme
in direct support of humanitarian operations in
Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia and Yemen,
which are places that we often discuss in this Chamber.
The most recent analysis by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations indicates that global
cereal prices have fallen by close to 20 per cent over
the past 12 months. Last month, international wheat
prices reached their lowest level since July 2021, driven
in part by the continued movement of Ukrainian grain
and by the large quantities of grain available for export
in the Russian Federation and other locations. That is,
of course, undeniable progress, but much more remains
to be done.
Predictable supplies for humanitarian food
assistance operations continue to be required. The

S/PV.9321

Initiative refers to the export of ammonia, but that has
yet to be realized. Over the past month, we have also
unfortunately seen a reduction in the volumes of exports
moving out of Ukraine’s Black Sea ports, owing to the
challenging dynamics within the Joint Coordination
Centre set up by the same agreement reached in Istanbul
on 22 July 2022, as well as the resulting slowdown in
operations. In recent weeks, in particular last week, we
have engaged in intensive discussions with the parties
to the Black Sea Initiative to secure agreement on its
extension and the improvements needed for it to operate
effectively and predictably. Such efforts will continue
and come into focus over the coming days.
In parallel, I pay tribute to Rebeca Grynspan, her
leadership and her team. They have continued to deliver
a wide range of support with concrete results under the
memorandum of understanding between the United
Nations and the Russian Federation on the facilitation
of Russian food and fertilizer exports, which are so
important for international food security.
For the reasons I set out, I hope Council members
will agree that the continuation of the Black Sea
Initiative is critically important, as is the recommitment
by the parties to its smooth and efficient operation. We
will continue to call on all to meet their responsibilities,
as the world watches us very closely.
I would like to take this opportunity to express
my profound gratitude for the efforts, energy and
commitment of the Government of Türkiye, which
hosted our talks last week, brokered the deal, hosted
us in Istanbul and intervened at all levels at every step
of the way to reach a sustainable deal. It is clear that
the people of Ukraine and millions of people around
the world can ill afford a continuation of the war. More
than ever, they need an end to the hostilities and a
political solution to end the conflict. I am one of those
who therefore calls on the Council and all Member
States to support any effort that may bring about an
end to the carnage and destruction that we have seen so
clearly, vividly and continuously. In the meantime, the
United Nations and its humanitarian partners remain
committed to safeguarding the life and dignity of
persons affected by the war and to the pursuit of peace,
whether it be today, tomorrow or in the weeks to come.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

23-135483/24

S/PV.9321

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Griffith for his briefing. At the meeting of the
emergency special session of the General Assembly held
on 22 February, exactly one year after Russia launched
its war against Ukraine, the Secretary-General clearly
reaffirmed that:
“Russia’s invasion of Ukraine ... is an affront to our
collective conscience. It is a violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and international law. It is
having massive humanitarian and human rights
consequences ... [and] challenges the cornerstone
principles and values of our multilateral system”
(A/ES-11/PV.17, p. 3).
The toll of this war has continued to rise. Since
28 April, the Russian army has resumed its large-scale
air strikes on all of Ukraine. Russia’s aggression
has already led to at least 23,000 civilian casualties,
including more than 1,000 children. That statistic
represents a mere fraction of the actual toll, as the
verification process is facing enormous challenges,
in particular the inability to gain access to areas
temporarily occupied by Russia. Journalists who are
courageously covering the conflict to establish the
facts are also exposed, as was tragically illustrated
by the death of French journalist Arman Soldin. In
Ukraine, almost 18 million people stand in need of
humanitarian assistance. France will continue to show
its solidarity, as long as necessary, by responding to
their needs through its bilateral assistance within the
European framework and providing support for the
United Nations, non-governmental organizations and
other humanitarian actors.
Since February 2022, Russia has committed
countless violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law. Some of those violations
constitute war crimes and even crimes against humanity.
Russia has intentionally targeted civilians and civilian
infrastructure. Crimes perpetrated against civilians,
killings, rapes, intentional attacks on hospitals, schools
and maternity wards, the forced displacement of
populations and the forcible deportation and transfer
of children must not go unpunished. The fight against
impunity is imperative, as there can be no lasting peace
without justice. France is resolutely committed to
ensuring that those responsible for large-scale abuses
are held accountable for their actions and brought to
justice. France recently donated a second mobile DNA
laboratory to Ukraine to help document such crimes.
4/24

15/05/2023

Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine is
having a profoundly negative impact on Ukraine and
the world, for which Russia bears the sole responsibility.
By invading Ukraine, Russia has exacerbated global
insecurity and malnutrition. By restricting maritime
exports via the Black Sea, Russia has chosen to exploit
the vulnerability of certain countries to fluctuations in
the price of grain. We call on Russia not to obstruct
the extension of the Black Sea Grain Initiative, which
benefits the most vulnerable populations. France,
together with its European partners, will step up its
efforts to reduce the risk of food insecurity. We will
do that in particular through the European Union’s
solidarity corridors, which so far have enabled exports
of more than 32 million tons of grain and other food
products, by river and land.
In conclusion, I want to once again quote the
Secretary-General, who continues to remind us that the
Charter of the United Nations is clear, the Organization’s
position unequivocal and the war that Russia is waging
has no place in the modern world and is unacceptable.
“It is high time to step back from the brink”, he said
(ibid., p.4). We know that just and lasting peace must
be built on the Charter of the United Nations and on
international law. France will continue to stand with
Ukraine to that end.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Madam President, for convening today’s
meeting at the request of France and Ecuador, as well
as the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Martin
Griffiths, for his very enlightening briefing. I want to
reiterate my delegation’s recognition of the valuable
work being done by the Organization for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on the ground.
We also recognize the efforts of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the International Committee of the Red Cross and
humanitarian organizations, working in an extremely
risky environment. We call on the Russian Federation
to facilitate safe access to the territory temporarily
under its control, as Mr. Griffiths mentioned.
With some 15 million people on the move, both
refugees and internally displaced, the humanitarian
conditions continue to deteriorate, and the needs are
increasing due to the ongoing hostilities. The worst
effects of displacement have been on women and girls,
who are the most vulnerable to violence and abuse,
including sexual violence. On the other hand, the
23-13548

15/05/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

millions who have returned to their homes continue
to face the challenges created by limited services
and the destruction of critical infrastructure, as well
as the stress that results from instability. We are also
concerned about the fact that the number of civilian
victims continues to rise, and the statistics show that
thousands have died or been injured, as Mr. Griffiths
mentioned just now.
We underscore the need for the parties to
strictly respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law and reiterate the urgent need to put
an end to the use of explosives in populated areas. We
deplore the fact that explosive weapons with wide-area
effects have been the cause of 92.5 per cent of civilian
victims in Ukraine. We are also concerned about
contamination caused by mines and explosive remnants.
At least 700 critical infrastructure objects have been
damaged or destroyed because of the war. We therefore
deplore the new escalation of attacks and bombings in
recent weeks, which has further jeopardized access
to basic services and primarily affects women, girls
and boys. We are concerned about the very serious
humanitarian crisis that millions of civilians are facing
as a result of the intense fighting in Marinka, Vuhledar
and Kurakhove in the Ukrainian province of Donetsk.
We offer our condolences to France for the death on
9 May near Bakhmut in eastern Ukraine of the French
journalist Arman Soldin of Agence France Presse, as
a result of hostilities involving missiles, adding to the
conflict’s tragic impact on journalism. We recognize
the significant role of reporters in documenting and
sharing the reality of the war.
We continue to be concerned about the spectre of
a nuclear catastrophe, especially in Zaporizhzhya, and
call on the parties to take all necessary measures to
protect the nuclear plant there from accidents of any
kind. We express our support for the efforts of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and urge
the Council to demonstrate unambiguous support for
the IAEA.
Next week we will commemorate the fifth
anniversary of resolution 2417 (2018), by which the
Council urged all parties to ensure the proper functioning
of food systems and markets in situations of armed
conflict and to protect civilians and objects required
for food production and distribution. We continue to
deplore the impact of the military aggression on global
food security. In that context, we ask that there be no

S/PV.9321

further opposition to the implementation of the Black
Sea Grain Initiative and that the Initiative be extended
indefinitely for as long as the conflict lasts.
Lastly, we emphasize the importance of ensuring
that the Council and its members are guided by the
resolutions adopted during the eleventh emergency
special session of the General Assembly and reiterate
our belief in the necessity of a peace process that is
based on strict respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of Ukraine, with
a view to making progress towards rebuilding and
reparations, in accordance with international law.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for his update. We pay tribute to his
efforts and work, as well as those of the entire team
at the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, aimed at meeting the humanitarian needs in
Ukraine and elsewhere in order to alleviate the suffering
of people everywhere.
After 16 months, the special Russian military
aggression has stalled on the ground. But it has not
stopped, and it is no less deadly. Beyond the casualties
and destruction on the front lines, missiles and illegally
acquired drones continue their deadly attacks on
innocent civilians and their homes and infrastructure.
The Under-Secretary-General just shared a sobering
account of the most recent escalations and their
consequences. International law prohibits aiming at
civilian buildings and nothing justifies it if not to instil
fear. Fear helps authoritarian regimes to impose total
control over their people, and fear in warfare is used to
terrorize civilians. But the truth is that after 446 days
of relentless war, Ukrainians have not surrendered and
every attempt to terrorize them has just made them
fight back harder.
After 10 months of gruelling failed assaults,
Bakhmut tells one of the key stories of this absurd
war. If Mariupol became the ugly face of the war and
a symbol of Russian brutality, Bakhmut, already a site
of tragedy, will be known as the symbol of Ukrainian
resistance. Yet the painful reality is that more than
23,000 civilians have been killed or wounded. In the
first week of May alone, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights recorded 221
civilian casualties in Ukraine. The Kremlin may keep
saying that Russia is not fighting the Ukrainian people,
but that does not even come close to a bad joke. It is
Ukrainian civilians who are dying under Russian bombs

23-135485/24

S/PV.9321

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

and shells. The 14 million people uprooted from their
homes, the 18 million requiring humanitarian assistance
and protection, unable to afford or access enough food,
and the thousands of children systematically abducted
have one thing in common — they are all Ukrainians.
We know now that Russian troops have tortured,
sexually abused and murdered non-combatants in towns
they have occupied, such as Bucha. Videos have also
surfaced allegedly showing Russian soldiers beheading
Ukrainian prisoners of war.
Since the beginning of this war, serious violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
committed in various regions of Ukraine have been
duly documented. The findings of the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine and
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe’s Moscow Mechanism point clearly to the
commission of war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Evidence will one day be presented to a court of law for
accountability. But among all the crimes committed in
Ukraine, the most incomprehensible and inhumane are
those committed against children. Everywhere, in every
culture, children are associated with innocence and
the need for care and protection. Crimes against them
are seen as particularly revolting — because they are.
The forcible mass deportation of Ukrainian children
to Russia, disguised under different false names or
initiatives, is nothing less than a re-education process
in the total denial of children’s rights. It is indefensible.
We expect the Secretary-General’s annual report on
children and armed conflict to include the effects that
the military aggression in Ukraine has had on children.
This war continues to have implications beyond
Ukraine, especially for global food security. For
hundreds of millions of people around the world, food
on the table depends on maintaining the pace of the
Black Sea Grain Initiative. We are concerned about the
reports of a slowdown in activity, as mentioned to us
by the Under-Secretary-General. The number of ships
transporting grain has been significantly reduced lately,
while renewals beyond 18 May seem no longer to be
extended for months but only for weeks. We know what
happens in the world when food is weaponized. Prices
go up, there is less food for vulnerable populations
and people go hungry. One does not sit in the Security
Council to deny food to those in need. We therefore call
for the Initiative to be extended as part of the global
humanitarian response in a way that provides — and
6/24

15/05/2023

for a sufficient period — the necessary assurances and
confidence to markets and people.
Two days ago in Germany, President Zelenskyy
and the people of Ukraine were awarded the
International Charlemagne Prize of Aachen for their
fight to defend their country, as well as Europe and
its values. The contrast could not be more striking:
a leader who is defending his country and its people
and fighting for independence is welcomed, honoured,
respected and revered everywhere, while another
leader — the author of the worst security crisis in Europe
for decades — is under arrest warrant by international
justice mechanisms. There is never a bad time to stop
a war, especially one that should not have started.
Russia must understand that it cannot have its way in
Ukraine and decide for its people and their future. It
would be far better for it to unconditionally, completely
and immediately withdraw from Ukraine and respect
its internationally recognized borders. Until that is
done and until reason has prevailed, we will continue
to stand in full solidarity with the Government and the
people of Ukraine in the defence of their nation, their
land and our shared values.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Mozambique thanks
Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths for his
update. We commend him and his team for their
noble and tireless work worldwide. I acknowledge
the presence in today’s meeting of the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine. According to the Global
Humanitarian Overview 2023, published by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
“This year, grinding conflict, the deadly
climate crisis and health epidemics, including
cholera and COVID-19, caused record levels of
hunger and displacement, worsened poverty and
put equality for women and girls increasingly out
of reach. As a result, one out of every 23 people
worldwide now needs humanitarian relief, more
than double the percentage just four years ago.”
That is a bleak and terrible scenario. It is
heartbreaking to know that conflicts remain the major
driver of humanitarian crises, and more so in Ukraine.
Humanitarian action is an imperative that aims to better
address the demands of those in need, particularly in
terms of protection and assistance. Notwithstanding all
the existing international legal frameworks that govern
the protection of civilians, including the humanitarian
dimension, guaranteeing the effective protection of
23-13548

15/05/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9321

civilians in conflicts remains a formidable challenge. It
is our principled position that humanitarian work must
be given a high priority.

Our briefer today did not say a word about that either.
Where is his commitment to the protection of civilians?
Or are they the wrong kind of civilians?

In that context, we call on the parties in Ukraine
to take urgent measures to ensure an environment
in which the conditions are conducive to aiding
distribution, with safeguards for aid delivery, as well
as to reconstruction and fostering long-term peace and
reconciliation in the country. We reiterate our urgent
call on the belligerent parties to immediately return to
direct negotiations conducted in good faith. We believe
that the peace initiatives put forward by a number of
States, including Member States of the Council, should
be given a chance. Political settlement is the right way
to address humanitarian problems. In that context,
we agree with Mr. Griffiths that the Black Sea Grain
Initiative is critically important. We therefore call
for the Initiative, which is due to expire this week,
to be renewed, improved and expanded, in line with
the findings of the Secretary-General’s Global Crisis
Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance.

Responsibility for those crimes lies not only with
the Kyiv regime, but also with those that supply it
with weapons. Moreover, every day, just as we think
that the level of pumping weapons into Ukraine has
reached its limits, we receive new reports of deliveries
of increasingly heavy and sophisticated Western
weapons — HIMARS Multiple Launch Rocket
Systems, shells with depleted uranium, long-range
missile systems, hundreds of tanks, and so on. We will
return to this issue during the meeting we requested on
this topic on 18 May.

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to begin our statement by
noting the hypocrisy underlying today’s meeting of
the Security Council on the humanitarian situation in
Ukraine. There were no meetings held on that topic for
the entire month of April, and the delegations of France
and Ecuador, as well as other Western delegations,
showed no interest in the situation in Ukraine.
However, today we can see that the members of the
European Union (EU) literally lined up to read out their
identical statements on camera to tick that box. That is
yet another clear illustration of the fact that there is no
genuine concern for the fate of people living in Ukraine
and even less concern for those living in the liberated
territories of Donbas — just as the Western delegations
have not been concerned about the situation of ordinary
people there since 2014.
And we will we not hear today any expression
of sorrow about the fact that on 28 April, Ukrainian
formations carried out yet another horrendous shelling
of Donetsk. They targeted a bus full of people with
artillery fire and burned it to the ground. Nine people
were killed, including a child. An expert examination
showed that the shelling was carried out using highexplosive missiles designed for multiple-launch rocket
systems, which were manufactured in Slovakia. The
same shells were also used in the attack on Donetsk’s
central cathedral during the all-night Easter service.

Some of those weapons are being supplied by
Security Council members sitting right next to us, who
care so much about the humanitarian consequences of
the conflict in Ukraine. On a daily basis, those weapons
kill civilians, women and children, destroy hospitals
and schools in the Donetsk People’s Republic, the
Luhansk People’s Republic, Zaporizhzhya and Kherson
oblasts. The entire military potential of NATO is
targeting them, and the Kyiv authorities openly boast
that they legally have the right to destroy everything
in those territories. Once again, we want to respond to
those who have said this or will say this today: Russian
Federation military forces are not fighting civilians and
are not subjecting them to targeted strikes, unlike the
Armed Forces of Ukraine.
Western countries are widely known for loving
to talk about combating impunity, especially when it
does not involve their own crimes. They believe they
have gotten away with millions of civilian deaths
in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya and elsewhere. We are
convinced that one day they will be held accountable.
And no threats of sanctions against judges, as was
the case with the investigations of United States war
crimes in Afghanistan, or intimidation of witnesses
and investigative reporters or suppression of facts will
help. We can already see that developing countries
that are neutral on Ukraine are rejecting the pressure
being exerted upon them. We are convinced that they
are tired of justifying their every step or call for peace.
Annalena Baerbock recently said that weapon supplies
by third countries to Russia are unacceptable because
they can be considered tantamount to participation in
the conflict. What about the fact that the entire military
machine of the West is now fuelling the war? This

23-135487/24

S/PV.9321

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

is yet another honest confession showing the West’s
participation in the conflict.
With the tolerance of Western patrons, Kyiv does not
shy away from openly terrorist methods either. Among
its crimes are the terrorist attack on the Crimean Bridge,
the murder of journalists Darya Dugina, Maxim Fomin
and the attempt on the life of Zakhar Prilepin, which
resulted in the death of his friend, Alexander Shubin.
On 3 May, the Federal Security Service of Russia
informed us that it thwarted an assassination attempt
on the leadership of the Republic of Crimea, which was
being planned by the intelligence of the Ministry of
Defence of Ukraine. The Chief of Intelligence, Kyrylo
Budanov, openly stated his readiness to kill Russians
nationals around the world. And the State news agency
of Ukraine, UNIAN, after the assassination attempt
on Zakhar Prilepin, published a poll on which Russian
figure should be next. If that is not an open incitement to
terrorism then what is it? How can the people of France,
the United States and other countries accept this when
they know first-hand about terrorist attacks? How can
the Secretary-General and representatives of other
international organizations remain silent about that?
Today we will hear a lot about the solidarity of
the Western community with Ukraine, the readiness
to support it until the end. However, they need to
understand that this support will lead Ukraine to
this very end. External debt in 2022 rose to a record
$132 billion, or 89 per cent of its gross domestic product.
It is estimated that, at the end of the current year, it will
exceed 100 per cent. The colossal amounts provided to
Ukraine by the International Monetary Fund, the EU
and Washington are driving this country into debt. All
this solidarity is not free, and it is ordinary Ukrainians
will have to pay it back.
In the meantime, capital is flowing into the country.
As we understand it, the funds will be distributed by
the American financial company Black Rock, with
which Kyiv just recently signed an agreement to launch
the Ukraine Development Fund. Under the guise of
attracting private investment for large-scale projects in
key areas of the economy, we see the transfer of State
sovereignty under the external corporate control of the
largest investment fund in the world, headquartered
in New York. Earlier, we also stated in the Council
that over the past 10 years, the amount of Ukrainian
arable land that has come under the control of mostly
American agro-industrial companies is in excess of
4 million hectares. And the food supplies exported
8/24

15/05/2023

from Ukraine as part of the Black Sea Grain Initiative
were not being sent, as we now know, for the use of
starving countries, but for commercial deliveries.
The West has always put its interests first. We are
therefore essentially witnessing another example of
how American money comes full circle. Most of it will
return to the accounts of Western corporations, and
some will end up in the offshore accounts of Ukrainian
and American bureaucrats. Ukrainian leaders will
probably not be able to take all of it with them when
they leave the country in a hurry, as was the case with
the former President of Afghanistan.
The European countries are equally cynical.
When it came down to the well-being of farmers in
EU countries, political slogans gave way to objective
analysis. In April, the countries, which, because of
so-called solidarity corridors, were overstocked with
Ukrainian agricultural products and took extreme
measures. They introduced a unilateral ban on imports
and, in some cases, even a ban on transit through
their territories of grain and other agricultural goods
from Ukraine.
It is undeniable that a large part of Ukrainian food
remains in the EU, even though they were allegedly
originally intended to be sent to the Global South. This
is a vivid example of the true nature of Brussels’ famous
humanitarian initiatives. Let me recall that the launch of
the solidarity corridors was accompanied by measures
to liberalize Ukrainian exports to the EU, which greatly
facilitated the supply of Ukrainian goods to the EU
market and not the markets of developing countries.
Russia approaches the food situation in the world
very responsibly. Despite the fact that global problems
in the field of food security appeared long before the
start of the special military operation and were the
result of the irresponsible monetary policy of Western
countries and were compounded by the pandemic, on
22 July 2022, we responded positively to the SecretaryGeneral’s initiative, the main goal of which was to
ease the situation by facilitating the supply of food and
fertilizer to developing countries. A package deal was
concluded to export food and ammonia via Ukrainian
ports and to unblock the export of grain and fertilizers
from Russia.
However, things did not go according to plan. As
of 4 May, 40 per cent of all products exported along
the humanitarian sea corridor went to the EU countries.
The share of the poorest countries is less than 3 per
23-13548

15/05/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9321

cent. For almost a year, Ukraine’s agricultural goods
have been used by the West, which was not hungry in
the first place.

lack of progress on the five systemic issues blocking
Russia’s agricultural supplies. We could not guarantee
that the package agreement would be extended.

It is only since 18 March, at the beginning of the
third phase of the Black Sea Grain Initiative, that
food supplies to African countries have increased by
54 per cent compared to the second phase. And that
was possible only thanks to the persistent efforts of
the Russian team at the Joint Coordination Centre in
Istanbul. They were the only one who fought, even
against the United Nations, to ensure that for priority
consideration be given to applications from ships bound
for Africa.

Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths
for his insightful briefing.

The export of ammonia was to be occur in parallel
with the export of grain. However, that never happened.
The Ukrainian side in the Joint Coordination Centre
refused to even discuss the unblocking of the TogliattiOdesa ammonia pipeline, which was enshrined in
the applicable tripartite agreement. Instead, it put
forward new series of conditions that were not part of
the Initiative.
For nearly a year now, we have seen no progress
whatsoever in the second part of package deal between
Guterres and the Russian Federation, namely the
Memorandum of Understanding between Russia and
the United Nations Secretariat. The main Russian
bank, Rosselkhozbank, which is the entity that is
specifically intended to conduct financial transactions
on exports of foodstuffs, remains under sanctions. The
one-time transactions that were so generously promised
by Washington and Brussels are just laughable when
they are presented as a viable solution to the problem.
The package proposed by the Secretary-General
works only on the part related to servicing Ukrainian
commercial exports. Russian agricultural supplies
continue to be effectively blocked by Western sanctions
without any prospect of their easement for supposedly
non-sanctioned fertilizers and food. The United
States and its satellites, with their usual preaching,
are essentially pushing the narrative that the world
needs Ukrainian corn for animal feed, which amounts
to 70 per cent of exports, more than it needs Russian
wheat and fertilizer.
As we know, high-level four-party talks were
held in Istanbul last week to consider the future of the
Black Sea Grain Initiative. Contacts on that subject
are ongoing. But we would like to recall that, in March
at the time of the extension, we already spoke about a

It is with profound concern that we continue to
witness Russia’s ongoing aggression against Ukraine,
constituting a flagrant violation of international law,
including the Charter of the United Nations. Russia
should stop the war it started.
Japan denounces Russia’s attacks on civilian
infrastructure and urban centres across Ukraine. The
attacks on housing complexes, hospitals, schools,
energy facilities and other essential installations for
life jeopardize the welfare and future of the Ukrainian
people. We once again recall that indiscriminate attacks
on innocent civilian populations constitute a war crime.
There must be no impunity for war crimes and other
acts of atrocities. Russia must be held accountable.
We further condemn all violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights abuses, urging
all parties to the conflict to uphold international
humanitarian principles.
To restore a just and lasting peace in Ukraine, Japan
is committed to the rapid recovery and reconstruction
of Ukraine. We will continue to steadily implement
humanitarian, financial and other assistance, totalling
$7.6 billion, to support Ukraine in various fields,
including electricity, mine action and agriculture.
The challenges we face today are very complex, but
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine has exacerbated
the global food security crisis and caused high inflation.
To respond to this urgent issue, the Black Sea Grain
Initiative has played a pivotal role in mitigating the
repercussions on the world’s food supply. The Initiative
has adeptly facilitated the export of over 30 million
metric tons of grain from Ukrainian ports, allocating
over 56 per cent of those food exports to developing
countries. Consequently, the Initiative has not only
contributed to the reduction of global food prices, but
also provided essential support to those severely affected
by the war, particularly in developing countries.
Japan commends the unwavering dedication of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Griffiths and Ms. Grynspan,
to upholding the Initiative’s continuity and integrity.
We also extend our appreciation to the Government of

23-135489/24

S/PV.9321

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Türkiye for its diplomatic and operational assistance to
the Initiative.
In line with the efforts to prevent further
deterioration of the food crisis, Japan actively
contributes to providing emergency food assistance
and enhancing the resilience of the international
community, including vulnerable Member States, and
has so far committed over $250 million in assistance.
It is truly regrettable that Russia opposed a 120day automatic extension of the Initiative in March. It
is also deeply concerning that, since 1 May, the Joint
Coordination Centre inspection rate has dropped
significantly, indicating not only Russia’s unwillingness
to facilitate inspections and the movements of ships, but
also the intention to suspend the Initiative. The prospect
of suspension is alarming, as it disregards the potential
catastrophic consequences for global food supplies.
To avert global hunger and tackle food insecurity,
we must ensure the safe and smooth passage of vessels
transporting grain, related foodstuffs and fertilizers
from designated Ukrainian ports by sustaining the
Initiative’s operations. Japan calls on all relevant
parties, particularly Russia, to act responsibly to ensure
the continuation of the Initiative.
The anguish endured by Ukraine and the
subsequent strain on global food security must cease.
Japan reaffirms its unwavering dedication to providing
comprehensive support and standing in solidarity
with the people of Ukraine. We pledge to continue our
endeavours to secure global food supplies, thereby
contributing to stabilizing global markets, preventing
poverty, containing social instability and maintaining
international peace and security.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths for the
information he just shared with us on the humanitarian
situation in Ukraine. I welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representative of Ukraine, the delegation
of the European Union and the representatives of
Denmark, Lithuania, Poland and Romania.
As we enter the fifteenth month of war in Ukraine,
the toll of this deadly conflict in terms of human
casualties, suffering and distress continues to grow.
Civilians and civilian infrastructure continue to be
targeted in deadly fighting and numerous displacements
of populations as a result of the bombardments, which
makes the daily life of innocent people impossible.
10/24

15/05/2023

Despite prompt and consistent international solidarity,
humanitarian assistance has not been able to reach all
those in need, and, according to statistics from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
from last week, there are an estimated 17.6 million
people in need in 2023.
We commend the work of the United Nations
specialized agencies and all the organizations in the
field, which must meet the humanitarian needs in
often difficult conditions. We recognize their efforts
to provide urgent relief following the bombings and
multifaceted assistance that the populations need on a
daily basis when fleeing or in reception facilities.
We call on the parties to facilitate access for
humanitarian convoys in all areas of operation,
especially those closest to the front line, which are the
most affected. The people who are not participating
in the combat, in particular vulnerable people such as
children, the sick or the elderly, must be able to access
essential services such as water, electricity or medicine.
We reiterate our continuing call on the belligerents
to respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law; not to target critical infrastructure or
civilian populations; and to refrain from using weapons
whose indiscriminate effects inflict unnecessary
suffering on civilians or may pose a long-term threat
to civilians, including through their effects on the
environment. In particular, we emphasize the need
for belligerents to refrain from the use of mines or
cluster munitions or other remotely delivered weapons
and to take maximum precautions to minimize their
effects on civilians, especially women, children and the
most vulnerable.
The magnitude of the security challenges that are
juxtaposed in several hotbeds of tension is putting
a strain on international solidarity and making
humanitarian mobilization more complex. The Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
is warning of shortages of food, water and medicine,
the effects of which could be catastrophic if they are
not quickly contained. As for the funding needs for
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations rapid response plan for 2023 in Ukraine, it is
estimated at $205 million.
In a global economic context greatly impacted by
various crises, the resurgence of other armed conflicts,
the worsening of the humanitarian crisis, in particular
in relation to the rampant food insecurity, the only
23-13548

15/05/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

relevant option for overcoming the crisis seems to be to
invest in dialogue with a view to achieving a diplomatic
and political solution to end the war. The price to pay,
both in human lives and in material reconstruction,
is too heavy and every day of war will only make
it heavier.
My country remains convinced that peace and
peaceful coexistence will result from good faith
negotiations among all parties. The Black Sea Grain
Initiative and the agreement on the exchange of
prisoners of war reinforce our conviction. We remain
attentive and stand ready to encourage any initiative to
resolve the conflict through diplomatic channels.
My country supports the search for viable solutions
that allow for a lasting settlement of the conflict to
achieve peace and calls on the parties to engage in good
faith negotiations to end the deadly war in Ukraine.
Mrs. Hackman (Ghana): We are grateful to you,
Madam President, for convening today’s meeting and
to France and Ecuador for requesting that you do so.
We are also grateful to the Under-Secretary-General
Martin Griffiths for his informative briefing.
It is regrettable that the war on Ukraine is continuing
in a manner that puts at risk the lives of innocent
civilians, as several cities and towns continue to come
under the heavy bombardment of military artillery. For
several weeks, intense fighting has taken place in such
areas as Bakhmut, Mariupol, Lysychansk, Popasna and
Sievierodonetsk, where there are reports of numerous
civilian casualties. In the first week of this month alone,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights recorded 221 civilian casualties, with
58 persons killed and 163 injured, mostly by explosive
weapons with wide-area effects. As is often indicated
in the briefings to the Security Council, these numbers
are likely to be higher than those reported.
While the casualties have diminished in comparison
to previous months, we feel strongly that any civilian
casualty is one too many for a war that ought not to
have been fought at all. Moreover, both sides have
borne great costs as hundreds of thousands of their men
are reported to have lost their lives or been injured at
the front lines of the battle.
While the turn of the war in the coming days is
uncertain, what remains unchanged are the obligations
of the warring parties under international humanitarian
law and human rights law to ensure the protection of

S/PV.9321

civilians from harm during times of war. In keeping
with these humanitarian obligations, we urge the
parties to ensure the safe passage of civilians and
grant unhindered humanitarian access to all areas
where people require assistance, including the
occupied territories of Ukraine. We caution against
deliberate attacks on civilian-populated areas as well
as the destruction of civilian infrastructure, especially
energy and water installations, homes, medical centres,
schools and marketplaces, whose destruction heighten
the vulnerabilities of civilians and worsen their
difficult circumstances.
We are grateful for the continuing commitment
of United Nations humanitarian agencies and other
partners and for their indispensable efforts aimed at
reducing the impact of the war on innocent lives. We
wish to emphasize the importance of making medical,
reproductive and psychological health services
accessible to all, especially, for women and children.
We thank the leadership of the United Nations
and Türkiye for their efforts made in support of
the Black Sea Grain Initiative and join the calls that
the Initiative’s further renewal would be helpful in
assuaging commodity-market concerns. As indicated
in today’s briefing the grain deal has been an important
stabilizing factor in global food prices over the past year.
In expressing our hope for an extension of the Initiative,
we reiterate our call on the parties and all stakeholders
to renew their commitments so as to ensure its effective
operation in all aspects. My delegation further urges
relevant stakeholders to make progress in addressing
any obstructions to the effective implantation of the
memorandum of understanding on promoting Russian
food exports and fertilizers to world markets.
Following the recent evacuation of settlements
around the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, an action
that has heightened uncertainty among residents and
also abroad, we share the concerns raised about the
staffing conditions at the plant and express our support
for the ongoing consultations led by the International
Atomic Energy Agency to secure the protection of the
power plant. We wish to reiterate the absolute necessity
of nuclear safety and security in Ukraine and further
reiterate that there can be no winners in a nuclearized
conflict. We therefore appeal for such capabilities not to
be postured in the course of the conflict in the interest
of all humanity.

23-1354811/24

S/PV.9321

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

We remain resolute in our view that the war on
Ukraine cannot be won militarily, and that is why we
continue to urge the international community to keep at
the forefront of its efforts diplomatic interventions that
can help to secure the immediate cessation of hostilities.
We believe that it is already past time for the international
community to have built on the international consensus
for peace in Ukraine in working towards a credible
pathway for a comprehensive political settlement in
keeping with international law and the spirit of the
Charter of the United Nations. We once again call on
the Russian Federation to rethink its actions in line
with our shared commitments for international peace
and security and to immediately and unconditionally
withdraw its troops from the internationally recognized
borders of Ukraine.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Ghana’s complete
commitment to the sovereignty, political independence
and territorial integrity of Ukraine as we renew
our support for all humanitarian efforts in aid of the
suffering people of Ukraine.
Mr. Sénéchal de Goffredo Junior (Brazil): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths for
his detailed briefing on the humanitarian situation in
Ukraine and on the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
We regret that the pursuit of a military solution
to the conflict continues to take an intolerable toll on
human lives, as was the case with the air strikes earlier
this month on Kyiv and other Ukrainian cities and with
the increased fighting in Bakhmut just last week. We
express our solidarity with the victims.
We reiterate our call on all parties to respect
and ensure respect for international humanitarian
law and the fundamental principles of distinction
between combatants and civilians, of proportionality,
precaution, necessity and humanity. Parties must refrain
from attacking critical civilian infrastructure. We also
emphasize the need for unhindered humanitarian access
to those in need wherever they may be and the need
to ensure safe conditions for humanitarian personnel,
including medical units and equipment. There must
be no politicization of humanitarian messages, nor
selective application of international humanitarian law.
Since the start of the conflict, Brazil has defended,
alongside other States Members of the United Nations,
the immediate cessation of hostilities, without
prejudging the results of future peace negotiations,
in order to avoid further violence. That remains our
12/24

15/05/2023

position. The efforts of other Member States in this
direction are encouraging. We take note of new appeals
in favour of dialogue between the parties, which, in our
view, is the only path towards sustainable peace.
We see the renewal of the Black Sea Grain Initiative
as a key step towards building trust between the parties.
Brazil encourages the extension of the agreements for as
long as necessary, in order to limit uncertainties about
the global supply of grain and fertilizers. Developing
countries have dramatically suffered the side effects of
the conflict, due to their structural vulnerabilities to
fluctuations in the prices of food and agricultural inputs.
The success of the Initiative is a collective
responsibility. We encourage Russia and Ukraine to
reach an understanding and urge other Member States
to avoid actions that go against the spirit of the Istanbul
agreements, including with regard to Russian exports
of grain and fertilizers.
We are concerned with the deterioration of the
political environment in the Council. We around this
table have different perspectives on the conflict’s origins
and on the way forward, but our understanding of basic
norms and principles of international humanitarian
law must nevertheless be shared. Brazil cannot avoid
expressing frustration at the Council’s inability to find
common ground and adopt a resolution calling on all
parties to respect international humanitarian law. We
also find it regrettable that the conflict in Ukraine
contaminates other issues on the international agenda,
including in other multilateral forums, by blocking
dialogue and making it difficult to find answers to
other urgent challenges for which we are responsible.
Equally regrettable are attempts, mentioned at
a meeting earlier this month by the representative of
Gabon, to force others to choose sides (see S/PV.9316).
Defending the United Nations Charter and international
law is a duty of all members, and we support the
territorial integrity of Ukraine. However, this principled
position should not hamper the work of the Council
towards finding a peaceful solution. That will require
the parties and other Member States to be willing to
understand the demands and concerns of all sides. The
sooner we engage in this collective effort, the better.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for his
sobering remarks.
23-13548

15/05/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

First, let me underscore that every day that Russia
obstructs and threatens to suspend the Black Sea Grain
Initiative, it raises global food prices around the world.
That means higher prices for everyone, including poor
and middle-income countries and the United Nations,
which also procures food on the global market. We have
heard the United Nations say many times, as we did
from Under-Secretary-General Griffiths just now, that
the Initiative is critical to stabilizing global food prices
and getting food to the world’s hungry. Despite that,
Russia has stopped discharging its commitments to the
United Nations and Türkiye. It has deliberately slowed
the pace of vessel inspections and severely reduced the
amount of grain leaving Ukraine’s ports to help meet the
needs of the world’s most vulnerable. In recent weeks,
on more than one occasion, the Russian Federation’s
delegation at the Joint Coordination Centre in Istanbul
has refused to allow any inspection of ships. Now
Russia is threatening to end its cooperation on 18 May.
While Russia keeps Ukrainian grain supplies from
feeding the hungry, Russia is successfully exporting its
own bumper crop of grain. The Russian Government
regularly cites the need to implement its memorandum
of understanding with the United Nations on the
export of Russian food and fertilizers. In that very
memorandum of understanding, Russia committed to
facilitating “the unimpeded export of food, sunflower
oil and fertilizers” from Ukraine’s Black Sea ports.
Russia must implement its own commitments. Russia
must stop holding global food security hostage to its
cynical power plays and profit-taking.
While we are all paying the increased price for
Russia’s actions, no one is paying more dearly than
Ukraine. After 15 months and countless briefings, we
are unfortunately no closer to ending the humanitarian
suffering caused by Russia’s unprovoked war against
Ukraine. Instead, the death toll is rising from Russia’s
missile and drone strikes on Ukraine’s civilian
population centres. Between 1 and 4 May, Russia
launched more than 145 air strikes across Ukraine.
That translates into an average of more than one
missile, drone or bomb every hour, 24 hours a day, for
three days straight. In those three days alone, Russia’s
attacks have killed and injured more than 100 civilians,
including at least five children.
Humanitarian
organizations
have
reported
worsening conditions in the front-line areas, and
necessities such as electricity, food and fuel are in
short supply. President Putin’s escalating attacks

S/PV.9321

on Ukraine’s critical infrastructure threaten us all.
Russia’s obstruction of the Black Sea Grain Initiative
is impacting the world’s hungry. Russia has no interest
in mitigating the spillover effects of its war against
Ukraine, just as it has shown no genuine interest in
negotiation or meaningful diplomacy. We call on Putin
to stop holding the world’s hungry hostage and to extend
and fully implement the Black Sea Grain Initiative. We
again call on Russia to end its attacks on the people
of Ukraine and withdraw its forces from Ukraine’s
territory completely. Russia alone has the power to end
the war that it senselessly started.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for his sobering briefing and for the
work that he and his team are doing on the ground.
The humanitarian situation in Ukraine has
continued to deteriorate since the last time the Council
discussed it (see S/PV.9286). In the past 15 months, the
number of people in need of emergency humanitarian
aid and protection has increased from approximately
3 million to nearly 18 million. We want to state with
all the clarity we can muster that this is the result of
nothing but Russia’s unprovoked aggression against
Ukraine. Malta strongly condemns Russia’s continued
escalation of its illegal war of aggression against
Ukraine. Ukrainians continue to suffer deliberate
large-scale attacks on critical infrastructure that is
indispensable for the civilian population’s survival.
Their basic services, including energy, water supply
and heating, have been destroyed by Russian attacks.
Russia’s continued attacks on energy infrastructure
prompted an energy crisis in the first months of 2023,
putting the country’s resilience further to the test.
Russia has perpetrated indiscriminate killings of
civilians, torture and other forms of cruel, inhumane
and degrading treatment, as well as sexual and genderbased violence and abductions and forced deportations
of children. In doing so, it has wilfully violated the
rules-based international order. According to the recent
report by the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on Ukraine, the forced transfer and
deportation of Ukrainian children to Russia or regions
under Russian control are violations of international
humanitarian law and amount to war crimes. Those
children must be promptly returned to Ukraine using
technical assistance from international organizations.
We demand that Russia stop the unlawful deportations
and comply with the Convention on the Rights of
the Child.

23-1354813/24

S/PV.9321

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

We also welcome and encourage further efforts
to ensure full accountability for all crimes committed
by Russia against Ukraine and on Ukraine’s territory.
In the light of that, we are supportive of the ongoing
International Court of Justice and International
Criminal Court (ICC) processes. Malta strongly
believes that there can be no peace without justice. In
that regard, Malta joined other States parties to the
ICC in making a referral to the Court on the situation
in Ukraine and will continue its efforts to strengthen
the cooperation between the ICC and the Security
Council in continuing to investigate Russia’s crime of
aggression. Malta is a strong supporter of the ICC as a
beacon of accountability. We take note of the warrant
issued against President Vladimir Putin and the Russian
Commissioner for Children’s Rights, Maria LvovaBelova. We are firm in our belief that such crimes must
not go unpunished and that all perpetrators must be
held accountable.
Malta will continue to support every effort to
address the humanitarian consequences of Russia’s
aggression. We also reiterate that the only serious step
towards a just and lasting peace would be for Russia to
immediately cease all hostilities and to unconditionally
and completely withdraw all of its forces and military
equipment from the entire territory of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders.
In conclusion, I want to highlight the importance of
the Black Sea Grain Initiative, which extends beyond
Ukraine and affects global food security. It is paramount
to ensure that the agreement is further extended
between all the parties to alleviate the pressures on the
security of supply that are affecting communities all
over the world. That is yet another element that needs
to be pursued as part of the collective efforts to secure
sustainable and lasting peace.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for his briefing.
The Ukraine crisis is still dragging on. The
humanitarian situation remains dire, and the spillover
effects of the crisis continue. The international
community should take positive steps to mitigate the
humanitarian consequences of the conflict and make
joint efforts to de-escalate the situation and ensure a
cessation of hostilities as soon as possible.
First, every effort should be made to reduce the
harm and suffering done to civilians. International
humanitarian law provides for a code of conduct that must
14/24

15/05/2023

be observed in situations of conflict. The parties to the
conflict should spare no effort in protecting the safety
of civilians and civilian facilities. Women and children
are the most vulnerable groups in armed conflicts
and must be given special attention. We welcome
the expansion of aid to all the populations affected
and the facilitation of the repair and restoration of
civilian infrastructure by the international community,
including humanitarian agencies, on a basis of neutrality
and impartiality. China supports the balanced, full
and effective implementation of the Black Sea Grain
Initiative and the memorandum of understanding on the
export of Russian food and fertilizers. We also support
the United Nations in playing an important role in that
regard with a view to removing the real obstacles facing
the export of Russian food and fertilizers.
Secondly, the red line of nuclear safety must never be
crossed. Nuclear weapons must not be used, and nuclear
wars must not be fought. The safeguarding and security
of nuclear power plant facilities in Ukraine concern the
safety and welfare of hundreds of millions of people.
An accident could lead to incalculable humanitarian
and ecological consequences. We call for maximum
reasonableness and restraint and for avoiding words
and actions that could exacerbate the confrontation and
lead to a miscalculation. China supports the DirectorGeneral of the International Atomic Energy Agency in
maintaining communication with Russia and Ukraine
and playing a crucial role in safeguarding the safety
and security of civilian nuclear facilities.
Thirdly, the spillover effects of response measures
to the conflict should be taken seriously and managed.
The world economy faces a renewed risk of recession,
which calls for coordinated actions by all countries to
jointly maintain the stability of global food, energy
and financial markets. However, consecutive rounds
of unilateral sanctions and ever-increasing longarmed jurisdictions have not only resulted in severe
humanitarian consequences but also undermined
global industrial supply chains. The United States
and other relevant countries should seriously consider
their behaviour, correct it and create the conditions
necessary for developing countries to grow their
economies and improve their people’s livelihoods.
They must refrain from engaging in economic coercion
and fabricating narratives that accuse other countries of
economic coercion. Unilateral sanctions have no basis
in international law and are eliciting pushback from a
growing number of countries. We must point out that in
23-13548

15/05/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9321

the same way, the so-called rules-based international
order is highly problematic in terms of its legal and
practical ramifications. It whould not be used by the
United States or other relevant countries as pretexts to
abuse unilateral sanctions, nor does it enjoy the broad
support or approval of the international community.

support, Russia has never provided the necessary
security guarantees for access. We continue to call for
unimpeded and sustained humanitarian access to the
people of Ukraine. We call on Russia to stop denying
access and to cease its attacks on critical infrastructure
and residential areas.

Fourthly, it is of the utmost importance that a
political settlement of the crisis be reached with the
greatest sense of urgency. Complex issues do not have
simple answers. Any comprehensive solution always
begins with the first step, and the resumption of dialogue
and negotiation cannot be deferred indefinitely. All
parties should create the conditions necessary to
advance dialogue and negotiation, instead of adding
fuel to the fire and escalating tensions in an attempt to
profit from them. With regard to the issue of Ukraine,
China has always been a proponent of peace. All our
efforts are directed towards promoting peace talks.
Special Representative of the Chinese Government
on Eurasian Affairs Li Hui left today to visit Ukraine,
Poland, France, Germany and Russia in order to engage
with all parties in order to reach a political settlement
of the Ukraine crisis. We stand ready to work with the
international community in its continued and tireless
efforts towards achieving a political settlement of the
Ukraine crisis.

As we heard from others, the Black Sea Grain
Initiative is critically important. More than 30 million
tons of grain and other foodstuffs have been exported
under the Initiative since 1 August. The deal has
been critical to lowering global food prices and
getting urgently needed grain to countries that need it
most. As the World Food Programme has said, grain
deliveries to any country drive global prices down. We
therefore urge Russia to stop threatening to leave the
Initiative and instead agree to a sustained and stable
deal. Meanwhile, Russia continues to block and delay
ship inspections. Such obstruction harms global food
security by delaying shipments, restricting supplies and
keeping prices high for food-importing countries.

Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I join others in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths for his briefing and work on the ground. His
briefing reminds us of the enormous cost of Russia’s
war of aggression.

Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to join others in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths for his informative briefing today.

Russia has continued to conduct massive missile and
unmanned aerial vehicle strikes against inhabited areas
across Ukraine, killing innocent civilians. The United
Kingdom is appalled by the reports of recent Russian
attacks on Ukrainian Red Cross Society warehouses in
Odesa and a mobile hospital in Mykolaiv. There is no
excuse for attacking the most vulnerable or the brave
humanitarian workers who support them. We therefore
call on Russia to abide by international humanitarian
law, in particular to observe the distinction between
combatants and civilians. Ukrainian civilians — indeed
all civilians — should be protected by all combatants.
Similarly, aid organizations and workers, whose
mission is to help innocent civilians in humanitarian
need, are not a target. In the Russian-occupied areas of
Ukraine, an estimated 4 million people are living in dire
and forlorn conditions. Despite regular attempts by the
United Nations to gain access to deliver humanitarian

Lastly, the United Kingdom is fully committed
to holding Russia to account for its illegal actions in
Ukraine. We will continue to support independent
investigations into the atrocities committed in Ukraine,
as part of a just and sustained peace.

His sobering report is a reminder of not only the
importance of why we are here but also what we must
do our utmost to avoid: losing our sense of urgency
about the conflict. And we should not stand idly by
as the war transforms into a protracted years-long
conflict. The consequences are too grave for all of us.
Yet fighting has been continuous, with the price being
paid by civilians, who bear the brunt of the suffering.
The scale of devastation and the dire humanitarian
situation in Ukraine cannot be truly conveyed by the
statistics that we heard today. In the past 14 months of
war, there have been more than 23,000 verified civilian
casualties, the actual number of which is likely to be
considerably higher. Some 18 million people are in need
of humanitarian assistance, while more than 8 million
people are refugees across Europe, and an additional
5 million people have been displaced within Ukraine.
Humanitarian access must therefore be ensured in order
to allow much-needed aid to reach the civilians caught
in the fighting.

23-1354815/24

S/PV.9321

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

In recent weeks, there has been a noticeable uptick
of missile and drone strikes, which have damaged
or destroyed civilian infrastructure. Humanitarian
facilities have been hit. Last week, a Ukrainian Red
Cross Society warehouse and mobile health clinic
were destroyed. We once again reiterate our call on
the parties to the conflict to abide by their obligations
under international humanitarian law. Civilian objects
must never be the target of an attack.
The United Arab Emirates continues to provide
humanitarian assistance to those impacted by the
conflict, including its recent donation of ambulances.
We also continue to support civilian energy needs. We
have sent 2,500 generators and will send additional
energy-efficient power supplies in the near future.
The war in Ukraine has had far-reaching
consequences beyond the battlefield, as the ripple
effects have exacerbated global food crises. The
Black Sea Grain Initiative has proved vital against
that backdrop. The world has seen the safe export of
more than 30 million metric tons of grain and foodstuff
from Ukraine since the beginning of the Initiative.
So far, those efforts have successfully contributed to
alleviating the mounting pressure on global food prices
and the inevitable knock-on effects of a destabilized
food system on the world’s poorest. We have been
encouraged that the vital Initiative has continued and
commend the earnest efforts of the United Nations
and Türkiye to bring all the parties to the table in
order to find solutions to outstanding issues. We are
pleased to hear that the United Nations will continue to
work closely with all sides to ensure that the Initiative
operates smoothly. At the same time, we continue to
call for the full implementation of the memorandum of
understanding on Russian fertilizer and food products
and to support efforts to that end.
While the importance of Black Sea Grain Initiative
is widely appreciated for its practical benefits, we also
hope that in reality it is a trust-building mechanism. The
ability to reach an agreement on that Initiative and other
successful negotiated outcomes, such as exchanges of
prisoners of war, demonstrates that there remains some
degree of willingness to negotiate a pathway forward.
We are cautiously hopeful that such efforts can be a
conduit for building trust between all the parties and
for reminding them of the benefits of peace.
The United Arab Emirates has consistently held
that there can be no viable military solution to this
16/24

15/05/2023

war, and we will not waver in that belief. We call for
de-escalation, diplomacy and dialogue as the way
forward. The international community should rally
behind all efforts that can lead to a cessation of hostilities
and pave the way for just and lasting peace — one that
respects Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Switzerland.
I would like to begin by thanking Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, not only for
his briefing but for all of his and his team’s work both
in Ukraine and related to Ukraine.
In May the Council traditionally focuses on the
protection of civilians, a legal obligation for any party
to an armed conflict. And yet after 15 months of war,
we are compelled to recognize that civilians in Ukraine
continue to pay a price that is far too painful. In the past
few days the Ukrainian population has again had to
endure multiple waves of attacks, with Russian missiles
and drones hitting various regions. In Kherson, attacks
were carried out on a train station and a supermarket
during rush hour and killed or injured dozens of
persons. In Odesa, the Ukrainian Red Cross warehouse
was destroyed, as was its mobile clinic in Mykolayiv. In
Ternopil, a humanitarian warehouse was also destroyed
by Russian strikes last Saturday. Switzerland strongly
condemns those attacks. I reiterate that civilians and
civilian objects should not be targets. We call for
respect for international humanitarian law. The parties
to the conflict have a responsibility to take every
possible measure to protect civilians. We also want to
point to the obligation to protect humanitarian workers
and ensure their unhindered access to the 18 million
people in need in Ukraine, including those in Russianoccupied areas.
Accountability is an imperative for delivering
justice. The Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on Ukraine concluded in March that certain
violations of international law in Ukraine constitute
war crimes. The perpetrators of those crimes and other
violations of international law must be held accountable.
At the same time, the needs of victims must be placed at
the centre of all transitional justice efforts. We support
the recommendation of the Commission of Inquiry
that complementary instruments, such as a victims’
23-13548

15/05/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

registry, reparations and mental health and psychosocial
services, be put in place.
Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine has
had negative repercussions all over the world. That is
where the Black Sea Initiative comes in, along with
the memorandum of understanding focused on the
export of Russian food products and fertilizer. The
Initiative helps to alleviate food and energy insecurity.
Last week, it reached an important milestone, having
seen the export of 30 million tons of Ukrainian grain
and foodstuffs since its launch. Of that, more than
half a million tons of grain have been shipped by the
World Food Programme in support of its humanitarian
operations in Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia
and Yemen. In view of its added value, the Black Sea
Grain Initiative must continue. We encourage all parties
to redouble their efforts to find a lasting solution. We
welcome the commitment of the Secretary-General and
his representatives and the contribution of Türkiye in
that regard. Switzerland stands ready to provide its
support, in particular in its role as host State.
After 15 months of war, thousands of civilians
are suffering from the devastating direct effects of
the hostilities, as well as the indirect effects on the
infrastructure necessary to meet their basic needs.
We reiterate our urgent call on Russia to de-escalate
the situation immediately, cease all hostilities and
withdraw its troops from Ukrainian territory without
delay. I hope that this month of May, marked by the
spirit of the Geneva Conventions, will lead us to
reaffirm what should unite us all — the humanitarian
imperative to protect civilians. That is true in Ukraine
as it is everywhere in the world.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I thank you, Madam
President, as well as the members of the Security
Council and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths. I also
recognize the representative of Putin’s regime in the
permanent seat of the Soviet Union.
We are meeting to address the Russists’ war against
my country. After one of the lowest periods in the
history of the Security Council, the April presidency
of the aggressor State inflicted yet another blow on
an already compromised principal body of the United
Nations. This April alone, the Russian occupiers

S/PV.9321

committed 6,139 war crimes, which led to the death
of 207 Ukrainian civilians, including 11 children. On
28 April, Russia again launched a missile strike on a
multistorey apartment building, this time in Uman,
in the Cherkasy region. As a result, 23 residents were
killed, including six children. So much for Putin’s envoy
saying that Russia does not attack Ukrainian civilians.
Many Council members have seen the heartbreaking
video footage from Uman, where people desperately
waited for hours near the rubble for their loved ones
to be retrieved. In Russia, television viewers watched
that footage on the State-owned propaganda channel
Russia-1. Meanwhile, the Russist “Ministry of War”
posted on social media the words “Right on target”.
The fact is that since day one of the Russian
invasion, regardless of the torrent of lies from the
Russist representative on the Council, innocent civilians
have been a deliberate target for Russian weapons and
a permitted object for Russian crimes. Russism and its
disciples, including in this Chamber, have defied logic,
all laws of non-contradiction and all semblance of
decency. Two days after the strike on Uman, on 1 May,
another Ukrainian child, a 14-year-old boy, was killed
in the village of Lyzunivka, in the Chernihiv region,
by a Russian air bomb that also destroyed the local
school. The attack was another case of the cowardly
and despicable terror tactics that the Russist army has
applied widely against the northern Ukrainian regions
that were liberated a year ago — bombing Ukrainian
border settlements from Russian air space. Like any
other terrorists, the Russist servicemen do not care
where those bombs fall. The main thing is that they
must sow death and destruction.
Terror aimed at the liberated areas has become
a hallmark of the Russist army. On 3 May, Russia
killed 23 people in the Kherson region alone, and 49
people were wounded — in a store, a railway station
and a gas station and in their homes. On 7 May, a
Russist missile strike damaged a mobile hospital in the
Mykolayiv region that also belonged to the Ukrainian
Red Cross. Since the beginning of the full-fledged
Russist invasion, 25 facilities of the Ukrainian Red
Cross have been damaged or destroyed. On 9 May, a
massive barrage of 25 missiles slammed into Ukrainian
cities. The day before that, on 8 May, the Ukrainian
Air Force was able to down all 35 of the Iranian drones
launched by Russia. Also on 8 May, Russian missiles
completely destroyed a warehouse of the Ukrainian
Red Cross in Odesa, along with all the humanitarian

23-1354817/24

S/PV.9321

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

15/05/2023

aid stored there. One employee was killed. As a result
of the attack, the Odesa branch of the Ukrainian Red
Cross was compelled to suspend the provision of
humanitarian aid and the implementation of a number
of humanitarian projects.

territories under the guise of so-called evacuation. We
join many others in the Council in reiterating that it
is only the Russist troops that must be evacuated from
the territory of Ukraine. As soon as that happens, the
atrocities of the war will be over.

We are grateful to our friends and allies, who
literally saved the lives of Ukrainians by helping
us to reinforce our air defence, which enabled us to
shoot down 23 of 25 missiles. However, more needs to
be done to fully protect our skies and civilians. This
weekend, Ukrainians also had to spend their time with
air-raid sirens sounding in the background as Russia
launched massive new attacks using dozens of Iranian
drones, cruise missiles and S-300 rockets. The cities
of Khmelnytskyi, Ternopil, Mykolayiv, Kharkiv and
Kostiantynivka in the Donetsk region suffered human
casualties and serious damage to civilian infrastructure.

We welcome the well-founded conclusions of the
reports of the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on Ukraine, established by the Human
Rights Council, and by the Moscow Mechanism of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
which reconfirmed the enormous scale of violations
and crimes committed by the Russist occupiers, in
particular against children. We call on the SecretaryGeneral and the Special Representative on Children
and Armed Conflict to give a proper assessment of the
gravity of the violations against children in Ukraine
perpetrated by the Russist Government forces in the
upcoming annual report. We believe that it should
contribute to ensuring accountability for perpetrators
and justice for Ukrainian children — victims of
the Russist aggression. The invasion of the Soviet
permanent seat in the Security Council should give
neither immunity nor amnesty to war criminals.

In addition to the immediate harm caused to millions
of Ukrainians by Russia’s war, the long-term effects of
displacement, trauma and poverty will be felt for years
to come. The most vulnerable suffer the most. Russia is
violating the fundamental principles of child protection
in wartime. As a result of the Russist aggression, 480
children have been killed, and 967 have been injured.
To date, 13 cases of sexual violence against children
have been verified by the Office of the Prosecutor
General of Ukraine in the Donetsk, Kyiv, Kherson,
Mykolayiv and Chernihiv regions. The real numbers are
definitely higher, and our law enforcement continues
the investigations. Russist attacks have damaged 3,185
educational institutions, 330 of which were destroyed.
In total, 1,412 health-care objects and 577 health-care
facilities have been damaged, 258 facilities of which
were destroyed. According to the annual report of the
UNICEF country office in Ukraine, education for an
estimated 5.7 million children has been disrupted,
while 1.5 million children face mental health issues.
The forceful deportation of children is nothing but
a well-planned Kremlin policy aimed at aggressive
indoctrination, ethnic identification-change and the
deprivation, for Ukraine, of its succeeding generations.
The Ukrainian authorities have identified that to date,
19,393 children have been deported or abducted to
the Russian Federation or to the territories of Ukraine
temporarily occupied by Russia — some 4,390 of
whom are orphans or children without parental care. It
has been possible to return only 364 children. We note
with concern that Russia has reportedly intensified its
deportation and abduction practices in the occupied
18/24

We have already brought to the Council’s attention
the critical situation concerning the mine contamination
of Ukrainian lands. According to preliminary
estimates, 170,00 to 180,000 square kilometres of
Ukraine’s territory are contaminated with mines and
other explosive ordnance. Our primary task today is to
accelerate the demining process as much as possible,
increase the number of demining teams and equip them
with special equipment. Unfortunately, those people
who risk their lives to clear Ukrainian territory of
mines and restore safety for people are also a target
for the Russist troops. Most recently, on 7 May in the
Kherson region, nine members of a demining team
were killed by Russian shells while on duty. The mine
contamination in Ukraine is an issue affecting global
food security, as more than 4,700 square kilometres
of contaminated areas are agricultural lands. In such
extraordinary circumstances, Ukraine continues to
act as a reliable contributor to global food security by
implementing its agreement with the United Nations
under the Black Sea Grain Initiative and advocating
for expanding its geographical scope by including new
Ukrainian ports.
As of the beginning of May, Ukraine has exported
29.8 million tons of grain and foodstuffs this year.
That number includes 600,000 tons of grain shipped
23-13548

15/05/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

by vessels chartered by the World Food Programme in
support of its humanitarian operations in Afghanistan,
Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia and Yemen. That volume
could have been significantly higher if Russia had not
resorted to impeding practices. We are concerned about
that, since as of 1 May, the inspection rate has dropped
to an average of 2.9 inspections per day, compared to
6.6 in the period from August 2022 to April 2023. As a
result, in April we were able to export through the grain
corridor less than 3 million tons, which is only half of
our agricultural export capacities.
Together with the United Nations and Türkiye,
Ukraine strives for the extension of the Initiative
without any delay or disruption to shipments.
According to experts, if it is blocked by Russia,
global food prices could increase substantially again.
That grim perspective should be taken seriously. It is
disgusting that Russia still pretends to be on the losing
side of the deal. I will not even remind the Council of
the immorality of such complaints from the aggressor
State, which has been and remains the only threat to
food shipments in the Black Sea. Let us just turn to the
data, which clearly shows the benefits for Russia from
the deal. The data indicates that Russian wheat exports
in January and February 2023 nearly doubled from the
same period one year earlier. We therefore consider
those speculations to be an attempt to whitewash
Russia’s deliberate practices to weaponize food
supplies, and we urge the international community to
give a resolute response.
Let me remind some who have made statements
here today that the Black Sea Grain Initiative is not
due to expire this week. It is, however, the Russian
blackmail deadline that expires this week.
A week ago, we paid tribute to the victims and
heroes of the Second World War, marking the end of
that war in Europe. The atrocities of that war prompted
our predecessors to commit to saving succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. Now in Ukraine,
Russia reminds us that our commemoration slogan,
“never again”, is still a goal to be achieved. The lessons
of the Second World War teach us that just and lasting
peace can be possible only if evil is defeated and is not
able to continue its aggression. Any attempt to appease
the aggressor, at the expense of its victims, will only
protract and broaden the scope of the tragedy.

S/PV.9321

As my President said on 8 May, when Ukraine,
along with the entire world, commemorated the victory
over Nazism:
“We in Ukraine give meaning to the words ‘never
again’ — not only to remember, but also to protect;
not only to value life, but also to the utmost to
ensure that everyone who threatens life, everyone
who brings aggression, everyone who resorts to
terror against other nations, every such evil loses.”
Ukraine has committed to stop this modern evil of
Russia-ism. We are guided by the supreme principle of
morality, which is a categorical imperative since it is
not conditional upon one’s preferences.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: I have the honour to speak on behalf of
the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
candidate countries North Macedonia, Montenegro,
Albania, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Bosnia
and Herzegovina; the potential candidate country
Georgia; and the European Free Trade Association
country Liechtenstein, member of the European
Economic Area, as well as Andorra and Monaco, all
align themselves with this statement.
Like everyone else, I want to first thank UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths for the briefing and
to commend him and the United Nations system for their
excellent work on the ground, providing humanitarian
assistance under very difficult circumstances in
Ukraine and in many other places.
The horrors that Mr. Griffiths and others have
described from inside Ukraine, resulting from Russia’s
unprovoked and unjustified military aggression,
are unimaginable. For 15 months now, the Russian
leadership has struggled, without success, to find any
justification whatsoever for its illegal war of aggression.
Russia must stop its war and immediately, completely
and unconditionally withdraw all of its forces and
proxies from the entire territory of Ukraine, within its
internationally recognized borders.
I will emphasize three points in my
intervention — the importance of upholding
international law and international humanitarian law,
the need for accountability and efforts to address the
global consequences of Russia’s war of aggression.

23-1354819/24

S/PV.9321

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

First, international law and international
humanitarian law must be respected. Russia must
therefore immediately stop its indiscriminate and
decimating shelling of civilians and civilian areas.
Under international humanitarian law, deliberate
attacks on civilians or attacks that do not distinguish
between military targets and civilians, are prohibited
under all circumstances.
We strongly condemn cases related to sexual and
gender-based violence. We are particularly horrified
by the impact of Russia’s aggression against children.
Children are being killed and maimed and schools
and hospitals have been attacked, in blatant violation
of international law. Russia’s practice of forcibly
transferring and deporting Ukrainian children is
a violation of international humanitarian law. The
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on Ukraine concluded that it amounts to war crimes.
Russia must immediately facilitate the safe return of
Ukrainians who were forcibly transferred or deported.
We also strongly condemn Russia’s attacks and
violence against journalists and media workers.
UNESCO has stated that 12 journalists have been killed
in Ukraine since the start of the invasion. The safety
of journalists is indispensable to ensuring the right to
freedom of opinion and expression and, in particular,
the freedom of the press.
We urge Russia to enable safe, rapid and unhindered
humanitarian access to populations in need of
assistance, in particular into the temporarily occupied
territories through the front lines. It is imperative that
the safety of humanitarian workers is ensured.
Secondly, there can be no impunity for the
commanders, perpetrators and accomplices of
atrocities. The EU is firmly committed to ensuring
full accountability for war crimes and the other most
serious crimes committed in connection with Russia’s
war of aggression against Ukraine, including through
the establishment of an appropriate mechanism for the
prosecution of the crime of aggression. We welcome
the creation of the new International Centre for
Prosecution of the Crime of Aggression, in The Hague,
and we reiterate our support for the investigations of
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.
We are also fully supportive of the establishment of an
international mechanism to register the damages Russia
has inflicted, as recommended by the General Assembly
in resolution ES-11/5, adopted in November 2022.
20/24

15/05/2023

Thirdly, Russia’s aggression and its weaponization
of food have undermined global food security, driving
up food and fertilizer prices worldwide. We welcome
the Secretary-General’s active engagement to address
those serious consequences, and call on all Member
States to come together in support of his efforts. They
benefit us all, including Russia.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative, in particular, has
been instrumental in bringing down global food prices.
It is crucial that it be renewed and run at its full potential
in order to provide the continuity and predictability
needed by operators and to avoid a discontinuation in
shipments of grains to countries in need. We must not
forget that there would be no need for the Initiative
were it not for Russia’s aggression against Ukraine.
In addition to the Grain Initiative, the EU’s
solidarity lanes have allowed the export of more than
32 million tons of Ukraine’s food and agricultural
goods. Vessels chartered by the World Food Programme
have transported almost 600,0000 tons of wheat
through various Black Sea ports, including to Ethiopia,
Afghanistan, Yemen, Somalia and Kenya. Through
Ukraine’s own Grain from Ukraine programme,
hundreds of thousands of metric tons of grain have
been donated to countries in need, as we just heard.
We know that these efforts are insufficient for
countries vulnerable to food insecurity. Therefore,
together with our member States, we are providing
€18 billion to address urgent and longer-term food
security needs in 2021 and 2024, focusing on regions
most affected by food insecurity. Concretely that
support enables vulnerable countries to afford imports
of key staples despite price increases and currency
devaluations, as well as to increase their resilience and
food autonomy in the longer term.
I want to reassure the members of the Council that
every effort in support of Ukraine has come in addition
to, and not instead of, our global commitments, as
illustrated by the increase in EU official development
assistance. We are grateful to all countries that are
generously supporting those in need in Ukraine and
elsewhere, and once again encourage all to step up their
assistance, in line with the humanitarian response plan
and appeal for aid of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs this year.
In conclusion, I reiterate our call for a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace, in line with the
Charter of the United Nations and the General
23-13548

15/05/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Assembly resolution adopted in February (resolution
ES-11/6). The EU is unwavering it our support for
Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity, within its internationally recognized
borders, and its inherent right of self-defence against
Russia’s aggression.
We will continue to stand firmly with the Ukrainian
people for as long as it takes.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania.
Mr. Feruță (Romania): I too want to thank Ecuador
and France for requesting this meeting, and I thank
you, Madam President, for convening it. I appreciate
this opportunity to address the Council.
In addition to the points made by European
Union (EU) Ambassador Skoog, I would like to add
several remarks.
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths provided a sober
overview of the humanitarian situation in Ukraine. I
want to take this opportunity to thank him and pay
tribute to the efforts of him and his team to address
the multiple challenges posed by this aggression. Sadly,
it is still the civilians who pay the price of the illegal
aggression of Russia against Ukraine. Today is day 446
since the beginning of the aggression.
International law and international humanitarian
law must be respected. That is a red line agreed by
the entire United Nations membership. And yet, the
new barrage of rockets towards Ukraine provides no
indication that Russia has any intention to stop its
indiscriminate shelling of civilians and civilian areas.
Ironically, next week we are to celebrate at the United
Nations the week of the protection of civilians.
The ruins of urban and rural areas are in sharp
and painful contrast with Sustainable Development
Goal (SDG) 11 on sustainable cities and communities.
There could not be a more direct connection between
development and security than that. Later this year,
we are expected to take stock of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development at the SDG summit in
September. The Russian invasion and the continued
aggression towards Ukraine also hamper our efforts to
promote the 2030 Agenda, in addition to being blatant
violations of the principles of international law and
international humanitarian law.

S/PV.9321

Since the beginning of the year, the international
community has sent strong messages regarding the
predictability of accessing food around the globe
via the Black Sea Grain Initiative. We welcome the
continued efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General,
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and SecretaryGeneral Grynspan and those of Türkiye in keeping
the Black Sea Grain Initiative alive. We need the
Initiative to move forward. We need predictability. We
need responsibility. We have implemented the Black
Sea Grain Initiative for too long to go back and risk
an aggravated global food crisis. There is no time for
second thoughts. As we heard today, there is no plan B
with regard to the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
For its part, Romania will continue to rise to the
expectations and facilitate the exports of grains from
Ukraine to reach those in need via the EU solidarity
lanes. So far, more than 16 million tons of grains have
crossed Romanian territory, mainly through Romanian
Black Sea ports, in addition to the amounts exported
through the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
In line with resolution ES-11/6, adopted by the
General Assembly on 23 February, Romania will
continue to call for a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in Ukraine. Similarly, we should also be mindful
of the danger of impunity for those responsible for
crimes committed in connection with Russia’s war of
aggression against Ukraine. Alongside the Russians
who commit abuses and violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law provisions, the March
report of the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on Ukraine recommends that the Russian
Federation limit the use of private military and security
companies as they are “generally less accountable than
regular forces” (A/HRC/52/62, p.18).
Romania firmly believes that justice must be done
with regard to all core crimes committed in the context
of this war — all core crimes — including the crime of
aggression. While that is not an easy path, we should
rise to this challenging task rather than be discouraged.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): Poland appreciates the
convening of this timely and very needed meeting. We
value the opportunity to contribute to the discussion,
triggered once again by the new distressful facts
regarding the humanitarian impact of the Russian
aggression against Ukraine, which we heard about from

23-1354821/24

S/PV.9321

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

our well-informed briefer. I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths for his briefing.
Let me concentrate today on the following
three points.
First, Russia has been waging its war of aggression
against Ukraine and Ukrainian people for close to 500
days now, and the war’s human and material tolls keep
growing every day. As the Russian military fails on the
battleground, it tries to compensate for its shortcomings
there with continuous brutal aggression against
innocent civilians. Air-raid sirens keep blaring across
the whole territory of Ukraine. Critical infrastructure
facilities remain the primary targets of the Russian
rockets. New civilian deaths are being continually
reported. All that bears the characteristics of a total war
and, as such, requires repeated universal condemnation
time and time again.
My second point refers to the Russian strategy at the
United Nations. Despite the fact that the vast majority of
United Nations Member States have been crystal clear
in their condemnation of the Russian aggression and its
disastrous humanitarian impact on numerous occasions,
Russia keeps ignoring our appeals, distorting the basic
facts even today and flooding us with disinformation
and propaganda about this special military operation.
Its hope is that the international community will
eventually become tired of this war, stop talking about
it and eventually forget about it. My appeal to Council
members today is simple: let us never be indifferent,
and let us never get used to war — any war — even if it
disappears from the breaking news headlines.
As long as Ukraine and Ukrainians keep paying
the highest price, heroically defending each square
kilometre of their territory against the invading forces,
we cannot let our resolve falter. We need to stand our
ground and continue to defend the Charter of the United
Nations. We need to keep putting pressure on Russia to
cease its aggression. When there is no aggression, there
is no war, so that is the way to achieve peace, which the
whole world is looking forward to.
Finally, we should keep helping Ukraine on the
ground as long as it takes. In 2022, the total value of
support for Ukraine from Poland amounted to about
$10 billion. This year, the expenditure to cover only the
social benefits and educational needs of Ukrainians,
mostly women and children, finding refuge in Poland
will amount to another $1.2 billion. In the face of the
systematic Russian attacks aimed at destroying energy
22/24

15/05/2023

and heating infrastructure during the past winter, our
humanitarian assistance focused on spare parts and
equipment for the energy infrastructure, as well as
transformers and power aggregates. We will continue
with our support for Ukraine, both in the United
Nations and on the ground, as long as it is necessary.
We will not get worn down in our solidarity with
Ukraine by Russian hybrid attacks on Poland, which
have increased recently, and we call on all Member
States to do the same.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lithuania.
Mr. Paulauskas (Lithuania): I am speaking on
behalf of the Baltic States — Latvia, Estonia and my
own country, Lithuania. We fully align ourselves with
the statement of the European Union. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths for his
comprehensive briefing.
We highly value the work of the United Nations
in its efforts to provide humanitarian aid to people
affected by Russia’s unprovoked and premeditated war
against Ukraine, as well as in its close monitoring and
documentation of human rights abuses and violations
of international humanitarian law. We also appreciate
its active engagement in numerous diplomatic efforts,
including the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
Over the past 15 months, Russia has inflicted
immense suffering upon Ukraine and its people through
its full-scale war of aggression against Ukraine. The
humanitarian consequences of Russia’s attacks on
the civilian population have been devastating. Each
additional day of aggression prolongs the toll of
human suffering.
Russia, responding to its military losses in Ukraine,
is terrorizing the civilian population by conducting
massive missile and unmanned aerial vehicle strikes at
critical infrastructure and residential areas, including
in Kyiv and Odesa. Those horrific attacks, which result
in significant casualties and destruction, are designed
to erode the will of ordinary Ukrainians to resist.
However, launching attacks with the sole purpose of
terrorizing civilians is a war crime.
The United Nations and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) have
published extensive reports indicating atrocities
committed by Russia and its armed forces against
civilians in Ukraine. Those acts have been classified
23-13548

15/05/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

as war crimes, crimes against humanity and gross
violations of the Geneva Conventions. We highlight the
large-scale attempts by Russia to abduct and transfer
children from Ukraine. International humanitarian
law must be upheld collectively with international
organizations leading the way. The recent arrest
warrants issued by the International Criminal Court
for Russia’s President Vladimir Putin and Presidential
Commissioner for Children’s Rights in Russia, Maria
Lvova-Belova, the OSCE Moscow Mechanism mission
of experts on the situation of Ukrainian children and
the Human Rights Council’s Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine are all concrete
steps towards accountability and safeguarding
international humanitarian law. We strongly condemn
Russia’s attempts to intimidate the ICC and undermine
international efforts to secure justice.
On 8 May, Russian strikes destroyed the
humanitarian aid stored in a 1,000-square-metre
warehouse of the Ukrainian Red Cross for the Odesa
region. By attacking agricultural infrastructure
and restricting maritime exports, Moscow seeks to
instrumentalize the vulnerabilities of other countries.
It is estimated that Ukrainian agricultural products
feed 400 million people around the world. Despite the
full-blown war on its territory, Ukraine remains one of
the world’s top five agricultural exporters. The Black
Sea Grain Initiative, the grain from Ukraine and the
EU Solidarity Lanes have played an instrumental role
in this by alleviating the global food crisis that has
been severely exacerbated by Russia’s illegal war of
aggression. If Russia were serious about countering
food insecurity, it would stop its threats to unilaterally
leave the Black Sea Grain Initiative and put an end to
delaying the inspection of vessels.
The Baltic States are making significant efforts to
support Ukraine, providing humanitarian, economic
and military aid. Together with Poland, we are among the
top four bilateral aid donors to Ukraine by percentage
of gross domestic product. It is important to recall that
all the support being provided to Ukraine is in addition
to, rather than at the expense of, aid and development
cooperation to other countries around the world.
Russia must realize that it cannot win in Ukraine.
Ultimately, it is Ukraine that will prevail. With
unwavering support from the international community,
Ukraine will continue to demonstrate its remarkable
courage, determination and moral strength, as it fights
to liberate its homeland. A peace will be achieved

S/PV.9321

when Ukraine’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence are fully restored, enabling its people to
thrive and prosper.
We reiterate our support for President Zelenskyy’s
efforts to promote a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in line with the United Nations Charter, and
we support the basic principles outlined in his peace
initiative. We are committed to holding Putin’s criminal
regime accountable for the war of aggression unleashed
against Ukraine.
We, the international community, must unite
and commit ourselves to ensuring full accountability
for the core international crimes in connection with
Russia’s war against Ukraine, including through the
establishment of a special international tribunal for the
prosecution of the crimes of aggression.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Denmark.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the five Nordic countries — Finland,
Iceland, Norway, Sweden and, of course, my own
country, Denmark.
The Nordics are committed to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict as a cornerstone of
international humanitarian law. Globally and at the
country level — in Africa, the Middle East, Asia,
the Americas and Europe — our commitment to
humanitarian action is resolute. I want to take this
opportunity
to
thank
Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths for his briefing and for the work of the staff of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
as well as the staff of other United Nations agencies
and other humanitarian actors who do humanitarian
work around the clock under impossible conditions in
Ukraine and elsewhere.
For more than a year now, Ukraine has been
bravely resisting a brutal war of aggression initiated
by Russia. The devastating consequences of the war
also reach beyond Ukrainian borders — to the Horn of
Africa, Yemen and beyond — where millions of people
have been pushed deeper into food insecurity, due to
rising food and energy prices across the world. Russia’s
war against Ukraine has compounded many global
challenges, making it an urgent matter of international
peace and security — and obviously a matter of concern
to all States Members of the United Nations.

23-1354823/24

S/PV.9321

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Russia’s indiscriminate missile attacks across
Ukrainian cities continue to cause harm to civilians and
severe damage to civilian property and infrastructure,
illustrating Russia’s complete disregard for international
humanitarian law. The consequences of these brutal
attacks are extensive and far-reaching, and the situation
is especially dire close to the front lines, where the need
for protection and humanitarian assistance, such as food,
medicines and shelter, is alarmingly high. For many, the
consequences of the war are long-lasting, damaging the
very foundation for recovery and healing, at both the
personal and societal level. In this regard, the Nordics
welcome the establishment of a register of damage,
documenting claims of damage caused by Russia’s war
of aggression against Ukraine, as recommended by the
General Assembly in its resolution ES-11/5.
Delivering humanitarian assistance in Ukraine to
those in need is difficult and dangerous. The situation
is a horrific reminder of the need to ensure protection
for all civilians. Under international humanitarian
law, civilians and civilian objects must be protected,
and humanitarian actors must have full, safe and
unhindered access. We condemn in the strongest terms
attacks on humanitarian operations, such as the attacks
on a Ukrainian Red Cross warehouse in Odesa and on
medical facilities in Mykolaiv on 8 May. We call on
Russia to allow full, safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian actors.
Further to the tragic consequences for people in
Ukraine, Russia’s illegal invasion has had catastrophic
global effects. The worsening food crisis and the
volatility of global food and energy prices have
affected countries around the world. The World Food
Programme estimates that an astounding 345 million

24/24

15/05/2023

people will experience acute food insecurity this
year. This is the equivalent of more than the entire
population of the United States of America. The world’s
poorest and those in the most vulnerable situations
tend to be the ones most affected by such crises. As
a result, the need for humanitarian assistance globally
has increased. At the same time, food assistance and
humanitarian operations have become more expensive,
exacerbating the gap between humanitarian needs and
available funding.
Until Russia ends its illegal war of aggression
against Ukraine, the continuation of the Black Sea Grain
Initiative remains imperative to avoid a worsening
of the global food crisis. Up until earlier this month,
the Initiative had ensured the export of as much as
30 million tons of grain and foodstuffs, thereby helping
to stabilize global food prices and allowing access to
food for people at risk of famine.
We welcome the active engagement of the SecretaryGeneral and Türkiye and urge Russia to ensure a longterm rollover of the Black Sea Grain Initiative, in line
with the Istanbul agreement — and to immediately
suspend its military operations. The extension and full
implementation of this initiative is critical in order to
avoid a further deterioration of the global food crisis.
Let me conclude by saying the Nordics will continue
to stand with Ukraine and its people. We commend
Ukraine’s initiative for a just peace and support the
various initiatives that are seeking accountability for
international crimes committed in connection with
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

23-13548
