A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/105
23 February 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 111
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/48/629)]
48/105.

International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 46/99 of 16 December 1991 and taking note of
Economic and Social Council resolution 1993/17 of 27 July 1993,
Taking note of the report of the International Research and Training
Institute for the Advancement of Women on its activities, 1/
Stressing the need for independent research to ensure that policy-making
and project implementation address issues and emerging areas of concern to
women, and the role of the Institute therein,
Reaffirming the unique and specific role of the Institute in the areas
of research and training that can facilitate the systematic inclusion of women
as partners in development programmes and projects,
Recognizing the important role that the Institute could play in the
substantive preparations for the Fourth World Conference on Women: Action for
Equality, Development and Peace, to be held in 1995,
Convinced that sustainable development cannot be achieved without the
full participation of women,

___________
1/

A/48/301, annex.
/...

A/RES/48/105
Page 2

1.
Expresses its satisfaction with the report of the International
Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women on its
activities; 1/
2.
Commends the Institute for its efforts to focus on problems that
constitute barriers to improving the status of women and thus impede overall
development and progress;
3.
Urges the Institute to continue to strengthen its activities in
the areas of research, training and information aimed at mainstreaming gender
in development strategies and giving women greater visibility by valuating
their contribution to social and economic development as important means of
empowering women and improving their status;
4.
Requests the Institute to assist with the substantive preparations
for the Fourth World Conference on Women: Action for Equality, Development
and Peace, given its key role in the areas of research and training and its
expertise in gender statistics;
5.
Emphasizes the unique function of the Institute as the only entity
within the United Nations system devoted exclusively to research and training
for the integration of women in development, and stresses the importance of
making its research findings available for policy purposes and for operational
activities;
6.
Expresses its appreciation for the continuing efforts of the
Institute to strengthen its programmatic linkages with other United Nations
organizations, including the regional commissions, governmental and
non-governmental organizations, research institutes and other organizations
and groups, thereby broadening the scope of its operations, making optimum use
of its limited financial resources and attaining a greater outreach and impact
of its work;
7.
Expresses its appreciation also to those Governments and
organizations which have contributed to or supported the activities of the
Institute;
8.
Invites States and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to contribute to the United Nations Trust Fund for the
International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women so
that the Institute can fulfil its mandate and ensure the full participation
and proper recognition of women in society;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its fiftieth session a report on the activities of the International
Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women, including a
detailed description of its administrative and institutional status, under the
item entitled "Advancement of women".
85th plenary meeting
20 December 1993
