UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/142
19 February 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 19 FEBRUARY 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

In its resolution 1133 (1997) of 20 October 1997, the Security Council
requested me to report every 60 days from the date of extension of the mandate
of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) on
the progress in the implementation of the settlement plan and the agreements
reached between the parties for its implementation. Following my report of
13 November 1997 (S/1997/882), which included a timetable and my recommendations
for the full deployment of MINURSO, I provided, in a letter to the President of
the Security Council dated 12 December 1997 (S/1997/974), an account of the
identification of potential voters in the referendum since its resumption on
3 December. My report to the Council dated 15 January 1998 (S/1998/35) provided
a further detailed account of that process and of other activities in
implementation of the settlement plan. Since then there have been several
important developments.
As members of the Council are aware, my Special Representative,
Mr. Charles F. Dunbar, arrived in the mission area on 9 February 1998. In
Rabat, he was received by His Majesty King Hassan II and had meetings with the
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation,
Mr. Abdellatif Filali, and with the Minister of State for the Interior,
Mr. Driss Basri. In the Tindouf area, he met with the Secretary-General of the
Frente Popular para la Liberación de Saguía el-Hamra y del Río de Oro (Frente
POLISARIO), Mr. Mohammed Abdelaziz, and other Frente POLISARIO leaders.
Mr. Dunbar assumed his duties at MINURSO headquarters in Laayoune on
16 February. He travelled to Algiers on 17 February to meet with the Algerian
authorities, and will proceed to Nouakchott shortly to meet with the Mauritanian
authorities.
During the reporting period, my Acting Special Representative,
Mr. Erik Jensen, maintained regular contacts with the parties to resolve
difficulties which continued to arise, in particular in the identification
process. The Chairman of the Identification Commission, Mr. Robin Kinloch, also
held regular consultations with the Moroccan and Frente POLISARIO coordinators
with MINURSO. Following visits by the Commission Chairman to Nouakchott and by
a technical mission to Zouerate in Mauritania, plans were finalized to open an
identification centre in Zouerate. The centre began its work on 9 February, a
month later than originally planned, in part because of the holding of
98-03710 (E)

190298

/...

S/1998/142
English
Page 2

Mauritanian presidential elections in December 1997. The technical mission
considered a proposal by Mauritania for a second centre at Atar, instead of
Nouadhibou. A decision in this regard is expected to be taken following my
Special Representative’s consultations with the Mauritanian authorities.
Eight identification teams are currently operating in the mission area
(three in Western Sahara, two in the Tindouf area, two in southern Morocco and
one in Mauritania). During the 11 weeks since the resumption of the
identification process, i.e. between 3 December 1997 and 18 February 1998,
42,484 persons were convoked by the Identification Commission. Of these, 30,425
came before the Commission for interview and identification, bringing to 90,537
the total number of persons identified since the start of identification in
August 1994. In January alone, 14,000 persons were identified. This is the
highest number achieved in a month so far, notwithstanding the impact of the
fasting month of Ramadan and the Eid-el-Fitr holidays.
Interruptions in the identification process owing to the illness of sheikhs
on either side caused the loss of three working days at one centre. One day of
work was lost at all centres as a result of sandstorms. Disputes between the
parties caused the loss of four working days at two centres. A change in
procedures at the Laayoune airport for arriving and departing POLISARIO
delegations led to the loss of one working day at seven centres, and this was
followed by a reciprocal change at the Tindouf airport for Moroccan delegations.
In addition, the Eid-el-Fitr holidays necessitated closure of all centres for
two and a half days. However, extra hours of identification work, as well as
weekend sessions, enabled the Commission to make up for some of these delays.
The above interruptions and other factors contributed to a perceptible
increase in tension between the two parties. There was a marked increase in
anti-POLISARIO and sometimes anti-MINURSO coverage in the Moroccan press. The
other factors included Moroccan official protests and public demonstrations
against the negative testimony of several sheikhs on the POLISARIO side, the
designation by the Frente POLISARIO of its former "Minister of Defence" (now
"Minister for the Occupied Territories") and its "Minister of Education" as
observers, and protests against the behaviour of a specific POLISARIO observer;
changes in the Moroccan arrangements for meals for the POLISARIO delegation at
Laayoune; and refusal, for a time, by a Moroccan observer to allow the
identification of non-convoked ex-prisoners of war.
The parties expressed some reservations regarding the decisions contained
in my report of 15 January 1998 (S/1998/35) concerning the centres in Morocco,
the identification of tribal groups H41, H61 and J51/52, as well as the
identification of tribal group D13. Nevertheless, the Identification Commission
incorporated these last two decisions in the identification programme for
February. In this connection, the Commission expects to identify, during the
latter part of February and in March, some 4,000 unconvoked individuals, who
presented themselves at identification centres in Western Sahara on the days of
convocation of members of tribal groups H41, H61 and J51/52 listed in the 1974
census and their immediate families. On the basis of the outcome of the
identification of these 4,000 individuals, decisions will then be made on ways
of dealing with any additional applicants from the above tribal groups,
including those in Morocco. In the meantime, I call on the parties to continue
/...

S/1998/142
English
Page 3

to cooperate with MINURSO in the identification of persons from non-contested
tribes, including those to be convoked in the towns of Sidi Kacem and El Kelaa
des Sraghna in northern Morocco.
Since my report to the Security Council of 15 January (S/1998/35), the
number of civilian police officers assigned to MINURSO has remained at 79,
including the Civil Police Commissioner, Chief Superintendent Peter Miller. Two
additional positions have therefore to be filled in order to bring the civilian
police component of MINURSO to its approved strength of 81 officers. As
described in my report of 15 January, the civilian police continues to assist
the Identification Commission in its daily tasks, and also to prepare for the
transitional period.
Under the command of Major-General Bernd S. Lubenik, the military component
of MINURSO continues to monitor the ceasefire between the Royal Moroccan Army
and the Frente POLISARIO forces and to plan for full deployment. The military
situation remains stable, and both sides continue to cooperate with military
observers in their respective areas. Two engineering teams from Sweden and
Pakistan visited MINURSO in late January and early February to assess the
demining requirements and the time necessary to undertake demining activities
for both the repatriation of refugees and the installation of additional
military team sites at designated locations.
During the reporting period, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) continued its preparatory work for the
repatriation of Saharan refugees. Discussions were held by UNHCR with the
parties and my Special Representative on its repatriation programme and role
under the settlement plan. UNHCR is completing preparations for its special
appeal for funds for the implementation of that programme. It is further
reviewing the budget for the operation, which is expected to exceed $50 million,
of which 60 per cent might be necessary to cover transport and logistics costs.
Before issuing its appeal for funds, UNHCR will brief potential donor countries
on the repatriation programme and related financial requirements.
I intend to report further to the Security Council in good time before the
expiration of the current mandate of MINURSO on 20 April 1998. In the event
that circumstances so warrant, I shall bring to the Council’s attention any
significant developments in the identification process in the coming weeks. In
the meantime, I reiterate my appeal to the Council to support continued
preparations and provide the necessary resources for the full deployment of
MINURSO. I also count on the parties to refrain from any statement or action
that could undermine the significant progress made so far in the identification
process and to cooperate fully with MINURSO in completing this process, so that
the transitional period may start as planned.
Mr. Erik Jensen will have completed his assignment with MINURSO at the end
of this month, after four years as Head of Mission. I wish to take this
opportunity to place on record my appreciation for his unfailing dedication and
invaluable contribution to the peace process under difficult circumstances.

/...

S/1998/142
English
Page 4

I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

-----

Kofi A. ANNAN
