S/PV.8104

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8104th meeting

Thursday, 16 November 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alfano. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-38586 (E)
*1738586*

S/PV.8104

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Siala, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Libya.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings from Mr. Salamé and Ambassador Olof Skoog,
Permanent Representative of Sweden, in his capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
I give the f loor to Mr. Salamé.
Mr. Salamé: I would like to congratulate Italy on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. I am privileged to see Minister Alfano presiding
over this meeting, which is a ref lection of Italy’s strong
commitment to supporting the United Nations effort to
end the crisis in Libya.
It has been two months since the launch of the action
plan for Libya. The action plan is made up of a number
of ingredients which the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) has simultaneously started
working on, including amending the Libyan Political
Agreement, organizing a national conference, preparing
for elections and providing humanitarian assistance.
The Libyan case may appear simple. As a nation
without stark ethnic or sectarian divides, but with a good
educational system and a wealth of natural resources,
many challenges faced elsewhere are not found there.
But what might be mistaken for a homogenous nation is
actually a country divided at the atomic level. Sparked
by the 2011 conf lict and fueled over the subsequent
2/21

16/11/2017

years, the national polity has imploded. In its place,
there has been an explosion of competing individual
agendas, often masquerading as representing regions,
cities or tribes. Reconstituting the Libyan national
polity is a must, for without it effective institutions
cannot form, and rebuilding a State can only be a
Sisyphean endeavour.
I am pleased to report that over the past two
months, the action plan has made significant headway.
The United Nations convened two sessions of the
joint drafting committee, composed of members from
both the House of Representatives and the High State
Council, to agree on a set of amendments to the Libyan
Political Agreement in UNSMIL’s offices in Tunis.
For the first time, with these meetings article 12 of the
Libyan Political Agreement has been implemented. I
welcome the mutual recognition of the two assemblies
and their acknowledgment of the Libyan Political
Agreement as the sole available framework for ending
the crisis in Libya.
Since the meetings, the two bodies have been in
constant contact. Though much progress has been
made, a few remaining points are still to be agreed. I
am quite confident that we are close to a consensus. We
will not tailor a process to pick particular candidates,
and any mechanism to select a new Presidency
Council and Government must be transparent and
fair. I am pleased to report that the Libyan public has
overwhelmingly welcomed this principled approach.
It is expected that politicians are overexcited by the
question of “who”, but for us, what is important is the
question of “how” — by which we mean, there must be
a fair, open and competitive process.
Work is also ongoing on other aspects of the action
plan. UNSMIL is well into preparations for the national
conference — al-Multaqa al-Watani — which is to take
place in February 2018. We are currently exploring the
possibility of hosting it inside Libya, and I welcome
the many Libyan offers of assistance that we have
received. The national conference will give Libyans
from all across the country the opportunity to come
together in one place for the first time, to renew their
common national narrative, and to agree on the tangible
steps required to end the transition. I insist that the
conference be inclusive in order to allow the adoption
of a true national charter and provide guidelines for
the legislation needed to end the transition. Such a
conference is needed now more than ever in the light
17-38586

16/11/2017

The situation in Libya

S/PV. 8104

of renewed threats to national unity issued recently by
parallel authorities.

decision of the Presidency Council to create a national
reparations fund for all victims of the conf lict.

As for elections, we are intensively trying to
establish the proper political and technical conditions
for their occurrence. Elections should not take place
until we are certain that they will not add a third
Parliament or a fourth Government. Libyans deserve
uncontested national institutions.

We cannot ignore the dire humanitarian situation
in Libya. In the past, the country has been a donor to
much of Africa; now, 25 per cent of the population has
humanitarian needs. In particular, Libya’s health sector
is in crisis. Only a fraction of the country’s public
hospitals is functioning. Medicines are in short supply
and modern equipment is often left in disrepair. Foreign
staff, the traditional backbone of Libya’s health-care
system, have f led. Some Libyan practitioners warn
that the country is vulnerable to a potential epidemic
outbreak. We plan to call a high-level coordination
meeting among local and international stakeholders
early in 2018.

To ensure preparedness, the High National
Electoral Commission is working to initiate a voter
registration update before the end of the year, which
will be the first such exercise since 2014. The
international community stands fully ready to support
the process. On its part, the House of Representatives
must assume its duty to pass the requisite electoral
legislation. There must also be a clear constitutional
framework. The Constitutional Drafting Assembly was
elected and mandated to produce a new constitution,
and it has completed its draft. I salute its fortitude for
the pressure it has faced and condemn the threats made
against Assembly members.
The constitutional process must now move forward.
While we work together to implement the various parts
of the action plan, no vacuum is acceptable. The Libyan
Political Agreement of 2015 must therefore stand,
amended or not, as the framework for the conclusion
of the transition.
As part of the action plan, the United Nations is
also working to create a more secure and normal life
for all citizens so that Libyans can go about their daily
lives free from fear and want. We are intensifying our
engagement with armed groups and developing our
strategy for their gradual reintegration into civilian
life. In Tripoli, our experts are working closely with
State security forces to empower them to secure the
capital more effectively. Moreover, we continue our
engagement with military leaders across the country
on the future shape of Libya’s defence institutions. The
sustainable delivery of human security in Libya also
needs an empowered judiciary and professional law
enforcement and security agencies. The United Nations
is working with the Ministry of Justice and other
Libyan actors on initiatives, in particular reforming the
appalling detention system.
The Mission continues to work to facilitate dialogue
between local communities and institutions, such as
the preliminary agreement recently reached between
Tripoli and Zintan. In this context, I commend the

It is outrageous that a country that stands upon such
vast wealth has so much suffering. However, it does, and
so we must help it to tackle the most urgentconcerns.
Our humanitarian strategy seeks to help to address
the acute needs of the most vulnerable groups. I hope
the the Council can consider supporting our programme
for 2018, not to mention the now critical two-yearold Stabilization Facility for Libya, which has brought
tangible benefits to communities in Ubari, Benghazi,
Sabha, Sirte and Kikla. Encouraged by the success, the
Facility is expanding to Bani Walid and the greater Tripoli
area. Owing to the Stabilization Facility, hospitals have
been reopened and children have classrooms.
Yet that is not enough. Much more remains to be
done. On migrants and refugees, despite emergency
assistance, we have seen an increase in the number
of people arbitrarily detained in a system with no
accountability or due process. Migrants continue
to be subjected to extreme violence, forced labour,
extortion, killings and other grave abuses inside
and outside official places of detention. We urge the
Libyan Government to address that challenge directly
and comprehensively in order to find a solution that
respects the rights of migrants and host communities
across the country. The United Nations stands ready
to work with the Libyan authorities and their northern
and southern neighbours to develop innovative and
sustainable solutions.
Beyond the action plan, three very serious
challenges have appeared on our agenda: impunity for
grave crimes, the economy of predation and the erosion
of frozen assets.

17-385863/21

S/PV.8104

The situation in Libya

First, impunity and lawlessness continue to prevail
across the country in the face of increasingly heinous
crimes committed every day. A few recent examples
include the fact that, on 26 October, 36 corpses were
found in Al-Abyar, near Benghazi. The corpses
showed signs of having been tortured before they
were executed. That example is one in a long series
of discoveries of corpses being dumped in and around
Benghazi over the past months. Days later, a fighter jet
bombed a family in the outskirts of the city of Derna.
Fourteen civilians, most of whom were children, and
including some women, were killed in an appalling
incident tantamount to a war crime. On 20 October,
in Tripoli, the bodies of three men were handed over
to families hours after having been taken alive during
clashes in the Al-Ghrarat area, raising concerns of
extrajudicial killings. We are still investigating the
recent events that led to the death of numerous fighters
in the Warshafanah area, in western Libya. There are
suspicions that a number of those fighters may have
been killed in a manner that violates international law.
Events such as these shake popular faith in the
political process. I once again call on the Libyan
authorities to investigate those incidents and to hold
the perpetrators to account. However, I cannot ignore
that such events take place across the country with
alarming regularity and I cannot accept that repeated
calls for justice go unheeded. If Libyans alone cannot
combat impunity for war crimes, it is time for the
international community to consider mechanisms,
including possibly joint tribunals, that can help them
to do so.
The second challenge is that politics in Libya
are strongly shaped by economic predation. In an
environment of protracted insecurity and a lack
of accountability, the shadow economy has been
f lourishing. Billions of dollars are lost every year in
illicit money transfers. The gap between the official
exchange rate, set at 1.4 Libyan dinars to the dollar,
and the black-market exchange rate, at 9 dinars to the
dollar, provides ample opportunities to earn huge profit
margins. Brokers benefit from the selling of letters
of credits and cheques. The traffic of subsidized fuel
to foreign countries robs the country of hundreds of
millions of dollars every month. Other measures include
the issuing of overvalued government contracts. The
result is that Libya’s financial reserves are depleting
rapidly. Libya is a textbook example of the appearance
of instant millionaires and of the extremely rapid
4/21

16/11/2017

pace of middle-class impoverishment. It is the Libyan
people who pay the highest price for that. Two of every
five Libyan youths are now unemployed.
The third challenge, beyond predation, which
robs the country of many dollars, is that hundreds of
millions more dollars are being silently lost due to the
poor management of Libya’s frozen assets. Freezing
the assets is one thing. However, their mismanagement
is another. We should revisit how Libya’s external
wealth and investments are managed so that they are
not silently and gradually lost for future generations.
The relaunch of the political process has created a
new momentum. I am pleased to see many constructive
and peaceful debates on the future of the country. It is
testimony to the commitment of the Libyan people that,
on a daily basis, I receive new ideas and suggestions
about the political process from ordinary citizens
who are keen and free to participate in shaping their
country’s future. Those citizens are not prepared to
sacrifice their rights for security — and they do not
need to do so. In a society based on institutions, neither
rights nor security must be compromised.
I am committed to doing my utmost to assist the
Libyans to resolve their political crisis. The United
Nations is ramping up its presence in Libya and
has already significantly increased its footprint in
the country.
Allow me to end by thanking Council members
for their commitment and support to our efforts to
resolve the crisis in Libya. I would also like to thank
our Quartet partners: the African Union, the League
of Arab States and the European Union. Their unified
efforts are key to the success of the action plan and the
better future that it promises for the people of Libya.
The President: I thank Mr. Salamé for his excellent
and comprehensive briefing and for his work.
I now give the f loor to Ambassador Skoog.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): In accordance with paragraph
24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011) of 26 February 2011,
I have the honour to report to the Security Council
on the work of the Committee established by the
same resolution. The report covers the period from
29 August to 16 November 2017, during which time
the Committee met once in informal consultations and
conducted additional work via the silence procedure.
17-38586

16/11/2017

The situation in Libya

At the outset, I would like to note that, based on
the requests of the Libyan Government, on 20 and
31 October, respectively, the Committee renewed
the listings of the Capricorn and the Lynn S vessels
for a further period of 90 days each. Pursuant to
information received from the Panel of Experts on
Libya, the Committee also updated the most recently
known locations of those vessels on its sanctions list.
As the Council will recall, the vessels were included
on the sanctions list for attempting to illicitly export
gasoil from Libya. During the reporting period, the
Committee also responded to a request for guidance
from Egypt on the scope of the measures contained in
paragraphs 10 (a) and 10 (b) of resolution 2146 (2014),
as they relate to vessels transiting the Suez Canal.
With respect to the arms embargo, the Committee
approved two requests for exemption, submitted under
paragraph 9 (c) of resolution 1970 (2011). Those requests
came from the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) and the Netherlands, respectively.
The Committee also received, and did not object to,
a notification submitted under paragraph 13 (b) of
resolution 1970 (2011) from UNSMIL, and received
two post-delivery notifications from the Mission.
There was no agreement on the Committee on followup action with regard to recommendation 5 contained
in the final report of the Panel of Experts (S/2017/466),
which relates to the arms embargo.
With regard to the assets freeze, the Committee
sought further clarification on an exemption request,
submitted by Switzerland pursuant to paragraph 19 (b)
of resolution 1970 (2011). The Committee also continued
its consideration of an exemption request submitted
by Canada, without reference to any specific
exemption provision.
The Committee is also considering technical
updates to its guidelines for the conduct of its work.
The previous time such an exercise was undertaken
was in October 2011.
Finally, on 10 November, the Committee convened
informal consultations jointly with the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005)
concerning the Sudan and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South
Sudan on the subject of the presence and activities of
Darfuri armed groups in Libya and South Sudan. That
was an initiative of the Chair of the 1591 Committee
following his visit to the Sudan in May 2017. During

S/PV. 8104

the discussion, the Panels of Experts assisting the
three Committees shared their findings on the illicit
cross-border activities of the Darfuri armed groups,
including fighting as mercenaries for different sides
in Libya, engaging in actions that violated the arms
embargo in relation to Libya, and participating in or
facilitating fuel smuggling and migrant trafficking
in Libya. Committee members exchanged views on
the matter.
The President: I thank Ambassador Skoog for
his briefing and for his effective work as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya.
It is now my pleasure to switch hats and deliver
a statement on behalf of Italy. Again, I wish to thank
Special Representative Salamé for his briefing,
Ambassador Skoog for the update on the sanctions
committee and Minister Siala for being at our
meeting today.
In Libya, stability and security across the
Mediterranean are at stake. A political solution is
indispensable. There are no military shortcuts, because
if a party goes for the military option, the crisis could
continue for a long time and Da’esh could re-emerge.
The fight against terrorism must remain a strategic
priority and the control of the Libyan borders is also
very critical. Today, for instance, after the defeat of
Da’esh in Iraq and in Syria, foreign fighters may return
to Libya and, from there, to Europe.
Italy has saved and welcomed thousands of
refugees and migrants by combining solidarity and
security, but, especially at this moment, the focus on
the Libyan borders has become a security imperative.
It is a task that must be shared by the main actors of the
international community.
Only two months have passed since Ghassan
Salamé laid out his action plan. We appreciated the
constructive approach of the discussions in Tunis. The
image of the two delegations sitting at the negotiating
table was a very good signal. We do not underestimate
the difficulties of a complex process. We are aware
that critical issues remain unresolved. Obstacles
and challenges are real. However, we stand firmly
behind Mr. Salamé’s efforts. Rushing to elections
without progress on security and reconciliation may
be counterproductive. Elections have to be kept on the
political horizon, but voting without setting the rules
could fuel tensions. For all these reasons, we call on

17-385865/21

S/PV.8104

The situation in Libya

Libyans to support the political process and to seize
the opportunity offered by Mr. Salamé’s plan. The
Libyans must build upon it with a spirit of openness
and compromise.
Next month is the second anniversary of the
Skhirat Political Agreement. This anniversary is not a
deadline. Instead, it should be used to redouble efforts
for political compromise and to promote reconciliation.
The parties and the international community cannot
allow a dangerous vacuum in the Libyan institutions.
The Libyan Political Agreement remains the only
framework for the transition. While the Libyans are
negotiating, we need institutional interlocutors to
define and implement programmes for the sake of the
Libyan people. In order to improve security, Libya
needs unified security forces under the control of the
Presidency Council.
Libya cannot afford to fall victim to new armed
conf licts. Italy has condemned the brutal bombings
near Derna and the horrific killings discovered near
Benghazi. We join the Libyan people, the Libyan
institutions and the United Nations in calling for an
impartial investigation on the latest tragic episodes.
At the same time, full humanitarian access must be
granted where basic needs and human rights are at
risk. For example, we welcome the news that the World
Health Organization managed to enter Derna to deliver
medical aid.
Italy is very close to the civilian population. We have
provided humanitarian and development assistance to
fragile sectors of society, including women, children,
refugees and migrants. The decline of migration f lows
is encouraging, but it cannot be at the expense of
human rights. Italy has devoted many resources to the
Libyan Coast Guard and local municipalities. We want
to improve the appalling conditions of refugee and
migrant centres. We are now launching new calls for
projects of non-governmental organizations. Already,
we are working together with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
International Organization for Migration.
A crucial component of Libya’s stabilization is the
relaunch of its economy. Libya would also benefit from
a long-term vision — a kind of Libya 2030 Agenda — as
a framework for action.
Allow me a final word on the international
community’s presence in Libya. Italy was the first
western country to reopen its embassy in Tripoli. We
6/21

16/11/2017

welcome the gradual increase of the United Nations
presence and we encourage other countries to consider
their return. Together, we shall rebuild those political,
economic and cultural ties that can help our Libyan
friends on the path to peace, security and stability.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the f loor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I welcome you,
Mr. President, back to New York. It is a pleasure to see
you at this meeting. I think your presence is a sign of
your country’s commitment to the people of Libya at
this difficult time for them.
I also thank Ambassador Skoog for all his
hard work on the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, and
Special Representative Salamé for his thorough and
fascinating briefing. It has certainly been an eventful
two months sent he set out his action plan for Libya
to the General Assembly. Under his guidance there
have been important steps forward to revitalize the
Libyan political process. Yet, in recent weeks, violence
has escalated again. It is clear that Libya now faces a
simple choice — a future of stability and security or a
return to a past of violence and uncertainty.
Let me start with the positives, and there have
been positive developments on the political process.
The dialogue committees from both the House of
Representatives and the High State Council worked
hard to secure agreements on amendments to the
Libyan Political Agreement. This has taken courage
and compromise, but of course it is only a start.
Further commitment from all parties is now needed
to sustain the momentum and move Libya forward. In
doing so, we should not lose sight of what is at stake.
It is a real chance now for Libya to establish a truly
national Government — one that will enjoy the support
of both the House of Representatives and the High
State Council and that will be able to deliver for all its
citizens. Further delay, however, will only prolong the
suffering of ordinary Libyans who I think we can all
agree have suffered for far too long.
We need only look at the recent escalation in
violence to see the consequences of delay. The strikes on
Derna, which killed 16 civilians and the recent apparent
summary executions in Al-Abyar and Warshafanah are
examples. There are many others. These escalating acts
17-38586

16/11/2017

The situation in Libya

of violence make it unambiguously clear that a political
solution is no longer a choice, but a critical necessity
for the Libyan people. We should all be concerned by
these continuing human rights violations and abuses
across the country, so many of them at the expense
of civilians, including migrants. Let us all condemn
extrajudicial killings by all parties from all sides of the
conf lict. The climate of impunity must stop. I reiterate
our support for Libyan and international efforts to
bring to account those responsible for such crimes.
It is clear from the recent escalation in violence
that the existing arms embargo has not cut off the f low
of illicit weapons in and out of Libya. This is not only
undermining the peace and security of Libya and the
region, but it is also playing into the hands of terrorist
groups who continue to threaten global security. I urge
all Member States to make every effort to ensure that
the arms embargo is strictly observed.
Engagement between both sides is needed not only
for the political process, but also for the economy.
A prosperous economy will be realized only if key
economic institutions take the steps necessary to
introduce important reforms. It is also vital that
Libya’s oil resources be used to benefit the country as
a whole. I call on all Member States to make sure that
they continue to do all they can to prevent illegal oil
smuggling and enforce the sanctions regime, which was
designed to protect Libya’s oil wealth for the benefit of
the Libyan people.
Let me conclude by reiterating that the Libyan
Political Agreement remains the only valid framework
for Libya’s transitional period into 2018. The United
Kingdom will continue to support the immediate next
steps to amend the Agreement and agree on a reformed
Presidency Council. We will also support subsequent
efforts to promote national reconciliation, agree on a
longer-term Constitution and prepare for elections. We
believe that the United Nations must remain firmly at
the helm and that the international community must be
united and steadfast in its support because, simply put,
conf lict and instability in Libya are hurting the region
and the world, but most of all, they are hurting Libya’s
citizens. I therefore call on Libya’s leaders from all
sides to show that they are committed to delivering
peace and security for all Libyan people. They must
look beyond immediate personal considerations and
towards the long-term future of their country. They
have a responsibility to make progress and I urge them

S/PV. 8104

to continue to work with Special Representative Salamé
and take the bold steps required to move Libya forward.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank you, Mr. President, and we are
pleased to have you in the Chamber today. We are
grateful to Mr. Ghassan Salamé for his briefing. We
very much hope that he can execute his difficult task of
helping to unify Libya and we sincerely wish him every
success. There is no alternative to that path if the aim
is to end the crisis as soon as possible and put a stop
the threats emanating from Libya, including terrorism.
The country’s complicated situation is still
extremely worrying. The political fragmentation
continues, the authorities disagree with one another
and armed groups, some of them radicalized, control
large areas. Terrorists are hiding out in remote corners
and remain dangerous despite having suffered losses.
Various forms of criminal activity are f lourishing, set
up by the criminal networks that have enmeshed the
entire Mediterranean region, and there is evidence that
the contraband activity may be reaching Europe. The
Libyan economy is clearly in dire straits and the social
sector is in bad shape. The situation of permanent chaos
is having a detrimental effect on the Libyan people,
who are sick of living with the protracted consequences
of the adventurist military undertaking of 2011.
However, there have been some encouraging
moments suggesting there may be hope for a certain
amount of progress in the political process. It appears
that those Libyan leaders with common sense realize
that the crisis can be resolved only by political means.
The obligation to refrain from the use of force is crucial,
as is their demonstrated willingness to act based on
the Libyan Political Agreement in order to implement
the arrangements previously agreed to on establishing
national institutions and law enforcement bodies.
We should not omit to note the Libyans’ intention to
hold elections under United Nations supervision in
accordance with Mr. Salamé’s action plan. We would
like to be sure that in both Tripoli and Tobruk they
have understood that the only way to deal with this
crisis is through joint efforts at the negotiating table.
If not, the country will be plunged into even greater
chaos, fraught with irreversible consequences for the
Libyan regime.
We support the efforts that have been undertaken
under the auspices of the United Nations and welcome
the signs we are seeing of momentum in finding

17-385867/21

S/PV.8104

The situation in Libya

solutions. As a long-time friend of Libya, Russia
will continue to assist it in that regard. We have been
working systematically with the Libyan parties since
the signing of the Agreement in Skhirat, guided by
the imperative of preserving Libya’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity. We encourage the Libyans to
overcome their internal differences and seek mutually
acceptable solutions on all disputed issues. We stress
the importance of promoting a constructive dialogue
and ensuring that it is broadly representative. Much
remains to be done on that front, since various political
forces in Libya are still sitting on the sidelines of the
political process. However, our principled position is
that the Libyan people themselves must decide their
country’s fate and that attempts to impose ready-made
schemes on them would be counterproductive.
There is still significant work to be done in order
to arrive at lasting agreements on the parameters for
national reconciliation, and in that connection it will
still be vital to ensure dynamic international support to
the political process in Libya so as to promote stability
during its transitional period. We should consolidate
that support and ensure that no needless competition
is involved, thereby avoiding the creation of any new
dividing lines. That also applies to the various forms
of practical assistance provided by Libya’s foreign
partners, including the various so-called training
programmes. The efforts of the United Nations will
be successful only if we all play by the same rules.
We appreciate the importance of the steps taken by
international and regional sponsors of the political
process in Libya, including its neighbours, but the
United Nations should continue to take the main
coordinating role.
Our colleague Mr. Olof Skoog, in his capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning
Libya, has briefed us on the subsidiary body’s recent
activities. For our part, we note that the problem of the
uncontrolled circulation of weapons in Libya is still
acute, especially in the absence of a unified army and
other law-enforcement bodies. It affects security both
in the country and the Sahel-Saharan region, which is
why it is crucial to ensure that the arms embargo is
strictly observed. In the circumstances, it would be
premature to start talking about relaxing the current
sanctions regime. As far as illicit exports from Libya
of oil and oil derivatives are concerned, that represents
a serious problem for the national economy. However,
8/21

16/11/2017

Sanctions Committee measures should be strictly
applied based on real, verified data and in line with
the parameters established in the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council, with no free interpretations of
the rules.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Representative Ghassan Salamé for his very
enlightening briefing and welcome his continued
efforts in the quest for a political solution, which,
needless to say, is the only way forward in Libya. I also
thank the Permanent Representative of Sweden for his
helpful briefing on the ongoing work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
For France, success in Libya depends on two
complementary requirements. We must maintain
unity within the Security Council in support of
Mr. Salamé’s efforts in order to strengthen the current
political momentum, while affirming that it is the joint
responsibility of all the Libyan stakeholders to assume
ownership of the political process and take their destiny
into their own hands.
On the political front, we will continue giving
our full support to the Special Representative in
his difficult task. I would like to commend his
exemplary commitment. The consultations between
the two chambers begun in Tunis in September enabled
a consensus to be reached on key points, including
reform of the Presidency Council. The progress made
in Tunis still has to be finalized in the next stages of
the action plan, and our joint support to Mr. Salamé
will be crucial for that. As I have said, for the action
plan to succeed, every Libyan stakeholder has to take
on more responsibility. We encourage dialogue among
all stakeholders within the Mr. Salamé’s framework,
which represents the only valid mediation effort.
We hope that everyone in Libya who has clout in the
national reconciliation process will engage sincerely
and resolutely with the Special Representative in order
to implement the various stages of his action plan — the
review by the High Statae Council and the House of
Representatives of the Skhirat Political Agreement,
the holding of an inclusive national conference,
the preparations for elections and the adoption of
the Constitution.
In that connection, France condemns the
individual strategies that have led some key players
to hold the Libyan Political Agreement review process
17-38586

16/11/2017

The situation in Libya

hostage, as France’s Foreign Minister Le Drian had the
opportunity to remind stakeholders. The international
community must exert all its inf luence on Libyan
officials to engage responsibly and unambiguously in
the political process. In that regard, we reiterate that
the Skhirat Agreement remains the only valid and
legitimate framework for any negotiations aimed at
completing the transition and eventually establishing
a constitutional framework and holding elections. We
must continue to hammer home the fact that there can
be no military solution in Libya. Defeating terrorism
in the country in the long term and responding to the
challenges presented by migration demands a political
solution that allows for national reconciliation and the
restoration of a State in full control of its territory.
We are very concerned about the increasing number
of violent acts and the deteriorating security situation
across Libya, from the recent strikes on Derna to the
discovery of a mass grave in Al-Abyar in the Benghazi
region. Fighting groups identified by the United
Nations as terrorists is a priority, but so is ensuring
the protection of civilians. Only the unification of
all Libyan forces will effectively combat terrorism,
secure borders and dismantle migrant trafficking
networks. That is why building a unified national
security architecture under the civilian authorities is
a top priority.
It will also be essential to address economic and
humanitarian issues as well as those on the security
front, as Mr. Salamé emphasized so eloquently in
his briefing. The situation for Libyans, particularly
the middle class, is deteriorating rapidly and is not
sustainable. Libya’s oil resources must remain under
the exclusive control of the Government of National
Accord and the National Oil Corporation of Tripoli,
the only legitimate authorities, in order to benefit all
Libyans in accordance with Council resolutions. We
must preserve and strengthen the sanctions regimes
within the framework of the arms embargo and the
fight against illicit oil f lows in order to support the
political process. We must also put an end to the
parallel economy that Mr. Salamé called “the economy
of predation”, which is fuelled by political divisions
and conf lict. We reiterate that the Council must be able
to take all necessary measures against any individuals
or entities threatening Libya’s stability. We must also
continue to encourage dialogue between the Presidency
Council and economic and financial institutions.

S/PV. 8104

We are appalled by the deplorable treatment of
migrants travelling through Libya. While the issue
is yet another challenge for the Libyan authorities, it
is also one for the international community. France
therefore calls on the Libyan authorities to make every
effort to ensure that migrants are treated with dignity
and to strengthen officials’ cooperation with the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Organization for Migration. The
violence and abuse that has been inf licted on migrants
in Libya is intolerable. Our top priority must be to
protect human rights and combat organized crime.
Strengthening national institutions and developing
economic alternatives to trafficking are essential
to that.
Lastly, we want to stress that it is important for
Libya to fulfil its obligation to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court in handing over persons
for whom arrest warrants have been issued. That would
represent an important sign of the Libyan parties’
commitment to the fight against impunity, which
is vital if they are to preserve the confidence of the
Libyan people in their own State. The crimes that
persist in Libya must not go unpunished. That is one
of the necessary conditions not only for justice but also
for reconciliation and peace.
In conclusion, on behalf of France, I would like
to stress how urgent it is to continue implementing
Mr. Salamé’s action plan, and all our joint efforts
should be geared to that. It is in the best interests of
Libyans, as well as the international community,
to work for national reconciliation and a political
consensus. Our unity and common commitment
are more necessary than ever for achieving that and
completing the various stages of the action plan. In that
context, it will be important to maintain the resources
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya so that
it can effectively discharge its mandate.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank you, Mr. President,
for your presence here this morning and for presiding
over this important meeting, which is very much
appreciated. I also thank Special Representative
Salamé for his valuable and informative briefing and,
even more importantly, for his commitment and that
of the Secretary-General to actively leading as well
as coordinating the international community’s efforts
in support of peace and security in Libya. I also want
to acknowledge the presence of Mr. Mohamed Siala,
Libya’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, and to thank him

17-385869/21

S/PV.8104

The situation in Libya

for being here today. I look forward to hearing his
statement later on.
We have consistently advocated for the United
Nations to play the leading role in the mediation and
support efforts in Libya. The Secretary-General’s
vision for a reinvigorated and long-term United Nations
approach has provided a blueprint for our concerted
action. Mr. Salamé can count on our continued and full
support for his efforts to implement the action plan for
Libya. We will continue to support efforts to amend
the Libyan Political Agreement, which is the only
viable framework for the transitional period into 2018,
and to agree on a reformed Presidency Council, with a
view to preparing for elections and promoting national
reconciliation. To that end, we welcome the proposed
next steps that Mr. Salamé outlined for us today and,
as others have, we call on all the parties to engage
constructively with him in that process.
We welcome the participation of women in the
drafting committee sessions in Tunis. Going forward,
we emphasize the critical importance of women’s
representation and full and equal participation in each
step of the process, and of ensuring that upcoming
committee gatherings, as well as the national
conference, will provide opportunities for their
concerns to be addressed, including with regard to
security and mobility.
We took careful note of Mr. Salamé’s pertinent
observations on the depletion of funds and the
management, or perhaps mismanagement, of Libyan
assets. Like him, we are deeply concerned about the
widespread abuses and violations of human rights and
violations of international humanitarian law being
perpetrated by all sides, from Derna and Al-Abyar in
the East to Warshefana in the West, almost always with
complete impunity. Summary executions, kidnappings,
torture, rape and other forms of sexual abuse must
stop and be investigated, and those responsible must
be brought to justice. In the absence of accountability,
those crimes also contribute to a dangerous spiral of
revenge and retaliation that threatens the promise of
peace in Libya. I thank Mr. Salamé for stressing those
issues today, and we encourage the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya to step up its human rights
monitoring. I also took careful note of his thoughts
on how justice can be improved, including through
international joint mechanisms.
10/21

16/11/2017

We welcomed the first visit to Libya by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in
October. That was significant, and we share his grave
concerns, which others here today have echoed, about
the suffering of migrants and refugees and about the
conditions in detention facilities. Clearly, further efforts
are needed to turn them into open-transit centres that
meet international standards. Support is also needed
for the important work being carried out in Libya by
the International Organization for Migration and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and to find sustainable alternatives to
detention, especially for vulnerable groups.
In conclusion, as all the speakers before me have
stressed, we must now seize the window of opportunity
that exists to advance the political process in Libya
and lay the foundations for long-term peace and
stability. It is essential that all Libyan stakeholders
engage constructively and for the good of the Libyan
people and that the Council and the wider international
community come together in support of those efforts.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, we commend you, Sir, as Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Italy, for presiding
over this important Security Council meeting at an
important historical juncture for our brother country of
Libya. I would like to thank Mr. Skoog for his statement
in his capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya. I
would also like to thank Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, for his
briefing, and to take this opportunity to express to him
Egypt’s continued support for his intensive work aimed
at achieving a political solution to the Libyan crisis.
I would like to outline some of Egypt’s efforts to
help to unify and strengthen the Libyan National Army
forces and support the work of Mr. Salamé and the
United Nations in general. The Egyptian committee
tasked with the Libyan issue hosted a delegation of
Libyan military personnel in Cairo from 29 October to
2 November, where they conducted detailed discussions
on various ideas and solutions aimed at launching a
new era with a view to unifying the Libyan military
establishment. A group of specialized technical
committees has been formed to discuss unifying the
military establishment and to explore various concerns
related to achieving that goal. The discussions focused
on issues pertaining to the nature of the relationship
17-38586

16/11/2017

The situation in Libya

between the civilian authorities and the military, as
well as how to restructure and reorganize the latter.
The delegation agreed to meet again in Cairo, following
a presentation of the discussions back home in Libya,
so as to continue consultations on the necessary
procedures and to acknowledge the recommendations
that the committees have endorsed for reunifying the
military establishment.
On the political front, Egypt continues to follow
closely the meetings of the High State Council on
amending the Libyan Political Agreement. In that
regard, we would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
our appreciation for Mr. Salamé’s exhaustive efforts
and the importance of continuing to expand the range
of consultations on the amendments. We also consider
it important to ensure that the participants display the
f lexibility needed to enable the implementation of
the Agreement, which we all desire. It will be crucial
to avoid confrontation and embrace harmony and
agreement. We should also note that time is not on
our side, because any delay in arriving at a consensus
on the amendments to the Agreement would expose
the crisis in Libya to further complications. We must
therefore work quickly to finalize those amendments
by the end of the year.
With regard to developments on the ground,
we express our deep concern about the military
manoeuvres and recent clashes in Warshefana, in
western Libya. Egypt urges all parties to exercise selfcontrol and avoid escalation.
In conclusion, we reiterate our full support for the
work of the United Nations and Mr. Salamé, and we
wish the brotherly people of Libya peace, prosperity
and well-being.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): It is a privilege to welcome
you to today’s Council meeting, Mr. President. Bolivia
commends the presence and the work of Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). We want to express our
support and gratitude to him for his major efforts in
achieving the progress that has been made since his
appointment. We also express our appreciation for
the work and briefing of Ambassador Olof Skoog in
his capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
Bolivia also commends His Excellency Mr. Mohamed

S/PV. 8104

Siala, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Libya, for his
presence here today.
We would like to begin by calling on parties to
implement the Libyan Political Agreement and to
maintain a sustained dialogue aimed at accomplishing a
peaceful, orderly and inclusive political transition, led by
and for the Libyan people, that addresses their interests
and will enable them to define their own future within
the framework of Libya’s independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity. We believe that Mr. Salamé’s
proposals — which include establishing a national
conference to bring together all political stakeholders
to work together on constitutional, legislative and
institutional reforms, as well as organizing an electoral
process that will enable the adoption of a Constitution
and promote progress towards presidential and
parliamentary elections — will pave the way to that
goal. In that context, we emphasize and highlight the
importance of the mediation efforts that the various
regional and international stakeholders have been
making to promote the Libyan political process and to
strengthen the related cooperation mechanisms, and
we acknowledge the initiatives undertaken by Egypt,
Algeria and Tunisia to support and promote the process.
We are very concerned, however, about the
continuing sporadic clashes between the parties and
their high humanitarian cost. According to an UNSMIL
report of 1 November, the casualties recorded in the
month of October alone included 15 people injured
and 23 killed by bombing, crossfire, or the presence
of explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive
devices. Sadly, we must add those fatalities to the more
than 30,000 victims of the conf lict since 2011.
Moreover, the alarming number of migrants and
refugees who have lost their lives in the Mediterranean
Sea — which in 2017 reportedly exceeded 5,000,
according to a 13 November report from the
International Organization for Migration — is only
one aspect of the critical situation that these people
are enduring on the Mediterranean coast. According
to a report published by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, more than
13,000 migrants and refugees have been rescued in
the Mediterranean Sea by the Libyan Coast Guard,
an accomplishment that we appreciate and would like
to highlight. We are nevertheless deeply troubled by
the reports of the indefinite detention of migrants,
reportedly amounting to more than 20,000 people
in custody. The conditions to which they have been

17-3858611/21

S/PV.8104

The situation in Libya

subjected while in custody reportedly include torture,
sexual violence and harassment, including the denial of
medical help. In that regard, we call on all the parties
to work to prevent and end human rights violations
and abuse of migrants in centres under their control.
We remind them that they must fulfil their obligations
under international humanitarian law and guarantee
the rights of these individuals. In that regard, we call
for the corresponding investigations to begin in order
to identify those responsible for these violations and
ensure that they are duly investigated and prosecuted.
We remind the actors and parties involved in the
conf lict that they are obligated to uphold and comply
with their obligations in the framework of international
humanitarian, avoid causing greater suffering to the
civilian population and refrain from violating their
fundamental rights.
Furthermore, we wish to express our support
for the progress reported today by the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya in accordance with its mandate
and on follow-up tasks regarding the implementation of
resolution 2362 (2017).
Finally, it is important to reiterate that the impact
that the Libyan conf lict has had on the security
situation in the region is a direct consequence of the
interventionist practices and regime change policies
that have had an effect extending far beyond the Sahel
region, with terrible consequences that we are still
witnessing today.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to begin by
welcoming the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, and to thank him and
Ambassador Skoog for their informative briefings.
I would also warmly welcome His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Siala to the Council.
Japan reiterates its support for the ongoing process
among the Libyan people, in accordance with the
action plan presented by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in September. We support the
Special Representative’s efforts to advance the process.
The window of opportunity must be seized now. We
are all aware that the negotiations will not be easy and
that they will occasionally experience some bumps
along the road. The important thing is to maintain the
momentum of the dialogue in order to complete the
transition, and that should be driven by the will of the
Libyan people.
12/21

16/11/2017

The Council should support the process by
providing the necessary assistance. In particular,
parties that have inf luence over relevant actors should
contribute to containing any action that may negatively
impact the process. Japan’s Foreign Minister Kono
directly conveyed Japan’s readiness to support the
Libyan-owned process to Foreign Minister Siala when
they met in September.
Ref lecting this commitment, we are now
considering relocating our embassy to Tunis so that
we can more closely follow the situation on the ground
and strengthen cooperation with relevant countries and
organizations. At the same time, in order for the yearlong process to maintain its momentum and eventually
bear fruit, the Council should not only be supporting
dialogues among inf luential political figures, but must
also consider how to strengthen the confidence and
support of the Libyan people in the process. In order
to build the confidence of the people in the ongoing
political process, the provision of basic public services
and enhancement of the capacity of the Government of
National Accord and local Governments are essential.
Assistance to internally displaced persons is also
much needed.
We appreciate the action plan, as well as the
presidential statement that followed (S/PRST/2417/19),
recognizing the need to address these issues in parallel
with the political process. Japan has been actively
supporting local peacebuilding efforts in Libya, such
as capacity- and institution-building, economic and
social development and local reconciliation. These
activities aim to help consolidate peace and stability
from the local level. We have prioritized contributions
to the Stabilization Facility for Libya, which is led
by the Government of National Accord, and we are
considering further peacebuilding assistance.
I would like to conclude by reiterating Japan’s
strong commitment to helping the Libyans overcome
their challenges. The Libyan Political Agreement
remains the only viable framework for Libya’s
transitional period, and we will continue to work in
close coordination with the international community
for its success.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal is pleased to see you,
Mr. President, presiding over this important briefing on
the situation in Libya — a situation that your country
is right to define as a top priority during its presidency
17-38586

16/11/2017

The situation in Libya

of the Council. I also welcome the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Mohamed Siala, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Libya, whose statement we look forward
to hearing.
I should like to turn to my Ambassador Skoog,
on my left, and congratulate him on the outstanding
work that he and his country are doing at the helm of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya.
The current situation in Libya is of particular
concern to us. The glimmer of hope kindled by the
recent efforts of Mr. Salamé and countries such as
France and Egypt has been threatened by the recent
resurgence of violence. We are also concerned because
its effects on the civilian population and throughout
Africa have been catastrophic. For us Africans, the
protraction and aggravation of the Libyan conf lict
continues to have an especially devastating effect on
the entire continent, but especially the Sahelo-Saharan
region. Weapons continue to circulate, terrorist groups
are proliferating and human trafficking is f lourishing,
with its scourge of grave violations of international
humanitarian law.

S/PV. 8104

The challenges related to the current situation in
Libya and its neighbouring countries remind us of the
need to work towards the unification and reconstruction
of the institutions in Libya, including the military and
security forces, in accordance with the Libyan Political
Agreement. Therefore, the implementation of the action
plan proposed by Mr. Salamé deserves to be supported,
while also taking advantage of the better coordination
of numerous initiatives for the resumption of internal
dialogue and Libya’s geopolitical situation. That is
why the work of UNSMIL, which has been led in an
outstanding manner by Mr. Salamé on the ground, is
essential and deserves our full support.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes to New York Mr. Angelino Alfano, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Italy, to preside over this meeting.
China also welcomes Foreign Minister Siala of Libya.
China thanks the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Libya, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, and
Ambassador Olof Skoog for their respective briefings.

The evolution of the situation in Libya will depend
partly on the successful implementation of several
important initiatives under way, such as the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, the promising
Group of Five for the Sahel process and the Alliance
for the Sahel, promoted by France and Germany.

The Libyan Political Agreement, concluded in
December 2015, represents a major achievement of the
Libyan people in their endeavour to restore peace and
stability. Over the past two years, the people of Libya
have made tireless efforts to implement the Libyan
Political Agreement, and have achieved a certain degree
of progress. In the meantime, Libya is facing multiple
major challenges, ranging from significant political
divergence, a fragile security situation, rampant
terrorism and the problem of refugees and migrants.

My delegation wishes to underscore that there are
no military solutions to the Libyan crisis. We therefore
encourage all Libyan parties to consider only the
national interests of their country and to make every
effort to overcome political differences and work
together for the establishment of peace and security
in order to preserve the national sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of their great
African country.

China is following the situation and developments
in Libya with close attention, and supports any and all
attempts aimed at advancing the political process and
promoting the united efforts of Libyan parties to fight
terrorism. The Libyan parties should work together
and adopt positive measures to advance the political
process. The international community should reach a
further common understanding on the matter and offer
effective assistance to the Libyan peace process.

Senegal also urges Libyans to exercise restraint,
put an end to violence and confrontations, and work in a
spirit of compromise on the basis of the Libyan Political
Agreement. Although of course certain amendments
need to be introduced — as Mr. Salamé mentioned
earlier — the Agreement is the only viable framework
accepted by the majority of Libyan actors in order to
complete the political transition in the country through
an inclusive process led by the Libyans themselves.

First, the search for a political solution must
continue. The international community should respect
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Libya and continue to promote a political process
that is led and owned by the Libyans themselves. The
Libyan parties should demonstrate goodwill, settle
their differences through inclusive political dialogue
and, on the basis of the Libyan Political Agreement,
find a solution that accommodates the concerns of

17-3858613/21

S/PV.8104

The situation in Libya

all parties in order to restore national authority and
achieve national reconciliation, peace, stability and the
development of the country.
Secondly, maximum efforts must be made to secure
security in Libya and to create enabling conditions for
an inclusive and sustainable political dialogue. China
supports the efforts of Libya to safeguard its national
security and stability, and hopes that the Libyan
parties will strengthen their dialogue, set aside their
differences, and continue to cooperate in areas of
common interest to the Libyan people, such as fighting
terrorism and accelerating economic development.
Thirdly, the United Nations should remain the
main channel for mediation. Recently, the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), under
the leadership of Mr. Salamé, has been working on
the United Nations action plan to promote the political
process in Libya. UNSMIL has extensively engaged
with Libyan parties, facilitated dialogue between the
House of Representatives and the High State Council,
and conducted the meaningful exploration of key issues,
such as amendments to the Libyan Political Agreement.
China supports Mr. Salamé in steadily carrying
out his work and appreciates the efforts of the
neighbouring States, the League of Arab States and the
African Union to facilitate dialogue among Libyans.
We hope that the parties concerned will continue to
advocate peace and promote dialogue and we urge
all parties to demonstrate f lexibility and actively
participate in national reconciliation. China is ready
to work consistently with the international community
and make its own contribution to the early restoration
of security, stability and prosperity in Libya.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, my
delegation would like to welcome and acknowledge your
presence, Sir, in presiding over today’s meeting, as well
as the participation of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Libya, Mr. Mohamed Siala. We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya,
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, and Ambassador Olof Skoog for
their committed work and comprehensive updates.
Kazakhstan welcomes the adoption of the new
United Nations action plan aimed at resolving the
protracted crisis in Libya, which was presented in
September on the margins of the high-level meeting
of the General Assembly at its seventy-second
session. We fully support the mediation efforts of
the international community, including those of the
14/21

16/11/2017

neighbouring countries and the Middle East Quartet,
to advance political reconciliation in Libya. Those
measures of external support must be coordinated
in a comprehensive and strategic manner to resolve
the situation in Libya under the auspices of the
United Nations.
In that context, we highly commend the committed
efforts of Special Representative Salamé to seek a
political settlement. The rounds of talks that were
envisaged by the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya and the joint drafting committee are critical, and
we therefore urge the Libyan political forces to cooperate
constructively with Special Representative Salamé.
Post-conf lict reconstruction, following the
settlement of the crisis in Libya through political and
diplomatic means and an inclusive inter-Libyan dialogue,
will be most critical. In that sense, we positively assess
the steps taken by the Special Representative to ensure
the return of the United Nations Mission to Libya. That
will mobilize more active work and engagement on the
ground, with various players from Libyan society.
Once again, we emphasize that the solution to
the conf lict must be primarily and solely peaceful;
a political agreement is the only viable option for
reconciliation. At the same time, the initiative for
and ownership of political processes and solutions
must come from the Libyans themselves, who must
determine their own future. But this political process
will take hold only if there are measures to improve the
socioeconomic conditions that will positively impact
the political process and stability in the country. Those
measures must be accompanied by steps to unite all
Libyan parties under the legitimate and effectively
functioning institutions of power. Their absence would
create a vacuum and a fertile environment for the
activities of extremists and terrorist groups.
We are extremely concerned at the high level of
impunity and the widespread violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law being perpetrated
by the different parties to the conf lict. As we heard
last week from the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (see S/PV.8091), the security situation
in Libya remains a matter of great concern and a threat
to international peace and security.
We are also concerned about the dire situation
of migrants. We share the concerns of the Special
Representative on the prevalence of irregular
migration and the revenue it generates for smuggler
17-38586

16/11/2017

The situation in Libya

networks. Such activities have proven to be a direct
threat to stability in several parts of Libya. Hundreds
of thousands of migrants and refugees often suffer
abuse and detention in inhumane conditions. It is clear
that we need to bring a halt to that by clamping down
on smugglers and having a concerted migration policy.
At tomorrow’s debate, we will discuss the root causes
of migration f lows that adversely affect the security
situation in the Mediterranean.
We believe that an early settlement of the situation
in Libya will reduce the level of migration f lows across
the country. Of particular importance is the task of
providing humanitarian assistance to the population in
dire need, whose grave plight must not be overlooked in
our pursuit of a dialogue between the various political
forces in the country. In that vein, it is necessary to
emphasize the need to ensure respect for human rights
and prevent attempts of to illegally exploit migrants.
We therefore welcome the desire of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
expand its activities in Libya to ensure the protection
of the rights of refugees.
Ms. Sison (United States of America):
Mr. President, your presence and that of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Libya, Mr. Mohamed Siala,
underscore the importance of this briefing. We also
thank Special Representative Salamé and Ambassador
Skoog for their briefings.
The United States joins the many others around
this table in offering our full support for Special
Representative Salamé’s many efforts. The United
States commends all of his work to reinvigorate the
political process in Libya and to help the Libyan people
achieve political reconciliation. It should be clear from
this meeting today that he has the strong backing of
the Security Council. There is a real opportunity here
for Libya to turn the page on years of strife. Libya’s
leaders can put the country on the road to greater
stability and economic prosperity by fully engaging
with the United Nations political process. Now is the
time for all political actors to show leadership and to
take decisive steps towards peace.
We as members of the Council must also use all
of our collective inf luence to support Libyans on
that path. Of course, the road to peace is not always
direct, and any mediation process will face setbacks.
We are confident that those obstacles can be overcome
through the international community’s unified support

S/PV. 8104

to Special Representative Salamé and the United
Nations-facilitated political process. All of us must
speak in one voice in emphasizing the central role of
the United Nations. We look forward to maintaining
close cooperation with Special Representative Salamé
as he continues to implement the action plan that the
Council unanimously endorsed.
We also recognize the leadership of Prime
Minister Faiez Serraj and the Government of National
Accord in advancing political reconciliation in Libya.
As the United Nations action plan rightly envisions,
the ultimate goal must be to help Libyans prepare for
elections that will be broadly accepted. Elections should
take place when the political groundwork is in place and
when security conditions allow. Political dialogue is
the only way forward in Libya. Any attempt to impose
a military solution will only further destabilize Libya,
play into the hands of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham and other terrorist groups, and undermine efforts
to address the challenge of migration.
The Libyan people have suffered for far too
long. Libyans have made clear that they are tired of
insecurity and of spoilers undermining political
transitions. Spoilers in Libya must not block or delay
reconciliation any longer. That includes any attempt
to undermine the integrity of the Libyan Government
and Libya’s core economic institutions. Some parties
have asserted that the Libyan Political Agreement
expires on the two-year anniversary of its signing
on 17 December. The international community must
reject those claims definitively. They will benefit no
one but political spoilers who think that, by dragging
their feet and running down the clock, they can bypass
the United Nations-facilitated political process. The
Libyan Political Agreement remains the only valid
framework throughout Libya’s transitional period. We
all want a swift political resolution to the conf lict, but
imposing false deadlines will backfire.
Special Representative Salamé announced the
United Nations action plan in September. We must
ensure that he has the time and support necessary
to implement it. Any political and security vacuum
will only undermine the reconciliation process and
further destabilize Libya. We are concerned about
recent increases in fighting in certain parts of Libya.
The United States is particularly concerned about the
recent air strike in Derna, which is a city in dire need of
immediate and unfettered humanitarian access. We also
join the Government of National Accord in condemning

17-3858615/21

S/PV.8104

The situation in Libya

the uncovering of a mass grave in Al-Abyar, where
36 people were found shot to death. Those who are
responsible for violations of international humanitarian
law and violations and abuses of international human
rights law must be held accountable. The United States
is also concerned about the tense security situation in
western Libya, including in Zawiyah and Warshafanah.
Any destabilizing military activity could escalate
quickly into significant armed civil conf lict.
Finally, turning to sanctions, we want to focus
on the challenge of illegal smuggling of crude oil
and petroleum products from Libya. The Council, at
the request of the Government of National Accord,
has repeatedly condemned those illicit transactions.
Earlier this year, the Council designated two vessels,
the Capricorn and the Lynn S, for their involvement
in illegal fuel smuggling. Those vessels remain
sanctioned. Therefore, we remind all Member States,
particularly those in the Mediterranean and the Middle
East, that those vessels must not be permitted to enter
their ports. We also reiterate that the f lag States of
those vessels must fulfil their obligation to direct the
ships not to load, transport or discharge their cargo.
Looking ahead, the United States believes
that now is a crucial opportunity for Libyans to
make real progress towards political reconciliation.
Special Representative Salamé and the international
community are aligned behind that objective. Now is
the moment for Libya’s leaders to engage in good faith
with the Special Representative. The United States will
work to mobilize the international community against
anyone who disrupts the United Nations process, but we
hope that Libyans will be able to put their differences
aside for the sake of their country’s future. It is long
past time for Libya to rebuild its institutions and its
economy. The United States urges all Libyans in the
east, west and south to come together in a shared effort
to ensure Libya’s security and prosperity.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank the Minister
Siala for his presence. I want to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Salamé for
his important briefing today and for all his efforts
to restore peace in Libya. My special appreciation
also goes to Ambassador Skoog for his effective
Chairmanship of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya. We look
forward to the important statement to be delivered by
Mr. Siala, Minister of Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Libya.
16/21

16/11/2017

I would like to highlight the following points.
First, Ukraine continues to believe that the
conf lict in Libya has no military solution. It can be
resolved only through a genuine dialogue, in which all
stakeholders must participate in good faith and without
preconditions. In that regard, we welcome the recent
engagement of Special Representative Salamé with the
parties to advance the implementation of the United
Nations action plan for the resumption of an inclusive
Libyan-owned political process, which was endorsed by
the Council in presidential statement S/PRST/2017/19,
on 10 October. In particular, I would like to refer to
several meetings of a joint drafting committee in Tunis
and to other meetings in the region that sought to
discuss amendments to the Libyan Political Agreement,
which, in our view, remains the only viable framework
for ending the current crisis. In that regard, we call
on all parties involved to continue those consultations
until all outstanding issues are resolved. Any attempt
to undermine the objectives of the transition period in
Libya are unacceptable and should be rejected.
Secondly, my delegation is extremely concerned by
the ongoing insecurity in Libya. The warring parties
must refrain from any actions that may further aggravate
the security situation and disrupt the unification of
the Libyan army and national security forces under a
unified and civilian Government. Ukraine also takes
very seriously the threat of terrorism in Libya. It has
not only an internal dimension, but a broader regional
impact. In that regard, Ukraine supports the efforts of
the Government of National Accord to counter terrorist
threats and to defeat the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and other extremist groups in Libya.
The ISIL attack in Misrata on 4 October against a
courthouse and the establishment by that organization
of additional checkpoints near Sirte are a clear signal
that the continuing fragmentation of Libyan society,
coupled with internal strife and armed confrontations,
is the single biggest obstacle to conducting a targeted,
consistent and persistent anti-ISIL campaign in that
country. Thus, it is now more necessary than ever that
the international community continue its support to the
Government of National Accord in its efforts to unite
the country and restore law and order.
Thirdly, we are no less concerned over the
deteriorating human rights situation in Libya.
Numerous reports alert us to ongoing human rights
abuses and violations, such as unlawful killings,
17-38586

16/11/2017

The situation in Libya

kidnappings, forced disappearances and torture.
Recent discoveries of bodies bearing signs of having
been shot and tortured are extremely troubling. The
other development that Ukraine is worried about is
abuses against migrants and refugees in official and
unofficial detention centres in Libya, which include
arbitrary detentions, cases of torture, rape and other
ill-treatment. In our view, the international community
must develop a comprehensive strategy on how to better
protect those vulnerable groups. I am sure that our
discussion tomorrow will contribute to that endeavour.
Finally, I would like to reiterate once again Ukraine’s
support for the efforts of Special Representative
Salamé and to commend all the men and women of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, who
continue to carry out their duties in extremely difficult
and dangerous conditions.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for joining us here
in the Council today and for presiding over our work.
We also wish to thank Mr. Mohamed Siala, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Libya; Mr. Ghassan Salamé,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL); and Ambassador Olof Skoog, Permanent
Representative of Sweden, in his capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya, for their detailed briefings.
The stabilization and resolution of the protracted
conf lict in Libya remains a priority for the Security
Council. Uruguay calls on the all parties in the Libyan
conf lict to be calm and moderate, while we reiterate
that the only solution to the conf lict is through political
means and negotiation among the parties. The way out
will be through all Libyans, the product of inclusive
negotiations that enable a scheduled political process
leading to the holding of elections while protecting the
country from any authoritarianism.
In that sense, we support the action plan presented
by Secretary-General António Guterres and his Special
Representative to revive the political process in Libya
under the facilitation and leadership of the United
Nations. The Security Council should continue giving
its support to Prime Minister Serraj and the Presidency
Council of the Government of National Accord to
enable them to fulfil the Libyan Political Agreement.
Uruguay has always stated that it welcomes any
unilateral, regional or multilateral initiative that

S/PV. 8104

proposes solutions to this and any other conf lict. In
that connection, we commend the meeting convened by
France in July that led to an agreement on the cessation
of hostilities and on the holding of elections in 2018.
We hope that what was agreed on at that occasion will
be carried out. We also welcome the meetings of the
joint drafting committee of members of the House
of Representatives and the High State Council at the
request of the Special Representative. Those are all
transcendental measure to promote trust and progress
towards national reconciliation, which must be followed
by specific actions on the ground.
We encourage Mr. Salamé to work closely with
the Libyan authorities to agree on the amendments
required in the Libyan Political Agreement so that the
Agreement can be used as a framework to bring peace
and unity to the country, to extend the control of the
legitimate Libyan Government to the whole territory,
and to urgently meet the multiple challenges it faces.
That is the only way the Presidency Council of the
Government of National Accord will be able to extend
its authority, curb the new wave of violence, preserve its
legitimacy and provide security and essential services
to the Libyan people.
I would like to highlight here the fight against
terrorism, which still has centres of power in Libya,
as well as the need to address the serious humanitarian
crisis and to cooperate with the European authorities to
tackle trafficking in persons and arms smuggling. The
violence that continues over vast swathes of the Libyan
territory — particularly in Derna, which was subjected
to siege and air strikes costing the lives of dozens of
civilians — can only lead to escalating the conf lict
and undermining efforts under way to reactivate the
Libyan Political Agreement.
The reigning chaos in recent years in Libya has
fomented actions of extremists and armed militias.
who have taken advantage of the institutional and
security vacuum to carry out their criminal and
terrorist activities that affect not only Libya, but
also its neighbours in the region and beyond. From a
geopolitical standpoint, achieving peace and stability
in Libya is crucial for the Maghreb and other regions
in the continent.
We remain concerned about the desperate situation
facing migrants who use Libya as a country of transit
on the way to Europe. Hundreds of thousands of
sub-Saharan migrants are in Libya as we speak, hoping

17-3858617/21

S/PV.8104

The situation in Libya

for a chance to attempt to cross the Mediterranean.
They are subject to abuse and very serious violations
of their human rights. In the last few hours, there
have been reports once again on the sale of slaves
in Libya. That is a reprehensible fact that must be
unanimously condemned.
We reiterate that in seeking solutions to this problem,
we should prioritize the human rights of migrants and
refugees, avoiding treating them as criminals. Only the
political and institutional stabilization of Libya will
allow for any significant reduction in that phenomenon.
To conclude, we confirm our support for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
for the role of UNSMIL. We encourage him to continue
working closely with Prime Minister Serraj and the
Presidency Council of the Government of National
Accord and with the other parties in Libya in order to
agree upon an appropriate framework to address the
country’s current situation, pave the way for a revival
of the political process and reduce violence. The new
Libyan Political Agreement, together with the United
Nations action plan, will have to be a central part of
the solution to the urgent and huge challenges facing
Libya. They include fighting terrorism and addressing
the very serious humanitarian, economic and security
crises affecting millions of persons.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We are pleased to see
you, Mr. President, presiding over this meeting of
the Council in a demonstration of the importance
you attach to the situation in Libya. Let me take this
opportunity to thank you for the very humane way
your country has been handling the migrant issue,
for which we are very appreciative. We also welcome
the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Libya with us this morning. We appreciate Mr. Salmé,
Special Representative of the Secretary General, for his
briefing and diplomatic efforts in the ongoing search
for peace and stability in Libya. The analysis and the
updates we received from the Special Representative
was truly of high quality. We have drawn confidence
from his comprehensive and objective analysis.
As the representative of France said, the time has
come for this Council to speak with one voice on Libya.
As we know, that applies to other situations as well. We
also thank Ambassador Skoog for his briefing and his
efforts as the Chair of the Libya Sanctions Committee.
We know that whatever tasks Ambassador Skoog is
entrusted with, he discharges them with a great sense of
18/21

16/11/2017

responsibility. Given the many human rights violations,
much is expected from the Committee he chairs, and
we are confident that he will make the Committee as
effective as possible.
The deteriorating political, security and
humanitarian situation in Libya, including the recent
attacks targeting civilians and civilian institutions,
continues to be of serious concern. We take this
opportunity to express our solidarity and sympathy
with the people and Government of Libya. We reiterate
our conviction that the multifaceted crisis in Libya,
including illegal migration and refugees, as well as
illegal armed groups, can be addressed sustainably only
through a comprehensive political solution facilitated
by the United Nations.
In that regard, the United Nations action plan,
with its sequential components, provides another
opportunity to end the current political impasse and to
meet the legitimate demands of all Libyans. We welcome
the continued efforts of the Special Representative to
engage all Libyans on the basis of the United Nations
action plan, including by bringing together the main
political actors, so as to amend the Libyan Political
Agreement, which remains the only viable framework
to resolve the Libyan crisis.
We particularly welcome the progress made in
Tunis at the meeting of the Libyan stakeholders under
the auspices of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya. We believe that that process is absolutely critical
to helping to overcome the current political impasse
and to pave the way for durable peace, stabililty
and reconciliation in Libya through an all-inclusive
dialogue. However, we understand the challenge in
addressing the points of divergence and, hence, the need
for the meaningful and constructive engagement of all
Libyans with the greatest sense of urgency and national
vision in order to reach a common understanding and
to move the process forward.
Clearly, two issues, among others, would continue
to be critical. As Special Representative Salamé has
stressed, there should be no vacuum; hence, the need
to uphold the Libyan Political Agreement. The other
issue relates to the need to make the process genuinely
Libyan-owned. Of course, there is no military solution
to the Libyan problem.
The international community, particularly the
Council, should send a strong and united message to
pressure all parties to stop the violence and to engage in
17-38586

16/11/2017

The situation in Libya

an inclusive and sustained political dialogue. The role
of the neighbouring countries of Libya in the pursuit
of peace, security and reconciliation is, indeed, critical
within the framework of a Libyan-owned process. The
African Union also has an important role to play in the
process. Ultimately, however, the solution to the crisis
in Libya lies primarily in the hands of the Libyans
themselves and the role of the international community
is to provide effective support to the Libyan efforts.
We therefore hope that all Libyans will constructively
engage in the inclusive political process, as set out in
the action plan, and demonstrate a spirit of compromise
in order to achieve concrete results that could facilitate
the full implementation of the plan.
The President: I give the f loor to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Libya.
Mr. Siala (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, it gives me great pleasure to congratulate you,
Mr. President, my dear friend Angelino Alfano, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Italy, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
I would also like to thank Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya, for
his valuable briefing. My thanks also go to Mr. Skoog,
Permanent Representative of Sweden, for his briefing,
in which he touched on the most recent developments
with regard to the sanctions on Libya in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
I would like to reaffirm that the Government of
National Accord is eager to support all United Nations
efforts to assist the Libyan parties in reaching full
agreement on various contentious issues in order to put
an end to the crisis in Libya, stop the bloodshed and
alleviate the suffering of the Libyan people.
As the Council knows, the suffering of the Libyan
people increases daily on various fronts in the light of
the deteriorating security situation and the political
divide in the country. Despite the serious attempts
of some national parties to resolve the situation and
to overcome the ongoing impasse, differing political
interests among the actors have led to the continuing
instability and prevent the Government of National
Accord from discharging its duties, in particular those
relating to the provision of basic services to citizens.
In that regard, we hope that international and regional
efforts will continue until a political consensus among

S/PV. 8104

all Libyan parties is reached in order to achieve peace
and stability in the country.
It would be remiss of me not to highly commend the
concerted efforts of Mr. Salamé in recently organizing
the round of talks in the sisterly country of Tunisia,
where he brought together representatives of the House
of Representatives and the High State Council in
order to agree on a consensus text and to amend the
Libyan Political Agreement, signed on 15 December
2015. In that regard, we hope that the efforts of the
Special Representative will continue to bring an end
to that divide and to unite all Libyans, and that rapid
solutions are achieved in order to overcome the current
obstacles, in the light of the current standstill, to reach
an understanding between the House of Representatives
and the High State Council, and to organize and hold
elections and the referendum on the Constitution as
soon as possible next year. We, in turn, have already
taken some steps to support the High National Electoral
Commission so as to hold elections in the near future.
Despite the great challenges in Libya, the
Government of National Accord has spared no effort
in addressing all those issues in a balanced and
transparent way by involving all Libyan actors, both
political and military, so as to bridge the gap and
to unite Libya on the basis of its national interests.
That is the national duty for which the Government
of National Accord was established — namely, to
achieve reconciliation, build civilian and democratic
State institutions, and provide services to the Libyan
people, who are exhausted by conf lict and the political
divide. We underscore the fact that there is no military
solution to the crisis in Libya. There is a need to unite
the military and security institutions so that they come
under the civilian executive authority.
In that regard, we welcome the recent talks in
Cairo, hosted by Eygpt, which led to a meeting between
the military leaders of the Government of National
Accord and their counterparts in the eastern part of the
country. We hope that that will give rise to an effective
proposal on distancing the military institutions from
the political conf lict so that we can focus on combating
terrorism and on protecting the State.
The Government of National Accord condemns
the recent events targeting representatives of the
Government of National Accord and the recent decisions
of parallel bodies, such as the detention and isolation of
mayors of certain provinces and other bodies that are

17-3858619/21

S/PV.8104

The situation in Libya

in contact with the Government of National Accord,
leading to the issue of an arrest warrant for the Mayor
of Tobruk. We strongly condemn such acts, which
counteract our efforts to provide services to all Libyan
cities and to shield citizens from the political conf lict.
Such acts also violate the resolutions of the Security
Council, the League of Arab States, the African Union,
the European Union and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, which call for an end to cooperation with
those parallel bodies.
The Government of National Accord also condemns
violence among Libyans and the policy of settling
accounts by force and detaining people on the basis of
identity, including abductions, torture, extrajudicial
killings and other acts that are tantamount to war
crimes and crimes against humanity. The perpetrators
must be handed over to the legitimate authorities so
that they can be held accountable.
The Government of National Accord condemns the
use of violence against any unarmed civilian or any
step to harm civilians in any Libyan city.
In that vein, we recall the bombing of civilians
in Wadi Nina on 20 September and the criminal air
strikes on Derna on 30 October, which killed many
innocent people, most of them women and children. We
categorically reject such criminal acts. We contacted
the Security Council at that time through the Permanent
Mission of Libya to the United Nations, expressing our
condemnation and rejection of those criminal acts. We
asked the Council for assistance to investigate this
terrorist act, determine the circumstances surrounding
it and identify the perpetrators. Once again, we call
on the Security Council to convene a special meeting
to consider that incident and take appropriate action.
We also call on the Council and the international
community to assist in lifting the two-year siege
imposed on Derna and open humanitarian corridors in
order to ensure access to humanitarian aid for civilians.
Due to the deteriorating security situation, my
country is suffering from many challenges that have
undermined the capacities of the Libyan people,
including the smuggling of oil and its derivatives by
criminal armed gangs involved in numerous illicit
activities, such as human trafficking. Recently, my
Government requested that the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya
renew the listing of two vessels for attempting to
illicitly export Libyan oil derivatives.
20/21

16/11/2017

In that regard, we hope that the f lag countries will
provide assistance to determine the circumstances
of that incident, prevent such illicit acts and return
the smuggled shipments to the legitimate Libyan
authorities. We also note that lifting the ban on the
listed vessels, despite their failure to comply with the
law or return the smuggled shipments to the legitimate
Libyan authorities, would certainly encourage the
smugglers to pursue the same course. We also reaffirm
the right of the Libyan national judiciary to investigate,
indict and prosecute the perpetrators of those acts and
to claim reparations from the countries concerned
through international justice.
Turning to the frozen Libyan assets — an issue
that we have addressed before the Council more than
once — everyone is already aware of the concerns of
the Government of National Accord. From the outset,
resolution 1970 (2011) has ref lected the international
community’s desire to protect the wealth of the Libyan
people. It was meant not to punish Libya, but to
preserve Libyan assets from being squandered during
the revolution and transitional period after the fall of
the previous regime. Thus, it was intended to last only
for a specific period of time that and did not foresee
that the protracted Libyan crisis would endure for more
than six years. The frozen assets regime therefore has
a negative impact on the interests of the Libyan people
and future generations.
I note that our Permanent Mission to the United
Nations has been communicating with the Security
Council since March 2016 and repeated its request in June
2017, in two Security Council documents — S/2016/275
and S/2017/543 — in addition to the letter by His
Excellency the President of the Presidential Council of
the Government of National Accord, Mr. Faiez Serraj,
addressed to the President of the Security Council and
contained in document S/2017/629, on the regrettable
state of the frozen Libyan assets under the current
sanctions regime. The Libyan State is not asking for
the freeze on the assets to be lifted, but calling for a
particular formula that would assist it in managing
its wealth and investments, while frozen, so that they
are not gradually lost, as is the case year after year
in significant amounts. We therefore call upon the
Security Council once again to address that issue and
stop such losses as soon as possible so as to thereby
preserve the assets and wealth of the Libyan people.
To conclude, we note the high-level meeting held
by the Secretary-General on 20 September, at which the
17-38586

16/11/2017

The situation in Libya

vital role of the United Nations in resolving the Libyan
crisis was stressed. In that regard, the Government
of National Accord renews its commitment to and
cooperation with the United Nations through the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, in order to put an end to the
political division and fragmentation in Libya and open
new horizons that will focus on finding a decisive

S/PV. 8104

solution to address the suffering of the Libyan people
owing to the deteriorating services, or lack thereof, and
economic and financial distress.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

17-3858621/21
