General Assembly-Fourteenth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FIRST COMMITI'EE

CONTJ:NTS
Page

1378 (XIV). General and complete disarmament (20 November 1959) (item 70)
1379 (XIV). Question of French nuclear tests in the Sahara (20 November 1959)
(item 68) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
... .. .... .... ... .....
1380 (XIV). Prevention of the wider dissemination of nuclear weapons (20 November 1959) (item 67).. . . . . . . .
...........................
1402 (XIV). Suspension of nuclear and thermo-nuclear tests (21 November
1959) (item 69). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.........
1403 (XIV). Report of the Disarmament Commission (21 November 1959)
(item 66) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1455 (XIV). The Korean question (9 December 1959) (item 26).
1472 (XIV). International co-operation in the peaceful uses of outer space
(12 December 1959) (item 25) . . .

3
3
4

4
4
5

5

records of the plenary meetings4 and the meetings of the
First Committee5 at which the question of general and
complete disarmament was discussed;
3. Expresses the hope that measures leading towards
the goal of general and complete disarmament under
effective international control will be worked out in
detail and agreed upon in the shortest possible time.
840th plenary meeting,
20 November 1959.

1378 (XIV). General and complete disarmament

The General Assembly,
Moved by the clesire to save the present and succeeding generations from the danger of a new and disastrous
war,

Striving to put an end completely and forever to the
armaments race which places a heavy burden on mankind, and to use resources thus released for the benefit
of mankind,
Desiring to promote the creation of relations of trust
and peaceful co-operation between·.States,
Mindful of the resolution of the United Nations Disarmament Commission of 10 September 1959, 1
Being convinced that any progress towards the goal
of general and complete disarmament under effective
international control will contribute to the achievement
of these high aims,
Considering that the question of general and complete
disarmament is the most important one facing the world
today,
l. Calls upon Governments to make every effort to
achieve a constructive solution of this problem ;
2. Transmits to the United Nations Disarmament
Commission and requests the Secretary-General to make
available to the ten-nation disarmament committee for
thorough consideration the declaration of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland of
17 September 19592 and the declaration of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics of 18 September 1959,3 and
the other proposals or suggestions made, as well as the

1379 (XIV). Que11tion of French nuclear te11l8
in the Sahara

The General Assembly,
Conscious of the great concern throughout the world
repeatedly expressed in the United Nations over the
prospect of further nuclear tests and their effects upon
mankind,
Noting the declared intention of the Government of
France to undertake nuclear tests in the Sahara,
Conside-ring the deep concern felt over the dangers
and risks which such tests entail,
Considering that significant progress is being made
in the negotiations now proceeding at Geneva concerning the discontinuance of nuclear weapons tests under
an international control system,
C onside-ring that the parties to those negotiations
have facilitated their progress by voluntarily suspending
such tests,
Considering that the purpose of the said negotiations
is to bring about a general discontinuance of nuclear
weapons tests and that it is to be hoped that, in the
same spirit which inspired the present voluntary sus-

1 Official Records of the Disarmament Commission, Supplement for January to December 1959, document DC/146.
2 Official Rtcords of the General Assembly, Fourteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 70, document A/C.1/820.
a Ibid., document A/4219.

4 Ibid.,

Fourteenth Session, Plenary Meetings, 799th and

840th meetings.
5 Ibid., Fourteenth Session, First Committee, 1026th to
1042nd meetings.

3

General Asaembly-Foarteenth Se11&ion

4,

pension of tests, no State will initiate or resume tests
of this kind,
Recognizing the anxiety caused by the contemplated
tests in the Sahara among all peoples, and more particularly those of Africa,
1. Expresses its grave concern over the intention of
the Government of France to conduct nuclear tests;
2. Requests France to refrain from such tests.
840th plenary meeting,
20 November 1959.

1380 (XIV). Prevention of the wider dissemination of nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the danger now exists that an increase in the number of States possessing nuclear
weapons may occur, aggravating international tension
and the difficulty of maintaining world peace, and thus
rendering more difficult the attainment of general disarmament agreement,
Convinced therefore that consideration of this danger
is appropriate within the framework of deliberations
on disarmament,
Noting the resolution of the United Nations Disarmament Commission of 10 September 1959, 1
Desiring to bring to the attention of the ten-nation
disarmament committee its conviction that consideration
should be given to this problem,
1. Suggests that the ten-nation disarmament committee, in the course of its deliberations, should consider
appropriate means whereby this danger may be averted,
including the feasibility of an international agreement,
subject to inspection and control, whereby the Powers
producing nuclear weapons would refrain from handing
over the control of such weapons to any nation not
possessing them and whereby the Powers not possessing
such weapons would refrain from manufacturing them ;
2. Invites the committee to include the results of its
deliberations on these matters in its report to the
Disarmament Commission.
841 st plenary meeting,
20 November 1959.
1402 (XIV). Suspension of nuclear and thermonuclear tests
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1252 B (XIII) of 4 November
1958,
Noting that the negotiations on the discontinuance of
nuclear weapons tests and on the establishment of an
appropriate international control system, which began at
Geneva on 31 October 1958, are still continuing,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the States concerned
for their efforts to reach an agreement relating to the
prohibition of nuclear weapons tests and including an
appropriate international control system;
2. Extresses the hope that these States will intensify
their efft ts to reach such an agreement at an early date:
3. [fr~ , the States concerned in these negotiations
to contim their present voluntary discontinuance of
1

-~

'-f'.:;tl".•(

~

p11,·1e-:r- ,ve3npn,- ·

4. Requests the States concerned to report to the
General Assembly the results of their negotiations.
842nd plenary meeting,
21 November 1959.

B
The General Assembly,
Desiring to safeguard mankind from the increasing
hazards resulting from tests of nuclear and thermonuclear weapons,
Bearing in mind the profound concern evinced by the
peoples of all countries regarding the testing of nuclear
and thermo-nuclear weapons,
Welcoming the endeavours at Geneva of the States
concerned to reach an agreement on the discontinuance
of these tests, and the progress so far achieved,
Noting with appreciation that the States concerned
have voluntarily suspended such tests, enabling progress
in the discussions at Geneva,
Considering that an agreement on the cessation of
nuclear and thermo-nuclear tests with effective international control is urgent,
I. Expresses its appreciation to the States concerned
for their patient and sincere efforts to reach agreement
on the discontinuance of nuclear and thermo-nuclear
tests with effective international control, and for the
progress hitherto achieved ;
•
2. Expresses further the hope that the States concerned will reach such agreement at an early date :
3. Appeals to the States concerned in the Geneva
discussions to continue their present voluntary suspension of tests, and to other States to desist from such
tests;
4. Requests the States concerned to report to the
Disarmament Commission and to the General Assembly
the results of their negotiations.
842nd plenary meeting,
21 November 1959.
1403 (XIV). Report of the Disarmament
Commission

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1252 D (XIII) of 4 November 1958,
Noting with approval the report of the Disarmament
Commission of 11 September 1959,6
1. Decides that the Disarmament Commission shall
continue to be composed of all Members of the United
Nations;
2. Transmits to the Disarmament Commission all
the documents, proposals and records of discussions
relating to disarmament at the fourteenth session of the
General Assembly:
3. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
staff and services required by the Disarmament Commission and, in consultation with the Governments concerned, provide such facilities as may be re(!uired by
the ten-nation disarmament committee.
812nd plenary meeting,
21 November 1959.
6 See Official Records of the Gen-eral Assembly, Fourteenth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 66, document A/4209.
