VIlL Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

34/224.

Medium-term planning in the United Nations

The General Assembly,
.
Recalling its resolutions 32/197 of 20 December
1977 on the restructuring of the economic and social
sectors of the United Nations system and 33/118 of
19 December 1978, especially paragraph 4 thereof, in
which it welcomed the intention of the Committee for
Programme and Co-ordination to conduct an in-depth
study of the programme planning process during its
nineteenth session,
Having considered the report of the Committee for
Programme and Co-ordination on the work of its nineteenth session, 50 the reports of the Secretary-General51
and of the Joint Inspection Unit 52 on medium-term
planning in the United Nations, and the comments of
the Secretary-General thereon, 53
Considering that medium-term planning should,
among other things, strengthen the relationship between
planning and development and contribute to better and
more rational management of United Nations activities,
to better interagency co-ordination and to the attainment of the objectives of the new international economic
order and of the international development strategies,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the aforementioned reports;
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Committee for Programme
and Co-ordination on the work of its nineteenth session54 and decides to establish the following principles
and guidelines for medium-term planning in the United
Nations:
(a) The planning process, which is a pa_rt of the
over-all management process, should be forward-looking
and dynamic; the plan should be deductive, with its
strategy, orientation, goals and activities deriving from
the objectives and policy orientations set by the intergovernmental organs;
(b) The medium-term plan should be a faithful
translation of legislative mandates into programmes;
(c) The plan will remain a proposal until its adoption by the General Assembly, upon which it will become
the principal policy directive; 55
(d) The medium-term plan should be comprehensive and not staggered;
(e) The flexibility of the plan should be achieved
through reviews by intergovernmental organs as detailed as required to incorporate the programme implications of the resolutions and decisions adopted by those
organs or international conferences since the adoption
of the plan;
(f) The effective participation of central and regional, sectoral and functional bodies in the formulation, consideration, review and evaluation of the plan
should be achieved by means of an appropriate preparation period and greater co-ordination of their calendars
of meetings;
(g) The introduction to the plan, which constitutes
a key integral element in the planning process, should
50 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/34/38).
51 E/ AC.51/97 and Add. 1 and 2.
52 See A/34/84.
sa A/ 34/ 84/ Add. I.
H Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 38(A/34/38), paras. 304 and 305.
55 Reaffirmation of the principle already established in General Assembly resolution 31/93, para. 3 (c).

229

highlight the policy orientations of the United Nations
system and indicate the medium-term objectives and
strategy and the trends deduced from the mandates
which reflect the priorities set by the intergovernmental
organs;
(h) The plan should emphasize the description of
objectives and strategy; the presentation and format of
the analyses provided therein should vary according
to the type and nature of activities;
(i) The plan should serve as the framework for the
formulation of the biennial programme budget;
(j) The density of the information provided in the
plan should vary in relation to the time-horizon of the
planning and the needs of the reviewing bodies;
(k) The planning process should take into account
the needs of interagency co-ordination; this co-ordination does not necessarily require system-wide synchronization of planning periods;
(/) Performance reporting and evaluation are key
elements in the planning and programming cycle; the
relevant mechanisms should be strengthened and the
relevant techniques refined; the use of achievement indicators should be developed;
(m) The medium-term plan should cover a period
of six years;
(n) The next medium-term plan should cover the
period 1984-1989; accordingly, the submission of a proposed plan for the period 1982-1985, scheduled for
1980, is no longer required;
(o) The current plan should be reviewed at an appropriate time to take account of all decisions with
programme implications during the biennium 19801981;
(p) The medium-term plan should clearly identify
new activities; the planning process should also make it
possible to identify completed activities or activities of
marginal utility;
(q) Emphasis should be placed on objective,s and
strategy; objectives should be time-limited as far as
possible and the plan should be objective-based in all
programmes where that is feasible;
(r) Financial indications should be shown in the
plan along the lines recommended by the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
in its report on the medium-term plan for the period
1980-1983 ;5 G
3. Approves the request made by the Committee
for Programme and Co-ordination 57 to the SecretaryGeneral to submit to the Committee at its twentieth session a draft calendar of preparation for the proposed
medium-term plan for the period 1984-1989 and, on
the basis of general principles and specific recommendations formulated by the Committee at its nineteenth
session, model programmes that would help to clarify
the questions of the programme structure of the mediumterm plan, the nature of the objectives of the plan and
the possibility of defining time-limited objectives;
4. Requests the Committee for Programme and Coordination to reconsider at its twentieth session the
question whether the plan should be a ''fixed" or a
"rolling" plan, so as to enable the General Assembly to
take a decision on that matter at its thirty-fifth session.
111 th plenary meeting
20 December 1979
A/33/345, raras. 7-11.
See Officia Records of the General Assembly, Thirtyfourth Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/34/38), para. 306.
56
57
