United Nations

A/RES/66/147

General Assembly

Distr.: General
29 March 2012

Sixty-sixth session
Agenda item 68

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 December 2011
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/66/461)]

66/147. Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights
and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples
to self-determination
The General Assembly,
Recalling all of its previous resolutions on the subject, including resolution
65/203 of 21 December 2010, and Human Rights Council resolutions 15/12 of
30 September 2010, 1 15/26 of 1 October 2010 2 and 18/4 of 29 September 2011, 3 as
well as all resolutions adopted by the Commission on Human Rights in this regard,
Recalling also all of its relevant resolutions in which, inter alia, it condemned
any State that permitted or tolerated the recruitment, financing, training, assembly,
transit or use of mercenaries with the objective of overthrowing the Governments of
States Members of the United Nations, especially those of developing countries, or
of fighting against national liberation movements, and recalling further the relevant
resolutions and international instruments adopted by the General Assembly, the
Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and the Organization of African
Unity, inter alia, the Organization of African Unity Convention for the elimination
of mercenarism in Africa, 4 as well as by the African Union,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations concerning the strict observance of the principles of sovereign equality,
political independence, the territorial integrity of States, the self-determination of
peoples, the non-use of force or of the threat of use of force in international
relations and non-interference in affairs within the domestic jurisdiction of States,
Reaffirming also that, by virtue of the principle of self-determination, all
peoples have the right freely to determine their political status and to pursue their

_______________
1
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/65/53/Add.1),
chap. II.
2
Ibid., chap. I.
3
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and Corr.1), chap. II.
4
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1490, No. 25573.

11-46764

*1146764*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/66/147

economic, social and cultural development and that every State has the duty to
respect this right in accordance with the provisions of the Charter,
Reaffirming further the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, 5
Welcoming the establishment of the open-ended intergovernmental Working
Group of the Human Rights Council with the mandate of considering the possibility
of elaborating an international regulatory framework, including the option of
elaborating a legally binding instrument on the regulation, monitoring and oversight
of the activities of private military and security companies,
Alarmed and concerned at the danger that the activities of mercenaries
constitute to peace and security in developing countries, in particular in Africa and
in small States,
Deeply concerned at the loss of life, the substantial damage to property and the
negative effects on the policy and economies of affected countries resulting from
criminal mercenary activities,
Extremely alarmed and concerned about recent mercenary activities in some
developing countries in various parts of the world, including in areas of armed
conflict, and the threat they pose to the integrity of and respect for the constitutional
order of the affected countries,
Concerned at the alleged involvement of mercenaries, as well as employees of
some private military and security companies with mercenary-related activities, in
serious human rights violations, including summary executions, enforced
disappearances, rape, torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, arbitrary
arrests and detentions, arson, pillaging and looting,
Convinced that a comprehensive, legally binding international regulatory
instrument is important for regulating private military and security companies and,
in this regard, for taking measures to ensure their accountability for human rights
violations and monitor their activities,
Convinced also that, notwithstanding the way in which they are used or the
form that they take to acquire some semblance of legitimacy, mercenaries or
mercenary-related activities are a threat to peace, security and the self-determination
of peoples and an obstacle to the enjoyment of all human rights by peoples,
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Working Group on the
1.
use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise
of the right of peoples to self-determination, 6 and expresses its appreciation for the
work of the experts of the Working Group;
2.
Reaffirms that the use of mercenaries and their recruitment, financing and
training are causes for grave concern to all States and violate the purposes and
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations;
Recognizes that armed conflict, terrorism, arms trafficking and covert
3.
operations by third Powers, inter alia, encourage the demand for mercenaries on the
global market;
_______________
5
6

2

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
See A/66/317.

A/RES/66/147

4.
Urges once again all States to take the steps necessary and to exercise
the utmost vigilance against the menace posed by the activities of mercenaries and
to take legislative measures to ensure that their territories and other territories under
their control, as well as their nationals, are not used for the recruitment, assembly,
financing, training, protection or transit of mercenaries for the planning of activities
designed to impede the right of peoples to self-determination, to destabilize or
overthrow the Government of any State or to dismember or impair, totally or in part,
the territorial integrity or political unity of sovereign and independent States
conducting themselves in compliance with the right of peoples to self-determination;
Requests all States to exercise the utmost vigilance against any kind of
5.
recruitment, training, hiring or financing of mercenaries by private companies
offering international military consultancy and security services, as well as to
impose a specific ban on such companies intervening in armed conflicts or actions
to destabilize constitutional regimes;
Encourages States that import the military assistance, consultancy and
6.
security services provided by private companies to establish regulatory national
mechanisms for the registering and licensing of those companies in order to ensure
that imported services provided by those private companies neither impede the
enjoyment of human rights nor violate human rights in the recipient country;
Emphasizes its utmost concern about the impact of the activities of
7.
private military and security companies on the enjoyment of human rights, in
particular when operating in armed conflicts, and notes that private military and
security companies and their personnel are rarely held accountable for violations of
human rights;
Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to consider taking the
8.
action necessary to accede to or ratify the International Convention against the
Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries; 7
9.
Welcomes the cooperation extended by those countries that received a
visit by the Working Group and the adoption by some States of national legislation
that restricts the recruitment, assembly, financing, training and transit of mercenaries;
10. Condemns recent mercenary activities in developing countries in various
parts of the world, in particular in areas of conflict, and the threat they pose to the
integrity of and respect for the constitutional order of those countries and the
exercise of the right of their peoples to self-determination, and stresses the
importance for the Working Group of looking into sources and root causes, as well
as the political motivations of mercenaries and for mercenary-related activities;
11. Calls upon States to investigate the possibility of mercenary involvement
whenever and wherever criminal acts of a terrorist nature occur and to bring to trial
those found responsible or to consider their extradition, if so requested, in
accordance with domestic law and applicable bilateral or international treaties;
12. Condemns any form of impunity granted to perpetrators of mercenary
activities and to those responsible for the use, recruitment, financing and training of
mercenaries, and urges all States, in accordance with their obligations under
international law, to bring them, without distinction, to justice;

_______________
7

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2163, No. 37789.

3

A/RES/66/147

13. Calls upon Member States, in accordance with their obligations under
international law, to cooperate with and assist the judicial prosecution of those
accused of mercenary activities in transparent, open and fair trials;
14. Requests the Working Group to continue the work already done by the
previous Special Rapporteurs on the strengthening of the international legal
framework for the prevention and sanction of the recruitment, use, financing and
training of mercenaries, taking into account the proposal for a new legal definition
of a mercenary drafted by the Special Rapporteur in his report to the Commission on
Human Rights at its sixtieth session, 8 including the elaboration and presentation of
concrete proposals on possible complementary and new standards aimed at filling
existing gaps, as well as general guidelines or basic principles encouraging the
further protection of human rights, in particular the right of peoples to
self-determination, while facing current and emergent threats posed by mercenaries
or mercenary-related activities;
15. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, as a matter of priority, to publicize the adverse effects of the
activities of mercenaries on the right of peoples to self-determination and, when
requested and where necessary, to render advisory services to States that are
affected by those activities;
16. Expresses its appreciation to the Office of the High Commissioner for its
support for the holding of the five regional governmental consultations on
traditional and new forms of mercenary activities as a means of violating human
rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination, in
particular regarding the effects of the activities of private military and security
companies on the enjoyment of human rights;
17. Notes with appreciation the work of the Working Group on the
elaboration of concrete principles on the regulation of private companies offering
military assistance, consultancy and other military security-related services on the
international market, which it carried out after country visits and through the
process of regional consultations, and in consultation with academics and
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, and also notes its work on
the draft convention on the regulation, monitoring and oversight of private military
and security companies for consideration by Member States; 9
18. Takes note of the summary of the first session of the open-ended
intergovernmental Working Group of the Human Rights Council to consider the
possibility of elaborating an international regulatory framework on the regulation,
monitoring and oversight of the activities of private military and security
companies, 10 expresses satisfaction regarding the participation of experts, including
the members of the Working Group on the use of mercenaries, as resource persons at
that session, and requests the Working Group on the use of mercenaries and other
experts to continue to participate;
19. Encourages Member States to continue considering the proposal of the
Working Group on the use of mercenaries regarding a possible convention for
regulating private military and security companies, 11 and recommends to all
_______________
8

See E/CN.4/2004/15, para. 47.
See A/HRC/15/25.
10
A/HRC/WG.10/1/CRP.2.
11
A/65/325, annex.
9

4

A/RES/66/147

Member States, including those confronted with the phenomenon of private military
and security companies, as contracting States, States of operations, home States or
States whose nationals are employed to work for a private military and security
company, to contribute to the work of the open-ended intergovernmental Working
Group, taking into account the initial work done by the Working Group on the use of
mercenaries;
20. Urges all States to cooperate fully with the Working Group on the use of
mercenaries in the fulfilment of its mandate;
21. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to provide the Working Group with all the
assistance and support necessary for the fulfilment of its mandate, both professional
and financial, including through the promotion of cooperation between the Working
Group and other components of the United Nations system that deal with countering
mercenary-related activities, in order to meet the demands of its current and future
activities;
22. Requests the Working Group to consult States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations in the implementation of the present resolution and
to report, with specific recommendations, to the General Assembly at its
sixty-seventh session its findings on the use of mercenaries to undermine the
enjoyment of all human rights and to impede the exercise of the right of peoples to
self-determination;
23. Decides to consider at its sixty-seventh session the question of the use of
mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the
right of peoples to self-determination under the item entitled “Right of peoples to
self-determination”.
89th plenary meeting
19 December 2011

5
