VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

19. States should consider incorporating into the national law norms
proscribing abuses of power and providing remedies to victims of such
abuses. In particular, such remedies should include restitution and/or compensation, and necessary material, medical, psychological and social assistance and support.
20. States should consider negotiating multilateral international treaties relating to victims, as defined in paragraph 18.
21. States should periodically review existing legislation and practices
to ensure their responsiveness to changing circumstances, should enact and
enforce, if necessary, legislation proscribing acts that constitute serious
abuses of political or economic power, as well as promoting policies and
mechanisms for the prevention of such acts, and should develop and make
readily available appropriate rights and remedies for victims of such acts.

40/35. Development of standards for the prevention
of juvenile delinquency
The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution 4 adopted by the Sixth United
Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders, held at Caracas from 25 August to
5 September 1980, 63 in which the Congress called for the
elaboration of a set of standard minimum rules for the
administration of juvenile justice and for the care of
juveniles,
Noting that the United Nations Standard Minimum
Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice (the Beijing Rules) 76 recommended by the Seventh United Nations
Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders, held at Milan, Italy, from 26 August to 6 September 1985, are limited to the administration of juvenile
justice and the assurance of legal guarantees in respect of
young persons in conflict with the law,
Mindful of the need to develop national, regional and
international strategies for the prevention of delinquency
among the young,
Recognizing that the prevention of juvenile delinquency
includes measures for the protection of juveniles who are
abandoned, neglected, abused and in marginal circumstances and, in general, those who are at social risk,
Recognizing further the existence of a large number of
young persons who are not in conflict with the law but who
are at social risk,
Acknowledging that one of the basic aims of the prevention of juvenile delinquency is the provision of requisite
assistance and a range of opportunities to meet the varying
needs of the young, especially those who are most likely to
commit crime or to be exposed to crime, and to serve as a
supportive framework to safeguard their proper development,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the work undertaken
by the United Nations regional institutes for the prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders and the
regional commissions in the field of crime prevention;
2. Also takes note with appreciation of the working
paper prepared by the Secretariat on youth, crime and justice; 77
3. Endorses the recommendations contained in the
report of the Interregional Preparatory Meeting for the
Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, held at Beijing
from 14 to 18 May 1984; 78
4. Requests the Secretary-General and Member States
to take the necessary steps to establish joint programmes
in the field of juvenile justice and the prevention of juvenile delinquency with the United Nations Social Defence
76 Resolution 40/33, annex.

77 NCONF.12117.
78NCONF.121/IPM/l, sect. II.

215

Research Institute, the United Nations regional institutes
for the prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders,
the Arab Security Studies and Training Centre at Riyadh
and other national and regional institutes, and with the
assistance of regional commissions and national correspondents, which would include the following activities:
(a) To study the situation of juveniles at social risk and
to examine the relevant policies and practices of prevention within the context of socio-economic development;
(b} To intensify efforts in training, research and advisory services for the prevention of juvenile delinquency;
5. Invites Member States to adopt distinct measures
and systems appropriate to the interest of juveniles at
social risk;
6. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council to
request the Committee on Crime Prevention and Control,
with the assistance of the United Nations institutes for the
prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders, the
regional commissions and the specialized agencies, to
develop standards for the prevention of juvenile delinquency which would assist Member States in formulating
and implementing specialized programmes and policies,
emphasizing assistance and care and the active involvement of the community, and to report to the Eighth
United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and
the Treatment of Offenders on the progress achieved in the
development of the proposed standards, for review and
final action;
7. Requests that the prevention of delinquency among
the young should be considered regularly by the Committee on Crime Prevention and Control and that it should be
considered by the Eighth United Nations Congress on the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
under a separate agenda item;
8. Urges all relevant bodies within the United Nations
system to collaborate with the Secretary-General in taking
appropriate measures to ensure the implementation of the
present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
29 November /985

40/36. Domestic violence
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/
14 of 24 May 1984 on violence in the family,
Recalling also resolution 9 adopted by the Sixth United
Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders, in which the Congress called for
the fair treatment of women by the criminal justice system, 63
Bearing in mind the recommendations made on the subject of domestic violence by the World Conference to
Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace, 79
Having regard to the Declaration on the Rights of the
Child, 62 in particular principle 9 concerning the protection
of the child against exploitation, neglect and cruelty, and
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 7 5
Mindful of the important role of the family in ensuring
the proper development of the young and their integration
79 See Report oft he World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Natwns Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace, Nairohi, 15-26 July /98.' (United Nations publication. Sales No
E.85.IV. I0). chap. I. sect. A.
