S/PV.5577 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-first year

5577th meeting
Monday, 4 December 2006, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Qatar)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ainchil
Mr. Li Kexin
Mr. Gayama
Ms. Løj
Mr. Vandeville
Mr. Christian
Ms. Filippidou
Mr. Takase
Mr. Voto-Bernales
Mr. Shcherbak
Mr. Burian
Ms. Johansen
Mr. Mahiga
Mr. Ohlson

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

06-64061 (E)

*0664061*

S/PV.5577 (Resumption 1)

The meeting was resumed at 3.25 p.m.
The President (spoke in Arabic): As I indicated
at the morning session, I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than five minutes in
order to enable the Council carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing and
to deliver condensed versions of their speeches when
speaking in the Chamber.
Mr. Ainchil (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. At the same time, we thank
the Emergency Relief Coordinator and UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Jan
Egeland, for his briefing to the Council. We also
especially wish to express our appreciation Mr.
Egeland’s excellent work leading the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) in
challenging times for the humanitarian community. His
commitment and devotion have made a difference in
the life of populations affected by humanitarian
emergencies, vulnerable groups and displaced
populations.
The situation described by the Emergency Relief
Coordinator clearly shows the persistence of atrocities
committed against civilians on a scale that goes beyond
the statistical fact of the increase or the decrease of
certain categories of violence or attacks.
My delegation strongly condemns these attacks
and would like to reiterate that no national security
consideration can prevail over the primary obligation
of all States and parties to a conflict to fulfil the rules
of international humanitarian law as contained in the
Hague Conventions and the Geneva Conventions and
their additional Protocols.
The
Security
Council
has
substantially
contributed to the international regime of protection of
civilians through its resolutions 1265 (1999), 1296
(2000) and 1674 (2006). At the same time, the Council
has been given a clear mandate by the General
Assembly to take collective action in a timely and
decisive fashion to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity.

2

The previously mentioned legal framework places
at the disposal of the Security Council a set of tools for
the protection of civilians. It is the task of the Council
to make full use of them.
In this respect, we would like to underline the
importance of ensuring that the mandates of
peacekeeping, political and peacebuilding missions
include provisions regarding the protection of civilians,
in particular, groups requiring special attention, women
and children. These provisions should also address
matters related to ensuring full and unimpeded access
by humanitarian personnel to civilians affected by
armed conflict.
At the same time, the Council has expressed its
disposition to examine situations of systematic,
flagrant and widespread violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law, to adopt adequate
measures to contribute to the establishment of a secure
environment, and to consider establishing zones and
corridors to protect civilians and provide humanitarian
assistance.
In addition to these important mandates, there are
areas in the work of the Council in this matter where
further improvement could be achieved. One example
would be the improvement of the reporting mechanism
on protection of civilians, in order to allow an
appropriate follow-up in each of the situations included
on the agenda of the Council.
The improvement of reporting mechanisms is
also important in the initial moments of a crisis when
civilians are affected and where an early warning might
allow the Council to deploy preventive measures to
protect civilians.
We also consider that there is room to advance in
the normative work of the Security Council on the
protection of civilians, in particular in areas where
current crises show that there is a clear need for further
development.
The situations of internal displacement are one of
these areas. We commend the work and the leadership
of OCHA in providing assistance and protection to
internally displaced persons. At the same time, broader
mandates are needed if there is political will in the
international community to address the issue in its
complexity. Other fields where further normative work
can be explored include the linkages between small

06-64061

S/PV.5577 (Resumption 1)

arms and the protection of civilians,
disproportionate use of force and the use of war.

the

Finally, we understand that the situation of
journalists in conflict also deserves the attention of the
Council and we welcome the initiative of France and of
other European countries in this respect.
Ms. Løj (Denmark): Mr. President, let me begin
by thanking your delegation for convening this meeting
on protection of civilians in armed conflicts.
I would also like to express our sincere gratitude
to the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, Mr. Jan Egeland, for his consistent and
unyielding determination to assist the millions of
innocent people who have been caught up in the
negative consequences of armed conflict. We wish him
all the best in his future endeavours.
Furthermore, I would like to fully associate my
delegation with the statement to be delivered later in
the debate by the Permanent Representative of Finland
on behalf of the European Union.
As the statement by Mr. Egeland clearly
illustrates, the efforts of the Security Council to
maintain peace and security continues to come up short
in the global perspective. It follows that the need to
protect civilians affected by armed conflict is an
ongoing imperative for the Council with no immediate
end in sight. For that reason, we cannot continue to
approach the question on an almost ad hoc basis.
Populations in need must be able to depend on our will
to come to their assistance, and perpetrators must be
assured that their crimes will not go unpunished.
Efforts by the Council and the international community
as a whole to protect civilians in situations of conflict
must be more predictable, timely and systematic.
A comprehensive framework for the protection of
civilians already exists, particularly in the large body
of international humanitarian law and in the three main
Security Council resolutions on the issue. The
immediate attention of the Council should therefore be
devoted to implementing the protection framework in
order to produce real improvements on the ground.
Emphasis should be placed on providing more
comprehensive
peacekeeping
by,
inter
alia,
incorporating the protection of civilians into the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations
as a central element. Such mandates must be supported
with the necessary capacity and practical support,

06-64061

enabling the peacekeeping forces to properly address
protection needs on the ground, including by taking
firm action against sexual violence and by providing
protection to internally displaced persons.
The protection of civilians is a multifaceted
challenge, and so must our response be. We must put to
their best use the relatively limited number of tools
available to the Security Council. That includes
increasing our capacity to monitor and report on
violations against civilians — an effort that is being
successfully spearheaded on the issue of children
affected by armed conflict. But it also includes
referring violators to international courts, including the
International Criminal Court, and using targeted
sanctions to deter attacks against civilians, including
humanitarian workers, workers for non-governmental
organizations and journalists. The Council must
overcome its reluctance to fully use those tools if it
seriously wishes to move the protection agenda
forward.
Each individual State has the responsibility to
protect its population from genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
Unfortunately, in some cases, States manifestly fail to
provide the necessary protection — or the perpetrator
is the State itself. In situations in which a State
embarks on waging war against its own population, the
responsibility to protect the civilians affected becomes
that of the international community. We have a moral
and political obligation not to turn our backs on the
many civilians who suffer from attacks carried out by,
or with the consent of, their own Governments.
Whether or not the concept of the responsibility
to protect needs further consideration is, as such,
irrelevant. Given the lack of action and engagement
elsewhere, the basic political commitment not to allow
another Rwanda or Srebrenica is the responsibility of
all of us, including the Security Council, as well as of
other United Nations bodies.
In that regard, Denmark welcomes the decision
by the Human Rights Council to convene a special
session on the human rights situation in Darfur. It is
high time that all actors engage in a comprehensive and
constructive dialogue on that unacceptable situation.
That in turn must lead to prompt and decisive action to
alleviate the suffering of the people of Darfur.
The reporting and dissemination of news from
areas entangled in conflict is often the only hope that

3

S/PV.5577 (Resumption 1)

the affected populations have of influencing national,
regional and international actors to step in and address
the situation. Consequently, Denmark is deeply
concerned by the alarming increase in attacks against
journalists in recent armed conflicts. The continued
targeting of journalists, in flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law, is unacceptable and has
now reached a level where the Security Council must
express its clear condemnation of the situation. We
hope that the initiative on this important issue,
presented by France and Greece and supported by the
United Kingdom, Slovakia and Denmark, will find
general support in the Security Council.
Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to thank Mr. Jan Egeland, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for his
presentation.
According to the information that Mr. Egeland
provided, much work remains to be done if the United
Nations is to be effective in protecting civilians in
armed conflict. In view of the situations that he
described, we must reaffirm the responsibility of the
United Nations to protect human rights throughout the
world and the duty to prevent war crimes, genocide and
ethnic cleansing. We must also reaffirm the importance
of the task of ensuring humanitarian access to civilian
populations affected by conflict and protecting the staff
who provide such assistance, as well as all civilians
involved. In that connection, Peru believes that the
Security Council should continue to sponsor effective
and feasible actions to ensure the protection of
civilians who find themselves immersed in armed
conflict.
I should like to make a few comments about the
work of the Security Council in this area.
First, we seek full implementation of resolution
1674 (2006), which the Council adopted in April. We
should continue to include clear guidelines and rules
aimed at protecting civilians in all resolutions on
countries in which there are peacekeeping operations
and monitor their implementation. The SecretaryGeneral must regularly inform the Council about the
incorporation of the provisions of resolution 1674
(2006) into new or renewed mission mandates and
continue to monitor specific cases in which conflicts
and/or humanitarian crises have caused the civilian
population to fall victim to violence, insecurity and
systematic human rights violations.

4

Within the framework of the United Nations
system, we must seek greater cooperation among the
specialized agencies present on the ground so as to
improve our efficiency in the protection of civilians,
including displaced populations. Such efforts will help
to provide more effective follow-up to Security
Council decisions.
Likewise, the Council must cooperate with the
International Criminal Court in the fight against
impunity. Effectively penalizing of those responsible
for grave human rights violations is an obligation of
the international community and a powerful signal of
the validity of the rule of law.
We express our grave concern at the persistence
of situations of risk for civilian populations that
Mr. Egeland cited this morning, including the
situations in Darfur, Gaza, Chad, northern Uganda,
Iraq, Afghanistan and Kosovo. We took note of the five
priorities that he set out for future work by the Security
Council on the issue of protecting civilians. They
clearly reflect the areas requiring greater attention,
such as preventive measures, timely information on
humanitarian crises and cooperative efforts with civil
society, including non-governmental organizations.
Finally, I wish to express Peru’s gratitude to
Mr. Jan Egeland for his commitment to the defence and
protection of civilian populations in the immense
humanitarian crises that the world has witnessed.
Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): On
behalf of my delegation, I should like to express to
you, Sir, our pleasure to see you presiding over the
Security Council during the month of December. Qatar
is a country whose awareness of issues concerning
peace and security as they relate to civilian populations
needs no further proof. Your country has expressed its
commitment in that regard on numerous occasions,
particularly with respect to the upheavals that have
recently characterized the Middle East crisis.
I would also like to commend the Ambassador of
Peru and his team for the very professional job that
they did in presiding over the Council last month.
We would like to thank you, Sir, for beginning
your term at the head of the Council by taking the
initiative to hold this debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict — an issue whose
importance is clearly reflected in the number and the

06-64061

S/PV.5577 (Resumption 1)

gravity of situations in the world today that,
increasingly, highlight the vulnerability of civilians.
Mr. Jan Egeland briefed us with the expertise and
depth for which he is known, and our Organization has
every interest in making use of that information.
The most recent statistics put at 27 million the
number of people affected by war or similar disasters
in 29 countries throughout the world. These people are
described as refugees or displaced persons, and their
numbers clearly demonstrate the scope of this growing
phenomenon. No continent has been spared. Asia,
southern Europe, the Middle East and Africa have all
been affected, and it is women and children who are
the most vulnerable.
Armed conflicts are man-made catastrophes,
unlike so-called natural disasters — although the latter
can often be directly or indirectly attributed to human
responsibility. They have physical, moral and legal
consequences that affect the integrity, freedom and
basic rights of individuals.
With respect to conflict situations — which we
are dealing with here — the protection of civilians has
been made one of the core principles of international
humanitarian law. Accordingly, civilians who are not
taking part in hostilities should not under any
circumstance be attacked. Rather, they must be spared
and protected. That is set forth in specific international
instruments, including the 1949 Geneva Conventions
and the Additional Protocols thereto of 1977, as well as
Security Council resolution 1674 (2006). We must,
more than ever, ensure that concrete measures are in
place for follow up and compliance with those
instruments.
The Secretary-General launched a consolidated
appeal for 2007 to provide $3.9 billion in humanitarian
assistance to protect the thousands of persons in need.
We thank him for that.
I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the efforts made by a number of countries, in particular
Sweden, which is the only country to have devoted
0.05 per cent of its gross domestic product to
humanitarian assistance. We call upon other countries
not to weaken their commitments at a time of
increasing need for civilians affected by armed conflict
or natural disasters.
Another important aspect is the urgent need to
provide assistance to non-belligerent parties. I am

06-64061

referring to the work done, often at great sacrifice and
with great courage, by intergovernmental organizations
such as the International Committee of the Red Cross
and the Office of High Commissioner for Refugees
and, increasingly, non-governmental organizations. We
must protect the men and women who work for those
organizations, who, often at great danger to their own
lives, provide assistance and hope to those who are in
need. We would like to pay them a well-deserved
tribute. We must increase awareness of the need to
provide optimal security conditions for humanitarian
workers so that they can carry out their noble mission.
The obligation to protect civilians rests above all
with Governments. Governments must therefore do
everything in their power to provide the most effective
protection to all those for whom they are responsible,
as the legitimate power invested with the necessary
latitude to provide for their citizens — as well as for
their partners — the highest possible level of security.
In this Chamber on 28 November, we discussed
the plight of children caught up in armed conflict. By
expanding the scope of the application of international
conventions to all innocent civilians, we are seeking to
highlight the importance of extending the rule of law.
At a time when so-called conventional wars
against what used to be called enemy armies or enemy
nations are often outnumbered by so-called civil
conflicts, there is a dangerous blurring of the line
between outright crime and what is euphemistically
called collateral damage. We can see that in Darfur,
with the sad and bloody escalation of conflict
orchestrated by armed groups with questionable
motives and a Sudanese Government whose
powerlessness verges on indifference and whose
nervousness borders on abdication of responsibility in
the face of atrocities that are becoming increasingly
intolerable.
In Africa, the conflict in Darfur is well on the
way to becoming the prototype of a situation
characterized by the denial of justice and by cynicism
that goes against the most basic values of human
dignity. It is true that a new chapter has begun — or is
about to begin — in Sierra Leone and Liberia, then in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where terrible
atrocities had been reported, as well as with regard to
the disastrous toll wrought by the Lord’s Resistance
Army in northern Uganda.

5

S/PV.5577 (Resumption 1)

The Security Council has on a number of
occasions deplored the fate of populations in the
Middle East, who are victims of military blunders or of
acts of terrorism, such as those directed at bewildered
civilians in Lebanon, Israel, Palestine and Iraq.
Likewise, in the former Yugoslavia, the international
community in recent years strongly deplored the
heinous crimes.
In such cases, as in others, the international
community is confronted by two different obligations
that, however, are not incompatible: the obligation to
prevent, and the obligation to act. My delegation, as
Chair of the Security Council Working Group on
conflict prevention, is currently working to determine
the various factors that might enable the Council to
work out a practical approach to help to prevent
conflicts whose main victims are civilians.
In conclusion, I would like to say that today’s
discussion gives us an opportunity on the one hand to
reaffirm our shared commitment to the provisions of
international humanitarian law aimed at protecting
civilians in armed conflict — they must be protected in
all circumstances — and, on the other, to consider what
actions can be taken at a number of levels, as well as
their impact on the people involved.
In other words, we must prevent man-made
disasters from amplifying the effects of natural
disasters in a world already left so poorly protected by
human ambitions. But that is for another debate. For
the time being, we express our support for the draft
presidential statement, to which we will give
favourable consideration.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
representative of the Congo for his kind words
addressed to me.
Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): I
wish to congratulate you once again, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of December. We extend once again our
appreciation to the delegation of Peru for a task well
accomplished during the month of November.
Mr. President, we thank you for having organized
this important debate and wish the State of Qatar every
success during its presidency of the Security Council
for the month of December 2006. Let me also thank
Mr. Jan Egeland, the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for his insightful briefing.

6

Enhancing the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is a fundamental responsibility of States and of
the international community; we cannot afford to fail
in that respect. It is estimated that, of the hundreds of
thousands of people who lose their lives due to the
direct effects of war and low-intensity insurgency and
to war-related famine and disease each year, almost 90
per cent are innocent non-combatants. Other violent
acts include reprisals, forced recruitment, kidnapping,
rape, sexual exploitation and gender-based violence.
The protection of civilians ought to include protection
for humanitarian workers involved with refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs).
Such insecurity is due to the presence or activities
of armed groups and militias within and around camps
and settlements. Governments need to be reminded of
their obligation to provide protection.
As correctly pointed out by Mr. Egeland, the
internal displacement of civilian populations in areas
of conflict is on the increase, both in terms of numbers
and of the complexity of protection needs. It is good
news that the number of refugees is steadily declining,
but the problem of internally displaced persons
requires that renewed efforts be made to address it. The
High-level Panel on System-wide Coherence has
recognized the need for a more coordinated response
operationally in providing resources and protection to
IDPs.
Children, especially, have become the most
affected victims of armed conflict. In some conflicts,
the ratio of child soldiers is said to be as high as 60 per
cent. There is no doubt that the realities on the ground
are far crueler than statistics would indicate. We
therefore join in emphasizing the need to enhance the
efforts of the United Nations to protect civilians in
armed conflict, including children.
Admittedly, the most important strategic
objective has been to prevent armed conflict and its
recurrence in the first place. That objective goes hand
in hand with the initiative to urgently make the United
Nations a more effective instrument for the
maintenance of international peace and security. While
the ongoing protection process has always played a
vital role and will continue to do so, any progress made
in the protection of civilians will constitute an integral
contribution to the maintenance of global peace and
security.

06-64061

S/PV.5577 (Resumption 1)

It is for that reason that we reaffirm our
commitment in support of this highly cherished
humanitarian cause. We also condemn each and every
party involved in all situations of conflict in which
innocent civilian populations are deliberately targeted
and attacked as a strategy of war, for military
advantage. Such unacceptable behaviour is contrary to
the civilized conduct of modern warfare. It is our
conviction that all such perpetrators must be held
responsible for violating international law and that
such cases should be prosecuted in order to put an end
to the culture of impunity.
It is our view that today’s fruitful discussions
should go beyond a naming and shaming exercise. The
Security Council has been greatly concerned at, and
remains seized of, the level of human tragedy
experienced by civilian populations, for example in the
context of recent events in the Middle East and in
Darfur.
The greatest challenge to the Council and to the
international community as a whole occurs when
Governments not only fail to protect their citizens but
are themselves the cause of insecurity to their citizens.
How can we exercise our collective responsibility to
protect under such circumstances? We should hold
such Governments responsible and accountable for
their actions.
Equally challenging is the identification of
existing gaps in the normative standards of
international law and in their implementation by
humanitarian actors, and the need to assist States that
lack adequate capacity to protect various categories of
affected civilians.
Experience in the Great Lakes has shown that a
regional approach to addressing security and
development problems has proved to be useful and
much more effective. We appreciate the support of the
Council and of the entire international community for
the peace processes in Burundi and in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which have brought an end to
the protracted wars there and paved the way to national
reconciliation, the institutionalization of the rule of
law, and respect for human rights.
Indeed, the emerging peace, and the anticipated
peace and security compact to be signed later this
month in Nairobi by the countries of the region, will
bring great relief to the region and enhance regional
security and the safety of civilians.

06-64061

Tanzania is very grateful that such positive
developments have come about through the assistance
rendered by the Council in the promotion of peace and
security in the Great Lakes region.
We agree with those delegations that raised the
issue of addressing the proliferation and illegal
circulation of small arms and light weapons, which fuel
conflicts and increase civilian casualties. This issue
requires more concerted action by the various organs of
the United Nations system as a way of enhancing the
protection of civilians.
I cannot conclude my statement without noting
my delegation's great concern at the emerging trend
whereby some State and non-State actors are openly
compromising the neutrality and questioning the
impartiality of the United Nations to deploy
peacekeeping troops or observers in areas they control.
We should assure Member States that the United
Nations is by definition an indispensable partner of its
Member States in the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. The core duty of the United Nations is not
only to maintain peace and security among Member
States, but also to protect their respective civilians.
Human security and safety should be as important as
the security of States. The two must be addressed
concurrently.
Finally, we would like to restate our appreciation
to Mr. Egeland for his role in raising the profile of
humanitarian issues on the international agenda in
general and on the agenda of the Council in particular.
He leaves behind a legacy of courage and dedication
and, above all, of commitment to protecting and
assisting civilians in precarious and vulnerable
situations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
representative of the United Republic of Tanzania for
the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we would like to welcome you,
Sir, and the delegation of Qatar, who will be presiding
over the Security Council in December - the last month
of the year. We would like also to thank the delegation
of Peru, which held the Council’s presidency in
November, for having effectively discharged its duties.
Our delegation would like to express its gratitude
to Mr. Egeland for his update on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We are grateful to Mr.

7

S/PV.5577 (Resumption 1)

Egeland for the efforts he has made in his post and
wish him every success in his future activities.
Unfortunately, not a day goes by without our
learning of more murders, abuses and other types of
violence against civilians in armed conflict. Despite the
existence of a myriad of instruments in the area of
humanitarian and human rights law, in many of today’s
conflicts civilian casualties and the destruction of
civilian infrastructure are not simply the costs of
waging war, but the result of premeditated actions.
Like direct violence, the destruction of medical and
social protection infrastructure during hostilities also
causes loss of life from disease and starvation. This
past year has been no exception in that regard, and was
marked by further conflict that caused human
suffering. This once again underscores the importance
of a prompt response by the United Nations to cases of
violence against innocent civilians and to the
destruction of civilian infrastructure during armed
conflict. This subject has taken on increasing
importance in the humanitarian agenda of the United
Nations. It calls for systemic measures at the
international, regional and national levels. The key
points in this connection are streamlined coordination
and a clear division of labour, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations.
Against that backdrop, we call for the greatest
prudence when dealing with documents and concepts
worked out without coordination with all United
Nations Member States or without any general
discussion in the United Nations. We urge that they not
be promoted as being widely recognized under
international standards.
In that context, it is to be expected that the
concept of the responsibility to protect has not yet
become a reality today specifically because in its
present form it does not enjoy sufficiently broad
support from Member States. In our view, it would be
wiser to talk about the implementation of the more
acceptable option enshrined in the 2005 Summit
Outcome, namely, the responsibility to protect civilians
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity. We would once again like to
emphasize that, under this concept, the primary
responsibility lies with national Governments, whose
efforts must be supported by the international
community without undermining State sovereignty.

8

We expect the Peacebuilding Commission to take
specific steps to assist in the stabilization of postconflict situations.
In the context of conflict settlement, we note the
growing importance being given by the Security
Council to problems affecting civilians as part of its
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security. Resolution 1674 (2006) was a further step in
the Council’s efforts in that regard. We are certain that,
at this point, it is important to focus on the
implementation of existing Council decisions to protect
civilians, including those that highlight the subject of
women and children, and not to dissipate our efforts by
generating new documents in this area. The main goal
should be to ensure the practical implementation of
existing legal norms and the decisions already taken.
Our delegation attaches great importance to
eliminating impunity and to the prosecution of all
persons guilty of crimes against civilians. In that
regard, we would note the role of the International
Criminal Court.
When it comes to protecting civilians, it is
necessary to ensure the security of humanitarian
personnel themselves, whose effective work is crucial
to providing assistance to civilians. At the same time,
we would like to underscore the importance of having
humanitarian workers comply with the principles of
independence, neutrality and impartiality.
In conclusion, we would be remiss if we were to
fail to refer to the importance of preventing armed
conflict, which calls for eradicating the root causes of
conflict. In that connection, we fully agree with our
Chinese colleagues. As a first step, it is important to at
least avoid creating situations that are fraught with
violence against civilians. Such a goal can be achieved
only through the joint efforts of the entire international
community. The United Nations is meant to play a
leading role in that regard.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
representative of the Russian Federation for his kind
words addressed to the presidency.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the representative of Qatar.
At the outset, I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Jan Egeland for his briefing this
morning.

06-64061

S/PV.5577 (Resumption 1)

In accordance with the Charter, the prevention of
armed conflict is without a doubt one of the first
priorities of the international Organization. However,
the most tragic losses in armed conflict are those
inflicted upon civilians. Such losses are among the
most heinous consequences of armed conflict. For that
reason, it is essential that United Nations bodies for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict devote
sufficient attention, time and efforts to that task.
Despite efforts to protect civilians, there has
unfortunately been an increase in the number of armed
conflicts throughout the world in recent years. There
has also been a noticeable change in the nature of such
conflicts. Urban and residential areas have increasingly
been transformed into battlefields in cases of internal
conflict and civil strife. That has contributed to the
surge in the number of victims among civilian
populations.
Although armed conflict takes a higher toll
among women and children in comparison to other
groups, the international community has only recently
begun to realize that fact. We must, therefore, focus
greater attention on the suffering of women and
children caught up in armed conflict. We also take note
of the ongoing recruitment of children and adolescents’
which makes them victims of armed conflict.
Moreover, many of the armed conflicts raging
today involve non-State actors. Many such actors fail
to uphold international humanitarian law and fail to
commit themselves to respecting human rights. That
problem must be addressed differently from the way
such violations committed by States and Governments
are addressed.
In the context of the efforts made to put an end to
armed conflict, it is crucial to obtain correct
information about unfolding developments. That
important task falls to journalists, who face serious
challenges in delivering information to the public. The
international community, and especially the parties to a
conflict, must therefore commit themselves to
protecting journalists, for they too are civilians.
It is abhorrent that civilians find themselves in
harm’s way during armed conflict. But even more
abhorrent is the deliberate violent targeting of
civilians. This phenomenon is not confined only to
targeting civilians for acts of violence, but it also
includes indiscriminate acts of violence without taking
into account the necessary measures to avoid striking

06-64061

civilian targets. That constitutes cynical disregard for
the lives of civilians and, as such, it is no different
from targeting them deliberately.
The State of Qatar is part of a region in which
civilians continue to suffer from the repercussions of
armed violence. Dozens of innocent civilians are killed
in Iraq every day. The war in Lebanon last July
resulted in the deaths of more than 1,500 people in
only one month, most of them civilians. There have
also been numerous victims in occupied Palestinian
territory as a result of ongoing violence. They too are
predominantly civilians. The total number of civilians
killed since the outbreak of the recent crisis in the
ongoing Palestinian-Israeli conflict exceeds 4,000
since 2000.
Endangering the lives of civilians is not only a
violation of international norms, laws and conventions —
including the Charter of the United Nations — it is also a
violation of numerous resolutions and presidential
statements issued by the Security Council on the
protection of civilians.
Prevention is always better than cure. It is
important that we treat symptoms; however, it is more
important that we address the root causes of this
problem. Therein lies the importance of adopting
policies that promote sound sustainable development,
building a harmonious society, bringing about national
reconciliation and encouraging preventive diplomacy.
To do otherwise would constitute reaction at best. We
need comprehensive plans to ensure more protection of
civilians, plans that include existing mechanisms.
Those, in turn, must be translated into reality and
implemented, while activating the role of humanitarian
organizations and emphasizing the need that they
remain unbiased, neutral and independent.
The United Nations role in the protection of
civilians is indispensable. We note that the protection
of civilians is a priority of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and that, in that context, it is
especially important to have child protection advisers
during conflict, particularly when children are
endangered. In that regard, we call on the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations to include child protection
advisers in the structure of peacekeeping operations,
and particularly the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon following its recent expansion.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

9

S/PV.5577 (Resumption 1)

I give the floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Carmon (Israel): At the outset, I would like
to join my colleagues in congratulating you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency of the Council and to thank
you for convening this open debate. We trust that, with
your able stewardship, you will aptly guide the work of
the Council in dealing with the various challenges that
the international community faces around the world.
I also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Egeland for his briefing and for his dedication to
addressing humanitarian concerns across the globe
over the past years. We wish him much success in the
future.
Israel assigns vital importance to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict and is encouraged by the
continued efforts of the Security Council, the
Secretary-General and his staff in that area. We believe
that all individuals should live without fear of physical,
sexual, psychological and other forms of abuse
stemming from conflict.
As Mr. Egeland said this morning, the
international community must demonstrate that it has a
“depoliticized [and] truly shared interest” in ensuring
the protection of civilians. Efforts will be “judged by
the extent to which our actions have made a
difference”. To that extent, Israel appreciates the
emphasis in recent reports on protecting women and
children, and believes that continued grass-roots
efforts, alongside greater governmental engagement,
can help end that deeply troubling phenomenon.
In recent months, we have been reminded of the
vulnerability of and danger posed to civilians in our
region by forces of extremism and instability, as
evidenced by the conflict with Hizbollah in Lebanon
and the ongoing Palestinian terror war against Israel.
We have been reminded again that no side has a
monopoly on victimhood or human suffering, and that
the jagged shards of armed conflict can cut deep and
wide, affecting all civilians – Israeli, Lebanese and
Palestinian.
Over the summer, Hizbollah terrorists operating
in southern Lebanon fired some 4,000 Katyusha
rockets into northern Israel, explicitly targeting
civilians in their homes and places of work.
Hizbollah’s onslaught of raining rockets forced nearly
1 million Israeli civilians to flee their homes, causing
insufferable damage to civilian life and infrastructure.

10

Similarly, the relentless Qassam rockets fired by
Palestinian terrorists in the Gaza Strip at Israeli
communities in the South within the past year — more
than 1,000 rockets to date — were all direct and
targeted attempts on the lives of civilians, attacks
against schools and synagogues, kindergartens and
classrooms, shopping malls and playgrounds.
The blatant disregard of terrorists for the value of
human life is a brutal maliciousness that we have seen
even among their own populations. Hizbollah stored its
rockets inside homes and launched attacks from
positions nestled within the fabric of civilian life. In
using civilians as human shields, Hizbollah sought to
evade responsibility and accountability for its crimes.
Palestinian terrorists, too, have employed
civilians as shields. Recently, Palestinian civilians in
Gaza were specifically called to surround the home of
a known terrorist. Human Rights Watch recorded the
incident, declaring that
“[c]alling civilians to a location that the opposing
side has identified for attack is at worst human
shielding, at best failing to take all feasible
precautions to protect civilians from the effects of
attack. Both are violations of international
humanitarian law”.
The deliberate blurring of the distinction between
terrorist and civilian is a terrorist tactic. It is a gross
injustice that endangers civilians and betrays the
principles of human dignity and life.
It is the obligation of all nations first and
foremost to protect their people from all harm, but it is
also the obligation of all nations to ensure that they and
their citizens not endanger others. It is an obligation
which Israel embraces. No doubt, strategic and ethical
complexities regarding counter-terrorism exist; we
addressed Israel’s perspective on the issue when we
last spoke before the Council on this subject. But in the
quest to secure our world and protect all peoples, we
must strike the proper balance. Failure to hold terrorist
groups accountable gravely endangers the vitality of
the human project and will only encourage them to
increase their abuse, manipulation and exploitation of
civilians.
The ceasefire in our region, initiated and agreed
upon by Prime Minister Olmert and Chairman Abbas
one week ago, is a sign of promise for all citizens of
the region — all civilians, no matter their nationality.

06-64061

S/PV.5577 (Resumption 1)

But we must see to it as well that the underlying
tensions of the conflict and Hamas’s disregard for its
internationally accepted obligations — recognition of
Israel, renouncing violence and terror, and abiding by
previous agreements — are addressed.
The past few months have been difficult, with
difficulties levied particularly on civilians, but the past
cannot be changed and the victims of the conflict
cannot be returned. What remains is the course we
chart together for the future. Prime Minister Olmert
reasserted that position in his remarks just last week:
“All we can do today is prevent further tragedies
and bequeath to the younger generation a bright
horizon and hope for life.”
Let us hope that all sides will keep to their
commitments identified within the ceasefire and that an
authentic Palestinian partner will emerge from it,
dedicated to the vision and cause of peace.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
to the representative of Finland.
Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I have the pleasure to
speak on behalf of the European Union. Bulgaria,
Romania, Turkey, Croatia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia, Iceland and Ukraine
align themselves with this declaration.
I wish to thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to
discuss this important issue in the Security Council. I
also want to thank Under-Secretary-General Jan
Egeland for his informative briefing. The European
Union would like to extend its appreciation to
Mr. Egeland for his excellent work as the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
complex challenge. Civilians, including women and
children, continue to bear the brunt of armed conflicts.
The European Union welcomes the sustained attention
paid by the Security Council to that important issue.
At the 2005 World Summit, the heads of State
and Government recognized that the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is a key concern of the
international community. The European Union
reiterates its support for the historic Summit Outcome
conclusion that each individual State has the
responsibility to protect its population from genocide,

06-64061

war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity – a conclusion which was reaffirmed by
resolution 1674 (2006).
The best way to protect civilians in armed
conflicts is to prevent conflicts. The EU is pleased to
note the strengthening of the culture of prevention
across the United Nations and vigorously supports the
continuation of this trend. The Security Council plays
an important role in this regard. Timely and adequate
briefings by the Special Advisor on the Prevention of
Genocide, the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the Emergency Relief Coordinator and other relevant
actors will help the Council to act sufficiently early on
in conflict situations to effectively protect civilians at
risk.
Humanitarian access is a crucial part of
protecting civilians in armed conflict. The European
Union is troubled by the denial of full and unimpeded
access of humanitarian personnel to civilians in need of
help, especially when this is used as a political tool and
as a weapon of war. Also, attacks on humanitarian
personnel cannot be tolerated. The European Union
fully supports the Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel. We urge all parties
to conflicts to provide unimpeded access to
humanitarian assistance and to take all necessary
measures to guarantee the safety, security and freedom
of movement of humanitarian personnel and of the
United Nations and its associated personnel.
The EU is alarmed by the fact that 63 journalists
and media staff were killed in armed conflicts in 2005
and 75 in 2006. The Security Council should take note
of such a dramatic development. Journalists are
civilians and as such are entitled to full protection.
The European Union believes it is vital to
investigate crimes under international law committed
against civilians and bring their perpetrators to justice.
The restoration of law and order to prevent future
violence and abuses and the tackling of impunity
should be a priority. It is for States concerned to bring
justice to perpetrators of the most serious crimes and
for the international community to support their efforts.
Where States fail to bring perpetrators of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity to justice, the
international community should be able to act.
The European Union urges States that have not
yet done so to ratify or accede to the Rome Statute and
to the treaties of international humanitarian, human

11

S/PV.5577 (Resumption 1)

rights and refugee laws, and to take all appropriate
measures to ensure proper investigation and
prosecution of any violations of the relevant rules.
The EU highlights the effective implementation
of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, and holds that the protection of
civilians in armed conflict can be properly achieved
only by strengthening the role of women as
constructive actors in developing and implementing
appropriate responses. Protection from physical and
sexual violence remains one of the major challenges of
civilian protection. Peacekeeping operations should be
mandated to employ all feasible measures to prevent
sexual violence and to address their effects where they
take place.
United Nations peacekeeping operations and
associated personnel have a particular responsibility in
their own conduct in this regard. The European Union
reiterates its full support for the policy of zero
tolerance of sexual abuse and exploitation by such
personnel, introduced by the United Nations, and has
adopted the same policy in its own European security
and defence policy operations.
The human rights of millions of children continue
to be violated and millions of children suffer in
situations of armed conflict. Every day children are
killed, maimed, abducted or recruited, in violation of
applicable law, as child soldiers, fall victims of rape or
other grave sexual violence, and suffer from attacks
against schools and hospitals that prevent them from
enjoying their rights to education and health care. The
European Union is fully committed to protecting
children from the grave violations that occur in armed
conflicts. It is mainstreaming the issues of children and
armed conflict into its advocacy, policies and
programmes and has continued to implement its plan of
action for the guidelines on children and armed
conflict. In this context, the EU commends the
sustained activity of the Security Council’s Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflicts, as well as the
dedicated work carried out by the Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary
General,
Ms. Coomaraswamy, UNICEF and the child protection
advisers in peacekeeping operations.
The special protection needs of refugees and
displaced persons must be adequately addressed. The
European Union welcomes the call by the Security
Council for all parties to a conflict to provide for these

12

needs in peace processes and to create conditions
conducive to the voluntary, safe, dignified and
sustainable return of displaced persons. Also,
peacekeeping missions must have mandates and
resources to guarantee this, for example, by providing
security for and around displaced persons camps.
The
easy
availability
and
destabilizing
accumulations of small arms and light weapons
continue to pose a grave danger for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Another issue that the
European Union would like to highlight is that of
explosive remnants of war. Progress has been made
since the adoption of the United Nations Programme of
Action against the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in 2001, but small arms and light weapons
continue to be the real weapons of mass destruction
today. They kill thousands every day, are instrumental
in depriving millions of their human rights, undermine
development and fuel conflict, crime and terrorism.
The EU believes that transfer controls, marking and
tracing of small arms and light weapons, control of
arms brokering and ammunition and the integration of
such measures into development assistance need to be
tackled in order to better protect civilians.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
multifaceted challenge. The European Union is fully
committed and works actively to protect civilians in
armed conflict. In cooperation with the United Nations,
the EU continues its relentless work for the promotion
of peace and conflict prevention so that in the future no
one, child or adult, is forced to suffer in armed
conflicts.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mrs. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
work as President of the Security Council during the
month of December. We thank Mr. Jan Egeland, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for his
illustrative presentation. We would also like to express
our thanks to him for his support in this important area.
The Government of Colombia reaffirms its
commitment to international humanitarian law,
particularly to the norms related to the protection of
civilians. We underline the importance for international
assistance in this field to adhere to the principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence
enshrined in General Assembly resolution 46/182.

06-64061

S/PV.5577 (Resumption 1)

Following these principles — while appropriately
channelling the collective efforts in support of national
authorities — acquires a greater significance when
cooperation is directed at countries that enjoy
democratic institutions and legitimately constituted
Governments.
On this occasion my delegation also wishes to
reiterate the importance of United Nations agencies
being fully familiar with the work being carried out by
national Governments in the area of protection of
civilians when establishing the priorities of their work
and informing the Organization on the respective
situations. Objective, balanced and impartial
information includes the identification of shortcomings
and challenges, but also includes the recognition of the
progress in each country.
In the case of Colombia, it is necessary that the
reality of our situation and the efforts made by the
national Government to face the complex problems that
affect the civilian population be properly reflected in
the reports on humanitarian affairs being distributed in
the United Nations. They help to define appropriate
and effective support from the international
community.
Colombia has had to face the actions of violent
groups that have attacked the civilian population.
Those groups, financed by transnational drug
trafficking, have caused internal displacements,
kidnappings, the recruiting of children and other forms
of violence against civilians. The National Government
has been acting decisively to face the violent actions of
those groups, restore security and thus create the
conditions for the proper protection of Colombians.
Our population has responded to violence from those
criminal organizations with solid civic support for the
Government’s democratic security policy and for
strengthening that policy during the second term of
President Alvaro Uribe Vélez, which began recently.
As a result of that policy, the security situation in
the country has improved noticeably. Today in
Colombia, the national police and civilian authorities
have established a permanent presence in all of the
country’s municipalities, a situation that four years ago
was not guaranteed in 157 communities. Today, the
State has strengthened its capacity to intervene using
the armed forces to deal with criminal groups. Coca
crops have been reduced by nearly 50 per cent since
2000. The demobilization of violent groups is being

06-64061

carried out and nearly 43,000 former members of
guerrilla and self-defence groups have surrendered
their weapons.
As a result of those realities, in the last four years
all crime indicators have been substantially reduced,
including homicides, kidnappings and various attacks
against the civilian population. The number of new
annual displacement cases has also been reduced. In
2002, that number included 425,000 people. In 2005, it
was reduced to 169,000, and to 90,000 in the first ten
months of 2006.
A fundamental part of Government action
involves care for vulnerable groups. The State is
implementing humanitarian policies to care for
civilians who have become victims of violence. The
Presidential Agency for Social Action and International
Cooperation coordinates the comprehensive care
programme for displaced persons. That programme is
carried out using an approach based on the restitution
of the rights of displaced households and their social
and economic reintegration into their places of origin,
or into the places of voluntary relocation.
To that effect, national and international
cooperation resources are allocated. Likewise, the
programme includes emergency care for displaced
persons. Furthermore, the promotion of the return of
families — keeping in mind the humanitarian
principles of voluntary return and security — has
fostered the return of 120,000 people in recent years.
On the other hand, stabilized socio-economic
conditions are being promoted through actions
including loans for productive projects and technical
training, complementary support for the acquisition of
homes and subsidized health services for those families
and guaranteed education for their children.
Several recommendations that have been
repeatedly presented in United Nations reports on the
issue of displacement have been implemented in my
country in recent years. The problems are complex, but
the Government has spared no effort to face them
decisively. Colombia hopes that this progress is
recognized. The challenge in front of us is still great,
but only through a realistic vision of our situation, free
from prejudice, will it be possible to concentrate our
efforts in an effective manner for the benefit of
affected groups.
The protection of civilians also includes specific
measures and actions for indigenous communities. The

13

S/PV.5577 (Resumption 1)

Defence Ministry has implemented a policy for the
protection of ethnic minorities, which has been agreed
by indigenous organizations, through instructions to
State forces that seek to promote the protection of
communities and guarantee the respect for their
collective and individual rights in carrying out their
operations. Likewise, the Government has prepared,
with the participation of indigenous organizations, a
comprehensive plan of support for vulnerable
communities, aimed at raising long-term social welfare
and guaranteeing security conditions for the
communities affected by poverty, violence or drug
trafficking. The situation of the specific groups that
have been the object of displacement or threats by
violent groups deserves special priority and action by
the State, in the framework of policies to care for the
displaced.
The Government of Colombia fully shares the
objective of guaranteeing the protection of the civilian
population and of the enjoyment of their rights. Any
action in that area, including international support,
should be realized on the basis of cooperation and
appropriate coordination with national authorities,
under an impartial approach and in strict observance of
the principles that guide the activities of the United
Nations in the area of humanitarian assistance.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Protection of civilians is a
primary objective of the United Nations, including the
Security Council. The Council has stressed — most
recently in resolution 1674 (2006) — that the
deliberate targeting of civilians and other protected
persons may even constitute a threat to international
peace and security.
There are many factors leading to the increased
vulnerability of civilians during armed conflicts. A
major threat to civilians, both during and after armed
conflicts, is the use of cluster munitions. A number of
countries in different parts of the world are affected by
the use of cluster munitions. The humanitarian
consequences are enormous and the setback to
development is massive. We must prevent cluster
munitions from becoming a new humanitarian disaster
the way landmines did before we managed to put the
Landmine Convention in place. We must act now to
establish an international ban on cluster munitions.
Norway supports the call made by Secretary-General
Annan and also reiterated here today by United Nations
Under-Secretary-General Egeland — to turn the use of
such cluster munitions into history.

14

Forced displacement is another major obstacle to
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Internally
displaced persons (IDPs) often find themselves trapped
by the fact that the Governments primarily responsible
for their protection are the very same ones that have
created conditions leading to the displacement. Despite
their vulnerability and urgent needs for protection,
IDPs often fall between the mandates of various
humanitarian bodies.
The Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement
were developed to meet the specific challenges of
IDPs. We want to underline the normative as well as
the operational importance of the Guidelines, and we
are encouraged by the increasing use of the Guidelines
as a standard, by States, United Nations agencies and
regional and non-governmental organizations.
Situations of armed conflict pose particular risks
for women and girls. Violence against women,
including rape and other forms of sexual violence,
often becomes a weapon of war. Unfortunately, there is
often reluctance to deal with gender-based and sexual
violence. We must ensure an end to impunity for those
grave criminal acts and provide adequate protection for
women and girls.
Regarding humanitarian assistance, recent
evaluations indicate that the humanitarian community
still fails to integrate a gender perspective in a
systematic manner in their programming and
implementation practices. The result is that the rights
of women and girls are not sufficiently protected.
Norway supports the initiative by the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee (IASC) to develop a five-point
action plan to rectify this dysfunctionality on the part
of the humanitarian community.
A very specific concern as regards gender
discrimination is sexual exploitation and abuse by
United Nations and associated personnel involved in
international operations. Norway strongly regrets the
fact that this abhorrent practice continues to require
our attention. We remain strongly committed to
working actively to prevent such behaviour by all
categories of personnel. In that connection, Norwegian
military authorities enforce a zero-tolerance policy
regarding the purchase of sexual services, which
applies to all military personnel serving abroad. The
ultimate aim of our efforts should be to instil zerotolerance on an international level based on the

06-64061

S/PV.5577 (Resumption 1)

standards in the Secretary General’s bulletin on sexual
exploitation and abuse (ST/SGB/2003/13).
Armed conflicts are generally characterized by
grave and systematic human rights abuses, impunity
and absence of accountability. Whether we are able to
end impunity will strongly influence how we are able
to prevent future conflicts. Transitional justice that
ensures accountability, serves justice and achieves
reconciliation is a prerequisite in this regard.
Norway wants to pay tribute to the courageous
human rights defenders, be they journalists, lawyers,
staff of human rights non-governmental organizations
or others, who every day risk their lives and security
for the lives and freedom of others. Their cause should
be ours. We need their eyes, ears and hearts even more
during armed conflicts and in volatile phases of
transition.
Finally, we would like to express our thanks to
Under-Secretary-General Jan Egeland for his active
engagement in the issue of protection of civilians in
armed conflict, including today’s briefing to the
Council.
Mr. President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada): I would like to thank Qatar
for convening this open debate today. The Canadian
Government wishes to pay tribute to Jan Egeland for
the great commitment and very strong leadership he
has brought to protecting civilians worldwide.
All people should live in reasonable expectation
that they will not be subject to serious violations of
human rights or international humanitarian law. People
should not live in daily fear that they will be
deliberately targeted. Yet millions of people around the
world are targeted and remain displaced and
dispossessed. In Darfur, Sri Lanka, Iraq, the
Democratic Republic of Congo, Afghanistan and
northern Uganda, men, women and children face daily
threats including threats to the very right to life.
Today, I would like to focus on three themes.
First, the Security Council must demonstrate
courageous leadership and unwavering political will to
ensure that populations at risk have access to the
greatest protection possible. Secondly, continued
emphasis must be placed on ending impunity.
Perpetrators of attacks against civilians in violation of
international law must be held accountable for their

06-64061

actions. Thirdly, we all share in the responsibility to
advance a culture of protection. The Council, the
United Nations Secretariat and agencies and Member
States must make advocacy, monitoring and capacitybuilding watchwords for our efforts.
Since the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict was first brought onto the Security
Council agenda, important and practical progress has
been made. In the field, agencies are devoting greater
attention to refining their abilities to meet protection
needs. United Nations missions are authorized to use
force to deter and respond to attacks on civilians and
some are organizing themselves so that civilian
protection acts as a unifying cross-mission theme. In
addition, new sanctions regimes have been more
attentive to the need to target their impact so as to
mitigate unintended humanitarian consequences.
Canada very much welcomes the adoption of
resolution 1674 (2006) earlier this year. Nevertheless,
efforts to date suggest that international action,
including by the Council, remains uneven. We need
look no further than the grave humanitarian situation in
Darfur to understand that our vigilance must not wane.
Canada is deeply concerned by the continuing violence
and the persistent culture of impunity in Darfur. We
condemn persistent violence, in particular sexual and
gender-based violence committed by all parties,
including in internally displaced persons camps, where
rape continues to be used as a weapon of war. Canada
continues to call for an immediate end to the ongoing
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law in Darfur and an end to the persistent
culture of impunity there. We urge the Government of
Sudan to prevent further violations, to ensure
perpetrators are brought to justice in accordance with
international law, and to facilitate humanitarian action.
Similarly, the recent shelling of an internally
displaced persons camp near Vakarai in Sri Lanka
highlights the heavy price paid by civilians in that
long-standing conflict, particularly where perceptions
of civilians have grown ambiguous, and thus their
targeting, recruitment as child soldiers, or denial of
assistance to them, is no longer viewed as taboo by
some. We urge the parties to the conflict to exercise the
utmost restraint and to fulfil their obligations under
international humanitarian law, including by promoting
the protection of civilians and facilitating safe and
unhindered access for humanitarian agencies to
civilians in need.

15

S/PV.5577 (Resumption 1)

The linkage between civilian protection and the
maintenance of international peace and security is well
established. The Council has a direct role to play in
encouraging and promoting the protection of civilians.
Council members have repeatedly pledged that they
and the wider international community will take steps
in this regard. We applaud this leadership and we will
continue to support and monitor the implementation of
the Council’s commitments.
Looking ahead, the Council must be more
proactive in responding to situations where civilians
are at risk. Greater focus should be given to timely,
credible preventative measures, in addition to
restorative actions. That means drawing on the many
levers at the Council’s disposal, including good offices,
envoys and monitoring missions. The Council should
show leadership by demonstrating a greater willingness
to draw on the United Nations human rights
mechanisms for early warning, while promoting
preventative
deployments,
targeted
sanctions,
diplomatic initiatives and adherence to international
legal instruments in support of affected populations.
In that, strong and consistent Security Council
resolutions are critical. Where peace support operations
are given protection mandates, these mandates must be
unambiguous and backed up by adequate financial and
human resources.
Effective action also requires consistent followup. The Council must be proactive in monitoring the
implementation of its protection-related commitments.
That means drawing on lessons learned from missions
with protection mandates, as well as being prepared to
rethink and readjust policy approaches. The Council
should outline specific actions to be taken by parties to
a conflict, monitor their implementation and apply
penalties if actions are not taken. The message must be
unequivocal — perpetrators of abuse will be held
accountable for their actions.
On Darfur, the Council and the wider
international community has been divided and
inconsistent. There must be consequences for countries
that violate the arms embargo and for all parties that
continue to violate the peace agreements and human
rights in Darfur.
We urge all parties to adhere to the principles
agreed to in Addis Ababa, including the need to
re-energize the political process, to establish a
strengthened ceasefire, and to find a way forward for

16

peacekeeping in Darfur. The Darfur crisis can only be
resolved through a political process, not through
violence.
Field visits by the Council are also key. Council
missions provide an indispensable opportunity to urge
parties to a conflict to allow safe and unimpeded access
by aid workers to those in need, to reinforce that there
will be no impunity for genocide and war crimes, and
to ensure that United Nations missions are being
vigilant in protecting civilians and meeting the needs
of displaced populations.
There can be no impunity. States must prosecute
those who commit genocide, crimes against humanity,
war crimes or other serious human rights violations.
No amnesty should be granted for international crimes.
The Council and the broader United Nations
membership have a particular responsibility to ensure
that those who commit serious violations of
international law are brought to justice. Canada is also
concerned by deadly attacks on United Nations and
associated personnel. A recent study has highlighted
that attacks against aid workers are increasingly
politically motivated and that national staff are more at
risk than ever before. Canada urges Member States to
sign or ratify the 1994 Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel and its
Optional Protocol. Member States must show the
willingness to investigate and prosecute the
perpetrators of acts against United Nations and
associated personnel.
Let me also underscore the importance of
protecting and promoting the right to freedom of
opinion and expression. In that respect, the security of
journalists — particularly in armed conflict — requires
our ongoing attention. The United Nations must also
address hate media in its own mission planning and
operations. If left unchecked, hate media can further
fan the flames of conflict and put populations at greater
risk. Early efforts by the United Nations to counter
hate media and to ensure that those who propagate
hatred are brought to justice are important preventive
steps.
(spoke in French)
While the leadership of the Security Council is
essential to strengthen the protection of civilians, it is a
responsibility that must be shared by all of us: the
Council, the Secretariat, United Nations agencies and

06-64061

S/PV.5577 (Resumption 1)

Member States. Canada encourages the Secretariat and
United Nations agencies to leave no room for
ambiguity in their assessments, because previous
resolutions have authorized them to indicate to
Member States situations that require their attention to
protect civilians. It is essential to provide the Council
and other competent bodies with concrete advice and
recommendations.
The effectiveness of
United Nations action
depends on the capacity of United Nations country
teams on the ground. Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General,
Humanitarian
and
Resident
Coordinators and individual staff must be in a position
to indicate protection concerns to parties to conflict.
Progress in this area has been only modest; we must
further strengthen this capacity. In addition, those
deployed with a Security Council mandate to protect
civilians must better understand what is expected of
them and take a joint approach. For example, it is
essential that all actors cooperate to ensure that the
predeployment training of military and civilian police
includes a specific focus on civilian protection when
such a mandate is entrusted to them.
The 10-point plan proposed by Mr. Egeland
requires our sustained support. Each point represents a
concrete
and
essential
component.
Canada
wholeheartedly endorses this programme.
A strong framework now exists for the protection
of civilians. Resolutions 1265 (1999), 1296 (2000) and
1674 (2006), together with resolutions on conflict
prevention, women and peace and security, children
and armed conflict, the safety of humanitarian workers,
impunity and the exploitation of natural resources are a
clear set of mutually reinforcing Council commitments.
To the extent that they create a framework for Council
action, those resolutions also establish criteria that all
Member States can apply to hold the Council
accountable when it is slow to act.
The most direct measures of success are the
number of lives saved, the number of displacements
avoided and the mitigation and settlement of conflicts.
In the last analysis, the Council, the United Nations as
a whole and the Member States that constitute it will
be judged in terms of their willingness to make a real
difference in the lives of the people who need our help
most. Our actions must be concrete, and we must make
flexible and pragmatic use of the tools at our disposal.

06-64061

The Council can continue to rely on Canada’s support
in overcoming these difficulties.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now call on
the representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We hail your wisdom
and stewardship. At the same time, I would like to
express the deepest appreciation to your predecessor,
the Permanent Representative of Peru. Finally, I would
like to thank Mr. Jan Egeland, not only for his briefing
today, but also for the work that he accomplished
during his tenure in general and during the
humanitarian crisis that my country, Lebanon,
witnessed last summer. I salute him and wish him all
the best in his future endeavours.
Between 12 July and 14 August 2006, Lebanon
was the target of a ferocious Israeli aggression,
considered disproportionate by international legal
standards as well as by the international community.
The scope and the scale of the destruction were
massive: 1,191 civilians were killed and more than
4,000 were injured. Approximately 900,000 people —
one quarter of the Lebanese population — were
displaced; many of them are still homeless. Buildings
and homes were flattened to the ground.
In 34 days, the Israeli forces carried out a
massive military campaign. The Israeli air force flew
more than 12,000 combat missions, the navy fired
2,500 shells and the army fired more than 100,000
shells. The Israeli army pursued an indiscriminate and
deliberate policy of targeting civilians, whether they
were hiding in shelters, fleeing in convoys from the
area of attack or lying wounded in ambulances and
medical facilities. No measures were taken to ensure
that the targets of the attacks had no military character.
No time was given to the victims to flee, and when
time was given, the fleeing civilians were themselves
the targets of violent and inhuman attacks.
As if all these massacres were not enough; as if
the state of panic and fear experienced by the entire
Lebanese population, from north to south and from east
to west, were insufficient; and as if the attacks against
the Lebanese infrastructure, which caused billions of
dollars in losses, were inadequate, the Israeli forces
prevented humanitarian assistance from reaching large
parts of south Lebanon. In a number of instances in
which they did allow such assistance, the forces

17

S/PV.5577 (Resumption 1)

attacked the aid convoys either directly or indirectly.
The Israeli forces even attacked United Nations
positions and bases. At the Khiam base of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization, for example,
four United Nations observers lost their lives as a
result of a deliberately planned attack.
We all remember how a naval blockade and a
land blockade were imposed on Lebanon and how the
Israeli air force managed to impose a curfew on the
country, with countless raids that endangered the
humanitarian situation of all Lebanese. To this day, we
are still dealing with the lethal effects of the cluster
munitions, 90 per cent of which were fired by Israel in
the last 72 hours of the aggression. There were
1,159,200 individual bombs dispersed over south
Lebanon, concentrated in developed areas and
agricultural lands, all of which have since become
desolate.
Impunity cannot be tolerated. The twisting of
reality and blatant violations of international
humanitarian law cannot be accepted. The failure of
the Security Council to take responsible action to
ensure access to Lebanese civilians and to protect
humanitarian convoys over a three-week period should
not be repeated. The Security Council has the
responsibility to act swiftly to protect civilians.
In its presidential statement of 20 December
2002, the Security Council recognized that secure
humanitarian access and the clear separation of
civilians and combatants should be ensured in armed
conflicts. In resolution 1674 (2006), adopted on
28 April, the Security Council recalled that deliberately
targeting civilians and other protected persons in
situations of armed conflict is a flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law, and the Council asked
all parties immediately to put an end to such practices.
The high-level Commission of Inquiry, created
pursuant to Human Rights Council resolution S-2/1, of
11 August 2006, established Israel’s responsibility for
the gross violations of international humanitarian law
committed during its military attacks on Lebanon. It
has proved beyond doubt that Israel’s claims that it
took precautions to protect civilian lives in the conflict
were untrue.
In order to prevent similar events in the future,
whether in the region or in other parts of the world, the
forthcoming report concerning the protection of
civilians in armed conflict should include a clear and

18

extensive depiction of the suffering endured by the
Lebanese civilian population caused by the Israeli
attacks this past summer. Although Lebanon expresses
the utmost appreciation for all the humanitarian aid and
support that it has received from all nations of the
world and from the United Nations, it endured
extremely harsh circumstances when the ceasefire was
constantly delayed, which allowed Israel to continue its
violent attacks.
Lebanon calls on the Security Council to deploy
more efforts in the future to seek a durable and
sustainable peaceful solution to armed conflict in the
world.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
to the representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Kyaw Tint Swe (Myanmar): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the Presidency of the Council for this month. I
would also like to thank you for having convened this
open debate.
I wish to thank Mr. Jan Egeland, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for having
updated the Council on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. I also wish to take this opportunity to
express my deep appreciation to him for his leadership
and dedication in discharging his important task. His
contributions, and the noble mission that he has ably
carried out, will be remembered by the international
community.
Armed conflicts breed a cycle of violence and
bring untold suffering to innocent civilians. In the
years since the adoption of Security Council resolution
1296 (2000), the international community has faced
numerous challenges in providing security for and
ensuring the well-being of civilian populations. As
Under-Secretary-General Egeland has pointed out,
success depends on united action taken by all
members.
Armed conflicts, and the great harm they do to
civilians, are exacerbated by the easy availability of
illicit small arms and light weapons. In addition,
terrorism also causes great suffering to the civilian
population. The international community must
effectively address these serious challenges. Myanmar
joins other members of the international community in
condemning all such acts. We fully sympathize with
the victims of armed conflict in various parts of the

06-64061

S/PV.5577 (Resumption 1)

world, as we ourselves endured the bitter experience of
insurgent groups committing atrocities against the
civilian population. We fully agree that the protection
of civilians must be depoliticized and must transcend
singular interests so as to become a core principle of
humanity for all civilizations.
The most efficient way to protect civilians in
armed conflict is to resolve the root causes and bring
armed conflicts to an end. Soon after regaining
independence in 1948, Myanmar had to face an
insurgency that lasted for over 40 years. Because of the
national reconciliation efforts of the Government, 17 of
18 insurgent groups have returned to the legal fold and
are now working together with the Government for the
development of their respective regions. The
insurgency that had plagued the country has come to a
virtual end. There now remain a faction of one
insurgent group, the Karen National Union (KNU), and
remnants of armed narcotraffickers, who are now
confined to small enclaves in the border areas.
Although their ranks have greatly diminished and they
currently control little or no territory, they continue to
target civilians and commit acts of terrorism.
In order to protect the civilian population, the
Government
is
conducting
counter-insurgency
operations against those elements of the KNU and the
remnants of narcotrafficking armed groups that are
conducting terrorist activities against the civilians.
With regard to allegations that civilians suffer
from the repercussions of counter-insurgency
operations, we took the members of the diplomatic
corps and the United Nations country team to those
areas. We also invited Under-Secretary-General
Gambari to those areas, so that he could personally
witness the actual situation.
Let me conclude by expressing our strong
conviction that only through a comprehensive approach
to promote economic growth, poverty eradication,
sustainable development and national reconciliation
will we be able to put an end to armed conflicts —
which, in our view, is the best way to protect civilians.
To that end, our Government has, to date, spent over
81 billion kyats and some $550 million to develop the
border areas, where most of our ethnic nationalities
reside. The Myanmar Government will do its national
duty to protect its citizens and bring peace, stability
and prosperity to the country.

06-64061

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Under-Secretary-General Egeland to respond
to the observations made and questions posed.
Mr. Egeland: This has been another day of
sitting and listening to many good interventions and
proposals and, first and foremost, the expressions of
support of Security Council members for what we are
trying to do to protect civilians.
Certainly the good news is that that there are
fewer conflicts and we are probably doing better
humanitarian work, better peacekeeping work and
better good offices mediation work in the United
Nations than ever before. We are making progress
overall. The bad news is that the armed men in the
remaining armed conflicts, wars and internal strife are
more ruthless than ever. They are better armed than
ever, and their whole purpose seems to be to make the
situation as bad as possible for the defenceless civilian
population. So in 2007 we will really be back to the
darkest ages in terms of not protecting civilian
populations. And it is really a question of crimes
against humanity and war crimes — in certain cases
amounting to genocide. I will on my many missions
never forget the abused women of eastern Congo, the
kidnapped children of northern Uganda, the camp
population in Darfur or the relatives of the killed
civilians in Iraq and the Palestinian areas and
elsewhere.
There is, of course, one major remedy to this
situation, and that is united action, as so many have
stated today — united action by all internal actors,
their Governments, civil society and all military and
armed groups, as well as united international action.
When I started my work, the worst cases of
abuses of civilian populations were found in pockets of
southern Sudan, in eastern Congo, in northern Uganda
and in Liberia. In all of those cases, we have made
progress. But the situation has become worse in other
areas. In those other areas, including Darfur, Gaza and
Iraq, there has not been any united action, at either the
national or the international level, to put an end to the
suffering of the civilian population. Only through reachieving unity of purpose and unity of action will we
be able to make progress on these issues.
I have been heartened to see growing support for
the agenda of the protection of civilians. There are
virtually hundreds, if not thousands, of civil society
groups and non-governmental organizations following

19

S/PV.5577 (Resumption 1)

this, in the east, in the west, in the north and in the
south. I have been heartened to see that an
overwhelming majority of Member States now believe
that this is the core of what the United Nations is all
about.
As this is my swan song, I should like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the members of the Council for
your kind words. I should like to thank the secretariat
of the Security Council for always helping us. I should
like thank my staff, which has been writing all of these
long drafts for me to be presented here. I should like
also to thank the non-governmental organizations, the
United Nations agencies and all of the partners that
have developed the agenda for the protection of
civilians and have made humanitarian work more

20

effective in these last, long and tough but very
rewarding years.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Egeland for his clarifications.
We would like once again to express our
appreciation to Mr. Egeland and to wish him every
success.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

06-64061
