S/2000/799

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 August 2000
Original: English

Letter dated 14 August 2000 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to resolution 1291 (2000) of 24 February 2000, by
which the Security Council decided to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) until 31
August 2000. The Council also requested me to provide a report to the Council
every 60 days on the implementation of that resolution.
My next report to the Council would therefore be due by 24 August and would
contain recommendations on the status of MONUC in the light of the situation as it
has developed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. These developments have
regularly been brought to the attention of the Council by my previous reports and
through informal briefings.
Members of the Security Council are therefore aware of the adverse climate
which has so far prevented the deployment of MONUC in accordance with the
Council’s resolutions. The situation is characterized by persistent large-scale
fighting in many parts of the country, severe restrictions imposed by the
Government and other parties on the Mission’s freedom of movement, the refusal of
the Government to permit the deployment of United Nations armed troops in
accordance with the decisions of the Council and my Special Representative and,
not least, by a sustained campaign of vilification conducted against MONUC and
individual members of its staff, which has created significant risks to their security.
The Lusaka peace process is therefore currently undergoing an extremely
challenging phase, which requires substantial reevaluation not only on the part of its
signatories, but also of the United Nations. In particular, the role MONUC can play
under current circumstances remains unclear. At the same time, there have been
major developments whose implications should be fully studied and taken into
consideration before I submit my recommendations to the Security Council. These
include the summit meeting to be convened today in Lusaka by President Frederick
Chiluba with the participation of the signatories of the Lusaka Peace Agreement
Accord, and the statement by the Government of Rwanda concerning the
disengagement of its forces in Kasai.
In order to allow sufficient time to assess the impact of these important
developments and to formulate my recommendations accordingly, I would like to
request that the Security Council consider an interim extension of the mandate of
MONUC for one month, until 30 September 2000.

00-60708 (E) 140800
`````````

S/2000/799

I should be grateful if you would bring this matter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.

(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2
