S/PV.7860

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7860th meeting

Thursday, 12 January 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Skoog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Sweden)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen Mohsen
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Coleman
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Letter dated 28 October 2016 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2016/915)
Report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2016/1109)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-00835 (E)
*1700835*

S/PV.7860

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Letter dated 28 October 2016 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/915)
Report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2016/1109)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/915, which contains the text of a letter
dated 28 October 2016 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
and document S/2016/1109, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): Today I would like
to touch chiefly on the most salient aspects of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2016/1109) that the Council
has before it and the main events that have occurred
since it was issued.
First — with regard to the situation on the
ground and since the announcement in September by
the Government of the Sudan of its forces’ victory
in Jebel Marra, and therefore the end of the conflict
in Darfur — in the last three months of 2016 the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) saw only two clashes between the
Sudanese armed forces and the Sudan Liberation Army/
Abdul Wahid. Because of the losses it sustained during
2/7

12/01/2017

the Government’s offensive in the first half of 2016,
the defection of some of its commanders and growing
internal dissension, the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul
Wahid is effectively maintaining a presence only in
areas to the east and south-east of Sarrong. That, by the
way, is the area where the two clashes I mentioned took
place, on 19 November and 4 December. Also according
to the Government, the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul
Wahid has no more than about 300 fighters, who have
been pushed back to various parts of the Jebel Marra
mountain range. However, UNAMID has not been able
to confirm that, because the Sudanese Government is
still restricting our access.
Security
arrangements
were
made
and
implemented by the Governors of the five states of
Darfur. Unquestionably, there was a more sustained
interaction in their dealings with the traditional chiefs
and indigenous administrations. All of that contributed
to a decline in intercommunal violence relative to that
of the previous years. Nevertheless, tensions among the
different communities persist. As everyone knows, they
continue to be salient because of the very long-standing
disputes tied to access to land, water and other resources,
including, more recently, clandestine gold mines. All of
that has been exacerbated by the proliferation of weapons
and an environment of impunity, thereby contributing
to intercommunal violence. Let us not forget that the
seasonal migration is currently taking place and that
there have been numerous clashes between herders and
farmers in the southern part of Darfur, resulting in 71
deaths during the quarter under consideration and the
theft of livestock in the more central and western parts
of Darfur.
With regard to the civilian population, including
the most vulnerable groups, such as displaced persons,
those people continue to be exposed to an elevated risk
of violence. Throughout the territory of Darfur, there
have been serious violations of their human rights. For
example, on 1 January, only a few days ago, members
of the Sudanese Armed Forces and the police who were
pursuing persons suspected of having been involved
in the killing of a soldier did not hesitate to open fire
inside camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs) in
Nertiti, Habad East and Straha. At Straha there were
no casualties, but at Habad East two displaced persons
died, 43 others were wounded and four police officers
were also injured. Subsequently, calm was restored, and
the Deputy Governor of Central Darfur arrived at the
scene. He promised to provide compensation and to pay
17-00835

12/01/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.7860

for medical care. All of that somewhat eased tensions,
but the situation continues.

prisoners and the role of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur in future negotiations.

(spoke in English)

All those actors engaged with the parties in order
to bridge their differences. On 11 December 2016, the
Deputy Prime Minister of Qatar, the Government of
the Sudan, UNAMID and the United Nations Special
Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan held consultations
in Doha to review the status of the negotiations and
outstanding issues. On 20 December, President Mbeki
met with President Al-Bashir and other Government
officials in Khartoum to discuss prospects for the
resumption of the cessation of hostilities and the status
of the National Dialogue. On 25 December, President
Museveni of Uganda engaged with the leadership of the
Justice and Equality Movement and the Sudan Liberation
Army/Minni Minawi in Kampala and discussed with
them their specific concerns on the remaining points
of disagreement. Finally, on 31 December, President
Al-Bashir announced a one-month extension of the
Government’s unilateral ceasefire in Darfur and the
two Areas, which had expired at the end of the year,
and doubled down on that with the reiteration of his
call for opposition groups to join the National Dialogue.
President Al-Bashir also met with the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Sudan and South Sudan
in Khartoum on 4 January and expressed readiness
to further extend the ceasefire and reiterated the
Government’s commitment to implement the road map
agreement. As Council members are aware, the Abdul
Wahid faction remains outside of the peace process and
rejected any form of talks with the Government.

As of today, humanitarian actors have verified
97,000 displaced persons as a result of the fighting
in Jebel Marra in 2016, while an additional 88,000
people have been reported but not verified as displaced
because we lacked access to the relevant locations.
Humanitarian work remains impeded by insecurity,
delays and denials of access and travel requests. The
past month, however, has seen some improvements
with the completion of a joint assessment mission
involving the agencies and Government in Gola in
Central Darfur, and the regulations governing military
access were eased by the Government’s humanitarian
aid commission.
In that environment, UNAMID has continued
to provide physical protection through military and
police patrols to prevent, deter and respond to threats
of violence against civilians. They focused on large
areas of displacement such as Tawila and Sortony in
North Darfur. Following the attack on IDP camps in
Nertiti, UNAMID immediately deployed a police
verification patrol to the area and intensified military
and police patrols, coupled with the engagement of the
Government of Central Darfur and the IDP community
to defuse tensions. The mission further contributed to
the prevention and mitigation of intercommunal conflict
through constant engagement with local communities
within the framework of early-warning networks,
assessment and confidence-building missions and
targeted patrols, thereby facilitating dialogue between
sedentary farmers, nomads and other communities and
calling for the effective engagement of Government
and community leaders to resolve disputes.
Allow me now to say a word about the political
situation. There have been concerted efforts by
UNAMID and the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel. Despite the initiatives taken by
other international actors, including the Presidents of
Chad and Uganda, as well as the Deputy Prime Minister
of Qatar, little tangible progress has been made in the
Darfur peace process. The engine of the process and
future political talks, which would be an agreement on
the cessation of hostilities and humanitarian assistance,
has remained stalled because of persistent disagreement
between the parties on the modalities for the disclosure
of armed movement locations in Darfur, the release of

Following the conclusion of the National Dialogue
in October 2016, the Government took steps to
implement its recommendations. Accordingly, on
27 December, the National Assembly of the Sudan
adopted several constitutional amendments that
established a Government of National Reconciliation
and the position of Prime Minister, both to be appointed
by the President. They also included an increase in
the number of seats in the Assembly, so that there
can be greater representation and participation of
opposition groups, and the separation of functions of
the Attorney General and the Minister of Justice. But,
in the absence of an agreement with the Government
on the format and substance of the National Dialogue,
major opposition groups have continued to boycott
and criticize the process because they feel that it is
insufficiently inclusive. There have been reports of
arrests of opposition party members and political

17-008353/7

S/PV.7860

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

activists, as well as the closure of media outlets that
were critical of the Government’s austerity measures
aimed at preventing inflation. On the basis of that, the
opposition has also argued that the current situation in
the Sudan is not conducive to national reconciliation
and a free and inclusive political process.
Turning to my final point, concerning relations
with the Government of the Sudan, I am pleased to
report on essentially unobstructed customs clearance
of food shipments at Port Sudan, but not of contingentowned equipment. However, progress has been made
in the latter area. Progress has also been made in the
granting of visa requests for some of the mission’s
personnel. I am hopeful that that spirit of cooperation
will be maintained to address the mission’s remaining
operational challenges, including access and freedom
of movement restrictions, the clearance of military
and police equipment and delays and denials of visa
requests for the Human Rights Section, because that
does not contribute to carrying out the mandate.
As had been requested by the Security Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council, the two
organizations held discussions with the Government
on the implementation of the UNAMID benchmarks
and on the exit strategy within the framework of the
joint working group, which convened in Khartoum
in October and November. These meetings were an
opportunity to review the implementation status of
the benchmarks, including the commendable progress
made on some points in this respect, and to identify what
remains pending. However, the joint working group
was not able to reach consensus on specific modalities
for the reconfiguration of the mission in the light of the
changes that have occurred on the ground. The United
Nations, in partnership, as ever, with the African
Union, will continue to engage with the Government,
including within the framework of the joint working
group, to address issues related to the benchmarks, the
objective being to adjust them as necessary, as well as
issues related to the UNAMID exit strategy.
In sum, the current situation in Darfur is
characterized by a significant decrease in armed
conflict, particularly as a result of the Government’s
military successes against the armed movements and
the efforts of state governments to curb intercommunal
violence. Despite these improvements, however,
civilians remain exposed to significant sources of
insecurity: intercommunal conflict, criminality and the
activities of armed militias. Because of the widespread
4/7

12/01/2017

proliferation of weapons and the inadequacy of rule-oflaw and justice institutions, this is not being mitigated.
Undoubtedly, long-term, comprehensive solutions
remain necessary to create the conditions for the
return or resettlement of the people who remain in
displacement in the region — I would recall here that
the figure is 2.6 million people — as well as for the
resolution of the deep causes of conflict: access to land,
water and other resources.
Now more than ever, we must call on all stakeholders
in Darfur to continue working with UNAMID and
the international community so that we can achieve
these goals.
The President: I thank Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the member of the
Council who wishes to make a statement.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, for presenting the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2016/1109). Uruguay wishes to stress that
the report notes that no significant conflicts were
reported in Darfur over the past three months and
that compared with previous years, there were fewer
intercommunal clashes. We wish also to acknowledge
the steps taken by the Government of the Sudan to limit
intercommunal tensions and fight crime.
Nevertheless, these encouraging elements have
not been accompanied by any tangible progress in the
Darfur peace process or in addressing the underlying
causes of the conflict. In this regard, we encourage
all the parties involved to renew as soon as possible
direct talks in order to reach a formal agreement on
a cessation of hostilities and humanitarian access, and
move towards a political solution to the conflict.
I should like to highlight once again the important
role being played by the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in
an operational context that is not without problems.
In terms of protecting civilians, UNAMID is focusing
its activities mainly on protecting internally displaced
persons (IDPs) and the prevention of intercommunal
conflict. We take note of the efforts being made by
UNAMID in this context, and we highlight the fact
that, as stated in the report, the mission, in coordination
with the United Nations country team, mapped the
protection situation in 174 locations hosting IDPs,
17-00835

12/01/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

including camps, gathering sites and communities.
This exercise measured approximate number of IDPs,
the main protection issues, response capacities and risk
levels. We encourage the mission to continue its efforts
to improve the effective protection of civilians through
a comprehensive approach, as it has been doing, for
instance, in terms of mediation in local conflicts and
supporting reconciliation efforts and peace processes
between various communities.
With regard to the operational situation, while
there has been an improvement in the issuance of visas
to UNAMID personnel and food ration shipments
for its troops, I would reiterate that, in keeping with
the obligations emanating from the status-of-forces
agreement, the Government of the Sudan must take
the steps necessary to eliminate all bureaucratic
impediments and ensure that UNAMID enjoys
conditions conducive to fully carrying out its mandate.
We would also highlight that the note dated
23 December 2016 from the Permanent Representative
of the Sudan addressed to the Security Council
referred to obstacles in connection with UNAMID’s
exit strategy.
In closing, allow me to express Uruguay’s
appreciation to all UNAMID personnel, the United
Nations country team in the Sudan, and the humanitarian
actors who continue to work tirelessly, often under
difficult conditions, to achieve lasting peace in Darfur.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
country’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month and to wish you every success in
your work. I should like also to thank your predecessor,
the Permanent Representative of Spain, for his efficient
stewardship of the work of the Council last month.
Similarly, I wish to thank the Secretary-General for
the report (S/2016/1109) presented on his behalf today
to the Security Council. In addition, I wish everyone a
happy and successful 2017, in particular Mr. Ladsous,
and I thank him for all of his efforts.
In previous statements before the Security Council
and on other occasions, we have very often stressed the
continuing improvement of the situation in Darfur, in
particular from a security, political and humanitarian
standpoint. The various reports of the joint working

S/PV.7860

group, as well as the visits and missions by United
Nations representatives and special representatives of
various countries, in addition to the report presented
today, all have confirmed that progress has been made
in Darfur. This is, of course, the result of the efforts
made by the Sudanese Government, with the help of
our international partners. The Sudanese armed forces,
as well as other regular forces, have been able to take
control of the entire territory of Darfur following the
departure of the rebel forces, which are now outside of
the Sudan.
All of this has made it possible to ensure security
and to prevent tribal conflicts. The Council can see that
in 2016, there was no significant tribal conflict that
could have had an impact on security and stability in
Darfur. For us, that is a great accomplishment and a
great step forward, if we take account of the four most
recent reports of the Secretary-General since 2015.
We also have the first report of 2016 (S/2016/1109),
which indicates that tribal clashes were a serious threat
to peace and security in Darfur, which is no longer the
case. That is why the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) has been able
to justify its presence, thus far, in Darfur.
Today, however, what prevails in Darfur is security,
stability and recovery, which have had a positive impact
on the humanitarian situation as well. In 2016, we saw
the return of 93,000 displaced persons and refugees
who returned from Chad and who have re-established
themselves in Darfur. Southern Darfur saw the return
of 71,000 people; 65,000 returned to western Darfur;
32,000 to central Darfur and 21,600 to eastern Darfur.
All of that is thanks to the provision of basic services to
their villages. Those villages are part of the voluntary
return that was facilitated by the League of Arab States
and Qatar, as well as other countries, particularly China
and Japan — countries that have also contributed to the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. Our Government
also wants to put a plan in place to improve the
conditions for voluntary return for our citizens.
The Sudanese Government is doing everything it
can to establish a holistic and long-term peace across
our national territories to move us away from war and
fratricide. That is why we are pursuing dialogue and
negotiations, in order to advance the peace process and
put an end to the conflict. We have made great efforts
to work with different factions, and were successful
when the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid joined

17-008355/7

S/PV.7860

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the National Dialogue, launched by our President.
That initiative was integrated into the constitutional
amendments that are currently under discussion. Thabo
Mbeki, Chair of the African Union High Level Panel
on Darfur, led the ongoing African mediation efforts,
which seek better results with the other functions, with
a view to achieving sustainable peace.
I reiterate the demand that we have already made
of the Security Council — to bring pressure to bear
on the more recalcitrant movements as a means to
encourage them to continue negotiations in order to
put an end to the suffering of our population in Darfur.
I would also like to kindly request that the Council
deal firmly with the case of the rebel Abdul Wahid
Mohamed al-Nour, who has consistently rejected any
initiative that promotes dialogue. He is called Mr. No
in the Sudan, as he has rejected all of our proposals for
dialogue. In the face of that, we must apply the Security
Council’s resolutions firmly, particularly paragraph 3
(c) of resolution 1581 (2005). It is very important that
Abdul Wahid be added to the sanctions list. The African
members of the Security Council should take that into
account. We officially request that the Council take that
matter in hand.
For two years now, the Secretary-General has
responded positively to my country and to the demand
that we made for a gradual disengagement strategy for
UNAMID. We made that request in 2014; it is a logical
and legitimate request, which is based on a number of
different considerations.
First of all, the security situation and the
humanitarian and political situation have improved
drastically in Darfur. Everyone is aware of that. The
reports of the Secretary-General are also evidence of
that fact. That is why the presence of UNAMID, in its
current form, does not seem logical. UNAMID also has
a very significant budget, whereas the international
community needs those resources to react to
humanitarian crises and issues elsewhere in the world.
In addition, the withdrawal of UNAMID from
certain sectors would still allow us to continue the
peace process because those sectors no longer require
a UNAMID presence. Currently there is an unequal
situation in some zones of Darfur, but it covers an
enormous territory. Peace is possible thanks to a
series of factors that we see are seeing now. That is
why there should be a progressive, flexible and quick
withdrawal strategy.
6/7

12/01/2017

We have carried out a number of cycles of
negotiations and consultations with the United Nations
and the African Union with the help of the joint
working group. That group has met four times, most
recently in November. There were also two evaluation
visits made to different parts of Darfur. The group
demonstrated that the situation has improved, thereby
allowing the withdrawal of UNAMID from eastern
Darfur, for example. Representatives of the United
Nations, with whom we have carried out discussions,
continue to reject the withdrawal of UNAMID from
other sectors as well. That is why I would like to make
some clarifications.
The Government of my country has reached the
conclusion that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations does not take seriously the disengagement
strategy for UNAMID. However, my Government
has, at several turns, demanded that the strategy be
taken into account and that dialogue and national
consultation be considered. That is the request of the
Sudanese Government. We are surprised to see that the
international community continues to bear the financial
and material burden for UNAMID when, in fact, there
is no longer a need to do so. UNAMID is no longer
needed in some sectors. It is as if UNAMID were an
end in itself and not, in fact, a means of securing peace
in Darfur.
The UNAMID budget is now a whopping $1.3 billion
annually. A small fraction of that would allow for
certain cities in the area of Darfur to be supported,
which, in turn, would help us make progress in our
efforts for development. Different agencies have also
visited various regions and sectors of Darfur — Jebel
Marra in particular. We therefore stress the need to
build a road that would allow us to end the armed
conflict and the armed confrontations. It would be very
useful if we could begin such a project. We must take
all the necessary measures to secure disengagement in
a gradual fashion, which would allow us to implement
the objectives set up in February 2015. I would also like
to stress that my Government will not accept the option
whereby the withdrawal or the end of the work of the
joint working group, which my Government is a part
of and is very important to us, and we need to continue
the implementation of a UNAMID withdrawal strategy.
We have sent two messages to the SecretaryGeneral on that subject. One of them was sent by the
Foreign Minister of my country. We have also contacted
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations on that
17-00835

12/01/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

issue. We agree with the Secretary-General’s report,
in that it stresses the need to resolve the deep-seated
causes of conflict in Darfur and to continue to commit
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
To that end, my country continues its efforts
to carry out holistic development in all sectors and
across Darfur. As the Council knows, one of the main
problems in Darfur is the scarcity of resources. Our
efforts are therefore ongoing. We are trying to better
connect the two cities of Al-Fashir and Khartoum. It is
the first time that high-speed roads have been built and,
for the first time in a long while, products from Jabel
Marra are now being sold in Khartoum.
Lastly, I would also like to highlight our sincere
willingness to achieve peace in Darfur and to continue

S/PV.7860

our cooperation with the United Nations, the African
Union and all of our other partners so that we can attain
our noble objectives and meet everyone’s interests.
I would like to reiterate my gratitude to UNAMID
and to all troop- and police-contributing countries. I
should also like to commend the efforts of the African
Union-United Nations Special Representative for
Darfur, Mr. Martin Uhomoibhi. In one year, he has
assisted us in making considerable headway and in
re-establishing trust between the Sudan and UNAMID.
Once again, I should like to stress that we are ready
to continue dialogue with all of the members of the
Council and to cooperate in a positive manner.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

17-008357/7
