54

General A111embly-Seventeenth Session

report of the Fifth Committee to the General Assembly
at its sixteenth session, 15
Recognizing that the principle of an equitable geographical distribution it: the composition of t~e Se~retariat <loes not conflict wlth the paramount constderations
of employment of staff, namely, the necessity oí securing
the highest standards of efficiency, competence and
integrity as laid down in Article 101, paragraph 3, of the
Charter of the United Nations,
N oting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral16 and the improvements that have taken place
in the geographical distribution oí the staff,
Recognizing that significant imbalances in t~e geographical distribution oí the staff oí the Secretanat continue to exist,
Recognizing further the necessity oí correcting these
imbalances as early as possible,
l. . Recommends that the Secretary-General should be
guided in his efforts to achieve a more equítable geographical distribution, within the general framework
of his report, by the following principles and factors :
(a) In the recruítmen_t of all staff, ~ue re¡sar? s~all
be paid to securing as w1de a geqgraph1cal d1stnbut10n
as possible ;
( b) In the Secretariat proper, an equitable geographical distribution should ta~e i!1to account _the fact
of membership, Members' contnbuttons and the1r populations as outlined in the Secretary-General's report,
particularly paragraph 69 ( b) thereoí; no Member
State should be considered "over-represented" if ít has
no more than five of its nationals on the staff by virtue
of its membership;
(e) The relative importance of posts at different
levels;
(d) The need for a more balanced regional composition of the staff at levels of D-1 and above;
(e) In career appointments, particular account should
be taken of the need to reduce "under-representation" ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General ta review periodically the geographical distribution of the staffs of the
Technical Assistance Board, the Special Fund and the
United Nations Children's Fund, and to report annually
to the General Assembly on this matter;
3. Requests the Secretar~•-General to report to the
General Assembly at its eighteenth session on the progress achieved in the geographical distribution of the
staff of the Secretariat.
1199th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.

1853 (XVII). United Nations lntemational School
The General Assembly,
H aving considered the report of the Secretary-General, together with the report of the Board of Trustees
of the United Nations International School,17 and the
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions on this subject, 18
111 [bid., Sixteenth Sessio11,, Annexes, agenda ítem 64, document A/5063.
16 [bid., Seventeenth Sessi011,, Annues, agenda item 70, document A/5270.
1T [bid., agenda ítem 72, document A/5308.
18 /bid., document A/5319.

N oting the action taken by the Secretary-General and
the Board of Trustees to locate a permanent site for the
School, to raise funds from voluntary sources to acquire
the site, and to build the new School,
N oting further the progress made in reducing the
operating deficit of the School,
N oting also the increasing number of applications for
admission to the School and its role in the recruitment
and retention of qualified personnel for the United
Nations,
Recalling its resolution 1439 (XIV) of 5 December 1959 by which the General Assembly decided to contribute to the International School Fund for a period
of five years such continuing financia! assistance as the
Assembly might consider necessary, and its subsequent
resolutions 1591 (XV) of 20 December 1960 and 1727
(XVI) of 20 December 1%1 by which it contributed
grants to liquidate the operational deficit and to begin
planning for the permanent accommodation of the
School,
l. Expresses its appreciation to the Mayor and the
City of N ew York for their continuing co-operation in
the location of a permanent site for the United Nations
International School and in extending the availability of
the present temporary premises;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to use
his good offices to assist the Board of Trustees in raising from voluntary sources the additional funds required
for the construction of the School and the creation of
an endowment fund ;
3. Decides to contribute $50,000 to the International
School Fund towards liquidating the operational deficit
anticipated for the current school year ;
4. Decides to contribute $20,000 to the International
School Fund for the purpose of forwarding plans for
the permanent accommodation of the School.
1199th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.

1854 (XVII). Administrative and budgetary procedures of the United Nations
A
The General Assembly,
Having regard to resolution 1731 (XVI) of 20
December 1961, in which the General Assembly recognized its need for authoritative legal guidance as to
obligations of Member States under the Charter of the
United Nations in the matter of financing the United
N ations operations in the Congo and in the Middle East,
Recalling the question submitted to the Internation"i'l
Court of Justice in that resolution,
Having received the Court's advisory opinion of
20 July 1962, 19 transmitted to the General Assembly by
the Secretary-General,20 that the expenditures authorized in the General Assembly resolutions designated in
resolution 1731 (XVI) constitute "expenses of the
Organization" within the meaning of Article 17, paragraph 2, of the Charter,
19 Certain expenses of the United Nations ( Article 17, paragraph 2, of the Charter), Advisory Opinion of 20 July 1962:
l.C.J. Reports, p. 151.
20 Official Records of the Genn-al Assembly, Sevmteenth
Sessian, Annexe.r, agenda ítem 64, document A/5161.
