UNITEDNATIOiVS

THIRTY-THIRD

YEAR

th
MEETING: 6 MAY 1978
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2078)

. . ... . .. . ... .. ... .. .. ... . . ... .

Page

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 5 May 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/l 2690) _

1

SlPV.2078

NOTE
Symbols of ,United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2078th MEETING
Held in New York on Saturday,
President: Mr, Ruben CARP10 CASTILLO (Venezuela).

6 May 1978, at 11 a.m.
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.

At the invitation of the President, Mr, Bouayad-Agha
(Algeria), Mr. Houngavou (Benin), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba)
and Mr. Lobo (Mozambique) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2078)

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): 1 wish
also to inform members of the Council that 1 have received
a letter dated 6 May from the Chairman of the United
Nations Council for Namibia, Ambassador Konie, which
reads as follows:

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 5 May 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2690)

“The Security Council is now considering the complaint
of the People’s Republic of Angola concerning the acts of
aggression committed against the People’s Republic of
Angola by South Africa, which apparently used for this
purpose the Territory of Namibia.

l%e meeting was called to order at I2.10 p.m.

“I wish to convey to you the desire of the United
Nations Council for Namibia to participate in this debate,
without the right to vote, and to be represented by me in
my capacity as President of the Council for Namibia.”

Adoption of the agenda
27te agenda was adopted.

4. On previous occasions, the Security Council has extended invitations to other relevant bodies of the United
Nations when considering questions on its agenda. Therefore, if I hear no objection, I shall extend an invitation to
the President of the United Nations Council for Namibia
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 5 May 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/12690)
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish)’ In
accordance with the decision taken by the Council at its
2077th meeting, I invite the representative of Angola to
take a place at the Council table, and the representatives of
the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

It was so decided.
5. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Members of the Council have before them document S/12692,
,which contains the text of a draft resolution sponsored by
Bolivia, Gabon, India, Kuwait, Mauritius, Nigeria and
Venezuela. I wish also to draw the attention of members of
the Council to document S/l 2688, which contains the text
of a letter dated 4 May addressed to the Secretary-General
by the representative of Sri Lanka.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola) took a place at the Council table and M,r. Salim
(United Republic of Tanzania) and Miss Konie (Zambia)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

6. I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution in
document S/l 2692.

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I wish
to inform members of the Council that I have received
letters from the representatives of Algeria, Benin, Cuba and
Mozambique requesting that they should be invited to
participate in the debate. Consequently, I propose, in
conformity with past practice and with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the
debate, without the right to vote, in accordance with the

A vote was taken by show of hands.
Z’he draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 1
1 See resolution.428 (1978).
I

7. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
first speaker is the representative of Angola, on whom I
now call.
8. Mr. DE FIGUEIREDO
(Angola): I have asked to speak
in order to inform you, Mr. President, the members of the
Council and the world that racist South African troops are
still in my country. I have also learned and should Iike to
share with you and the members of the Council the
information that 16 members of the Angolan armed forces
have died and 64 have been wounded; 504 Namibian
refugees have died and 224 have been wounded. The town
of Kassinga has been partially destroyed and we are now
evaluating the damage.
9. My delegation has studied the draft resolution and,
while its content reflects in part the realities of the events
to which my country has been subjected by the malicious,
vicious, racist South African Government and its cohorts, I
should indeed have liked to have had the words “armed
aggressions” included in that resolution.
10. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): The delegation of Kuwait is
very happy that the draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously. This is a positive response to the unmistakable drift towards lawlessness in the world today. Member
States take the law into their own hands and violate the
Charter of the United Nations, and yet they get away with
it. Unless this drift is arrested and, indeed, reversed towards
the right direction, there will be a descent into international
anarchy which will make this earth a jungle of adventurism
in which muscle rather than reason will prevail. The
dastardly attack by South Africa on Angola is nothing but
an outcome of this drift towards lawlessness. South Africa
called its invasion against the sovereignty of Angola a
“mopping up operation”. This term was used recently by
its twin sister, Israel, to describe its aggression against
Lebanon. These twin sisters have contributed enormously
to the state of lawlessness which characterizcs the present
world. Both sisters subsist on .aggression, apartheid and
racism and on the intimidation of their neighbours.

12. The timing of the attack by South Africa against
Angola invites certain observations. It has been said that it
took place in the wake of the special session of the General
Assembly on Namibia at which the overwhelming majority
voted for the Programme of Action for the liberation of
Namibia [resolution S-9/2]. It has also been said that the
invasion of Angola was designed to complicate matters for
the five Western States members of the Council that
worked so hard on their proposals for a peaceful transfer of
power in Namibia. All this is true and credible. But we
should not forget that the attack on Angola is bracketed
between two special sessions. We have just finished the
special session on Namibia and are preparing for the special
session on disarmament. One cannot resist the temptation
to describe the honest cry for disarmament, in the light of
what has been happening in the Middle East and in
southern Africa, as a tragic farce. The invasion of Angola by
South Africa is a vivid example of how much a brutal force
can do in the face of a crippled world. We cannot expect
Angola, Zambia and other countries all over the world to
entertain the luxury of talking seriously about disarmament
when they see the integrity of their territories mauled by
adversaries armed to the teeth, with no counteraction by
the international community.
13. The attack on Angola is designed to ostracize that
young republic and to discourage it from assisting its kith
and kin in Namibia in their struggle for emancipation, The
South African Government’s intention is also to dislocate
the economic plans for development in Angola and to
disrupt its social fabric in order to create an atmosphere of
anxiety from which South Africa benefits.
14. The international Territory of Namibia was used in
this aggression as a staging post from which South Africa’s
troops took off in their mission of destruction. The fact
that this international territory is used for aggression makes
it tnore urgent to secure the termination of South Africa’s
illegal occupation of the Territory. The attack by itself is a
challenge to the Security Council, but the use of Namibia
makes it more challenging and therefore the demand for
drastic action in this case is more justified.
15. The delegation of Kuwait is in favour, as it has always
been, of the adoption of punitive measures in accordance
with Chapter VII of the Charter. A comprehensive set of
sanctions to be adopted by the Council in the future is
necessary and advisable. This should not exclude an oil
embargo, especially with the present composition of the
Council, of which four members are members of the
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries. The Council already invoked Chapter VII of the Charter when it
adopted resolution 418 (1977) on an arms embargo.

il. The complaint before the Council is not Angola’s or
Africa’s, It is a complaint of the whole civilized world
against the absence of respect for international law and for
the purposes and principles of the Charter which all of US
rave so much about. And the sad point in this unwholesome
state of affairs is that aggressors go Scot-free. The inability
of the Council, the supreme body for the maintenance of
world peace and order, to take corresponding measures to
check aggression has encouraged irresponsible Member
States to pursue their violent course of destruction with
impunity. On the other hand, this inability of the Council
has left the victims of such aggression with no choice
except to rely on whatever means are available to defend
themselves. It has bred extremism that thrives on the
agonizing despair of the defenceless. For who can blame
Mr. Sam Nujoma, the leader of the South West Africa
People’s Organization (SWAPO), when last night [2077th
meeting] he articulated the agony of his people in stating
that the only road the Narnibians had in order to free
themselves from the oppressive occupation of South Africa
was the costly road of armed struggle.

16. The delegation of Kuwait would like to assure Angola
of its support for its efforts for economic and social
progress and for the preservation of its territorial integrity
and independence. This dastardly act of aggression by
South Africa should in no way detract from the determination of the Angolan people to achieve social and economic
progress. It is in this spirit that Kuwait co-sponsored and
voted for the draft resolution.
17. Mr. BARTON (Canada): We have heard the account
given to us by the representative of Angola of the tragic
2

events which led his country to bring once again before the
Council a most serious complaint against the Government
of South Africa. I wish to join others in expressing my
whole-hearted sympathy and sorrow for the physical
damage, the suffering and the loss of life endured by the
people of Angola as a result of this armed incursion,
conducted deep into the Angolan territory, in flagrant
violation of that country’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. I should like also to extend my sympathy to the
Namibian refugees who suffered in that attack.

24. Mr. HULINSKq (Czechoslovakia) (interpretation from
Russian); The Czechoslovak delegation has listened with
emotion [2077th meeting/ to the statements of the
representative of Angola, Mr. de Figueiredo, and the President of SWAPO, Mr. Nujoma, about the bloody aggression
committed by the racist r.&gime of South Africa against a
sovereign African State, the People’s Republic of Angolaan act committed from the international Territory of
Namibia, occupied by the South African racists.

18. The Security Council should have no hesitation, and
has shown no hesitation, in condemning this armed
incursion. No matter what is alleged to be justification for
such action, the responsibility
of the South African
Government is undeniable. Canada, for its part, acted
immediately to advise the South African Government of its
deep concern and dismay and the Secretary of State for
External Affairs stated in the House of Commons that such
actions, at a time when restraint ought to be exercised,
couId only have an unsettling effect in the prospects for
peace in the region.

25. This is not the first time that the People’s Republic of
Angola has been subjected to aggression by the South
African rkgime. The 4 May invasion of the territory of
Angola is but the latest in a series of incessant and
premeditated acts of aggression by the South African
racists, who, violating the peace and security of southern
Africa, pose a constant threat to the freedom and national
independence of peace-loving neighbouring countries. Systematically expanding their acts of aggression, the South
African racists are attempting to intimidate Angola and
other African States and to compel them to give up their
support for the just struggle of the people of Namibia and
its liberation movement, SWAPO.

19. But what we must all realize is that the NamibiaAngola border area will never become a zone of peace and
tranquillity until such time as the international community
has succeeded in restoring to the Namibian people their full
sovereign rights over their own land.

26. The barbarous invasion by the South African regime
of a Member State of the Organization, coming as it did just
after the ninth special sessionof the General Assembly
called upon South Africa to put an end forthwith to its
occupation of Namibiaand thereby provide an opportunity
for the Namibianpeople to exercise its inalienable right to
freedom and genuine independence, represents an open,
naked act of defianceof all the Members of the Organization.

20. The escalation of violence which we have witnessed in
recent weeks is bound to become irreversible unless the
prevailing political situation is totally reversed. The five
Western members of the Council have proposed a plan
which would have this effect, and I can but stress once
again that the early implementation of this plan is, in our
view, the only practical means at our disposal to lead the
Namibian people to independence and bring peace along
the border between Angola and Namibia.

27. The act of aggressioncommitted against Angola
demonstratesonceagain that the South African racistshave
no intention of withdrawing voluntarily from Namibia,nor
have they any intention of agreeingto a peaceful settlement
of the Namibian problem, as some people have recently
tried to convince the international community. In actual
fact, all their actions are designedto annihilate SWAPOwhich has beenrecognized by the Organization as the sole
and authentic representative of the Namibian people-and
in this way to create conditions for imposing upon the
Namibianpeople a so-calledinternal settlement designedto
ensuretheir domination over the Territory.

21. We, for our part, have continuously urged the principal parties concerned with the Namibian problem of the
need for restraint, even in the face of perceived provocations, in order to allow the negotiating process to follow its
course to a final solution. We have been encouraged by
much that has happened around the negotiating table, and
we feel, along with a large number of Members of the
United Nations, that success is close at hand.

28. The bandit attack on the refugeesfrom the Territory
of Namibia, in which South Africa used that Territory asa
spring-board,only aggravates the dangerous situation in
Namibia itself. In the circumstances, can anyone possibly
be surprisedby the fact that SWAP0 is displaying a great
deal of caution with regard to the various kinds of
proposals attempting to impose upon the people of
Namibiavarious dealswith South Africa?

22. We appeal once again to all concerned to direct all
their efforts towards peace and to renounce resort to
violence. There cannot be any winners in violent confrontation of this sort, and human rights and justice are certainly
the losers.
23. My delegation has given its support to the resolution
just adopted by the Council. In doing so, we are not only
condemning what must be condemned, but also indicating
that the path to peace in Namibia cannot be found in
violence. It is our most fervent hope that, in the very near
future, the Council will be able to meet under more
auspicious circumstances to take definitive action SO as to
enable the United Nations to play its rightful part in the
achievement of independence by Namibia.

29. The continuing acts of aggressioncommitted by the
South African rCgimecan be explained by the very fact of
the existence of that regime and by its attempts, at any
price, to preserve its illegal domination over Namibia.
Naturally, therefore, peace and security in that part of the
world can be ensuredonly by the immediate elimination of
the occupation of Namibia by the racists, and only by the
eradication of the very system of apartheid in South Africa
3

itself. In order to attain this goal, the United Nations must
take the strictest possible measures to Compel the racists,
immediately and unreservedly, to comply with all relevant
decisions of the General Assembly and Security Council.
30. My delegation supports the statement issued on 5 May
by the United Nations Council for Namibia, in which, inter
alia:

“It urges all States Membersof the United Nations
urgently to take effective measures
to terminate South
Africa’s illegal occupationof Namibiaand put an end to
its acts of aggressionagainstneighbouringindependent
African States.It callsupon the Security CouncilUrgently
to consider the imposition of mandatory and comprehensive economicsanctions,an oil embargoand an arms
embargo againstSouth Africa, in accordancewith the
Programmeof Action in Support of Self-Determination
and National Independencefor Namibia””
adopted by the General Assembly at its ninth special
session
[resolution S-9/2].
31. The Czechoslovakdelegationat the sametime supports the Security Council’sstrongcondemnationof the act
of aggressioncommitted by the racist regime of South
Africa against the People’sRepublic of Angola, which
representsa flagrant violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of that country, and calls for the
immediate and unconditional withdrawal of all South
African armed forces from Angola. We firmly supportthe
demandthat South Africa shouldput animmediateendto
its illegal occupation of Namibia and comply with the
relevant resolutionsof the Security Council, particularly
resolution385 (1976).

prevaifitlg in Namibia. Indeed, the question under con.
sideration today is but one of the Consequences
of the
tragic situation in which the Namibian people hasbeen
living since South Africa decided illegally to occupY
Namibia,an international Territory, and to establish~~Q~t~
hejd there. In hismessage
to the ninth specialsession
of the
GeneralAssembly,devoted to, Namibia,which wasreadcut
by his Prime Minister, Mr. Leon MCbiame,HisExcellency
E1 Hadj Omar Bongo, Presidentof the Republicof Gabon
and Acting Presidentof the Organization of African Unity,
statedthe following:
“For what are we dealing with unlessit is a special
aspect of a general problem which has Confrontedtfle
United Nations for more than a decade, of a tragedy
which piercesthe heart of H3lAfricans and woundsthe
spirit of all men of goodwill, just as it insultsthe honour
of peopleswho love the causeof justice and freedom,
This justice and freedom for which man has always
fought in all placesand at all times must alsotriumph
today throughout the African continent. For-and wecan
never repeat this often enough--it is unacceptablethat
peoplesin their own country, and especiallywhenthey
form the majority, should seetheir legitimateaspirations
to dignity, freedom, justice and happinesstrampled
underfoot by minority governments which basetheir
political, economicand military supremacysolelyonthe
merecolour of their skin.“3

35. Only three days ago the Gcncral Assemblyconcluded
its specialsessiondevoted to the problem of the indepen.
denceof Namibia-to the problem of the independence
of a
Territory which South Africa continues to occupy despite
numerousresolutions adopted by the General Assembly
and the Security Council calling upon it to withdraw.
During that specialsession,all States unanimouslycalled
for a speedy solution to that problem, through peaceful
32. Mr. N’DONG (Gabon) (interpretation
from French):
meansif possible.Even though the Declaration andthe
Yesterday [2077th meeting] we listenedwith emotion to
the representative of the People’sRepublic of Angola Programmeof Action drawn up by the United Nations
describing in a clear and concisemannerthe barbarous Council for Namibia were not adopted unanimouslyby all
the Membersof the Organization, no State-not evenoneof
attack of which hiscountry hasonceagainbeenthe victim.
The meansusedin this military expedition give the most the Statesmost closelylinked to the Pretoria r@gime-voted
eloquent proof that it was without a doubt a deliberate againstthem. That proves,if proof werenecessary,that the
attack in a true war of aggression
with the mostdevastating initiative which led to the convening of the specialsession
weapons,including attack aircraft, helicoptersand airborne waswell founded. And then, the very next day, welearned
troops.
that South Africa had violated the territory of a sovereign
State Member of the Organization in order to commitacts
33. The facts describedby the representativeof the
of aggressionand vandalismthere, which are all the more
People’s Republic of Angola-to whom I convey my
regrettablesincemany Statesbelieve in the needto arrivest
country’s solidarity-are especially serious and, in my
a solution of the Namibian problem through peaceful
delegation’sview, constitute a flagrant violation of the
means.Are we to believe that there is no way to br@
sovereignty and territorial integrity of a State Memberof
South Africa to reason other than violence, which mY
the Organization. It is not only an obvious threat to
country deploresbut which we believeto be necessary
ifnc
international peacearidsecurity but alsoundeniableproof
other way is available.
that the Security Councilwill alwaysbe seizedof suchbase
acts SOlong asFascistminority regimespersistin southern 36, Experience has shown that it is easierto starta fire
Africa.
than to put it out and, even though the inherent differences
betweenthe forces in play would not be in favour of those
34. To understandthe true and profound meaningof
who defend their rights on their territory and whostra%‘le
South Africa’s aggression
againstthe People’sRepublicof
for their independence,there are objective criteria in the
Angola is to speakof the particularly troubling situation situation which the variousparties to the canflict musttake
2 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thtity-third
Session, Supplement No. 24, vol. I, pam.366.

3 Ibid., Ninth Special Session, Plenary Meet&x

para.9.
4

5th mee’ings

into account if they Want the various minorities to be able
in the future to have their voices heard on African soil.
37. It goes without saying that acts of aggression such as
those of which Angola has been the victim do not at all
favour a dialogue among the various parties on the problem
of Namibia. It is therefore fitting that we should object to
and condemn such acts, which constitute one more threat
to international peace and security and which are proof of
total contempt for international opinion. That is why I
wish to appeal urgently to all those who, because of their
many interests in that region, maintain close relations with
South Africa to make Sotfth Africa understand that there is
no other alternative but for it to come to terms with the
sons of Africa if it wants them to consider it a responsible
country capable of netzotiating rationally,
38. In conclusion, I wish to express my delegation’s
satisfaction that the draft resolution was adopted unanimously. I wish to thank all the members of the Council for
having unambiguously condemned South Africa’s base
aggression against the People’s Republic of Angola.
39. Mr. CI-IEN Chu (China) (interpretation from Chinese):
On 4 May the South African racist authorities flagrantly
invaded Angola, savagely raiding the Namibian refugee
camps at Kassinga and brutally slaughtering the people of
Namibia and Angola. This is an act of gross trampling upon
the Charter of the United Nations, a new grave crime
committed by the Vorster racist r&gime against the people
of Namibia, Angola and the rest of Africa. The Chinese
delegation expresses utmost indignation and strongly condemns it,
40. Recently the Namibian people have stepped up the
armed struggle, under the leadership of SWAPO, dealing
increasingly heavy blows at the handful of South African
racists. The General Assembly at its ninth special session,
which has just concluded successfully, adopted a declaration and programme of action, giving firm support to the
Namibian people’s struggle for national independence and
liberation and thus landing the South African racist rBgime
in greater isolation.
41. In these circumstances, while advertising its so-called
peaceful settlement, the South African racist regime,
defying universal condemnation, has flagrantly perpetrated
the latest barbarous act of armed aggression. This is‘by no
means accidental, but is yet another glaring manifestation
of the habitual counter-revolutionary
dual tactics it has
been using over a long period, its criminal purpose being
obviously to exert pressure on the people of Namibia and
the whole of Africa so as to weaken and stamp out the
armed struggle of the Namibian people and realize its wild
ambition of continuing its illegal occupation of Namibia.
The inevitable result will be “lifting a rock only to drop it
on one’s own feet”, It is bound to arouse the people of
Namibia and the rest of Africa to greater indignation and
still more resolute resistance, bringing about the complete
isolation of the South African racists.
42. We are convinced that, with the support of the African
people and the people of the whole world, the Namibian
people, who have been tempered through protracted

struggle, will unite as one, persevere in struggle, guard
against and do away with the super-Powers’ interference
and meddling, and carry to the end the struggle for the
complete national independence and liberation of the
Namibian people.
43. We maintain that the Security Council should condemn the South African racist rdgime in the strongest
terms, give resolute support to the just struggle of the
Namibian people and take effective measures to make the
South African authorities withdraw from Namibia irnmediately and unconditionally and put a definitive end to its
colonialist domination over Namibia.
44. Mr. LEPRETTE
(Francei (interpretation
from
French): The Security Council has just taken a unanimous
decision on the complaint by Angola against South Africa,
presented clearly, sincerely and with justified emotion by
Mr. de Figueiredo, the representative of the People’s Republic of Angola. My Government shares the feelings of
indignation expressed here by previous speakers at the
armed attacks perpetrated inside Angolan territory, and at
the loss of life and the wounds inflicted, which we
deplore-in
a word, at this flagrant violation of the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of a State Member of
the Organization.
45. Immediately upon hearing about this South African
attack against Angolan territory, my country unambiguously expressed its reprobation, in the following terms:
“The Government of France regards the action undertaken in Angola by South Africa as reprehensible. At a
time when the five Western Powers are intensifying their
efforts towards a peact;fui settlement of the Namibian
question that would be in:crnationally acceptable, the
Government of France cannot but find reprehensible the
action undertaken in Angola by South Africa.”
My country wishes to express deep sympathy to the victims
and their families.
46. France, fully committed like other Member States to
the principles of the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, can find no excuse for those who
violate the territory of a sovereign State. My Government
condemns such acts and demands that the South African
authorities should immediately and unconditionally withdraw their troops from Angola.
47. At this stage I shall endeavour to go to the root causes
of the necessity of convening the Council to condemn such
acts. I cannot but recall the Council’s debate in July 1976
on the complaint by Zambia against South Africa, As we
said then, an immediate end must be put to the abnormal,
unjustifiable and politically unacceptable situation to which
the Namibian people is subjected. It is the maintenance in
Namibia of a South African occupatiori totally devoid of
any legal basis that is the cause of the events that we meet
today to consider. Namibia must accede to independence as
quickly as possible, after free elections under United
Nations control and supervision. It seems to us that the
only chance we have of achieving that goal as quickly as
possible is to ensure the implementation without delay of a

peaceful process which excludes violence. That is the
meaning of the effort beingundertaken by the five Western
countries.

54. My delegationhasdrawn the attention of the Council
to the use to which South Africa has put the United
Nations Territory of Namibia. Apart from its illegal
occupation of Namibia, South Africa, with the active
collaboration of sometransnationalcorporations,hascontinuously plundered the natural resourcesof that Territory;
it has sown the seedsof distrust along tribal lines,thereby
sharpeningdivisive tension in the Territory, with a view to
perpetuating its domination through a puppet regimeof its
own creation. It was only last Wednesdaytit the ninth
specialsessionof the General Assembly that a document
was adopted denouncingthe various atrocities committed
by South Africa in Namibia.

48. It would not be necessary for us to face such
situations if Namibiahad been able to exerciseits right to
self-determinationin internationally acceptable conditions
andhad accededto independence.
49. My country wishesto assuremembersof the Council
that, for its part, it will continue, along with all those
whoseaim is to searchfor a just and lasting solution to the
questionof Namibia,to act in such a way asto ensurethat
a settlementin conformity with resolution 385 (1976) will
be found assoonaspossible.

55. My delegationagainstates that the lack of effective
and prompt action againstSouth Africa over Namibiahas
50. Mr. GEORGE (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation given the racist rCgimethe nerve to perpetratethis latest act
of aggressionagainst Angola. South Africa must not be
expressesits condolencesto the peoples of Angola and
Namibia,which, in their solidarity, have lost kith and kin as allowed the continuoususeof the United NationsTerritory
a result of South Africa’s wanton and recklessaggression of Namibia as a spring-board from which to launch
launched last Thursday against Namibian refugee camps unprovoked attacks againstindependentAfrican countries
and cause untold suffering to innocent civilians and
situated about 155 milesinside the People’s Republic of
Angola. Without doubt, Angolans and Namibians have immensedamageto property.
suffered together. Nigeriastandsby them. Africa standsby
56. We all recall South Africa’s earlier military adventhem. It is our hope that the international community also
turism in Angola in the wake of that country’s indepenstands by them, to condemn South Africa and to take
dence. South Africa unleasheda massivemilitary offensive
remedialaction againstthe racists.
on Angola on the pretext, in the words of Mr. P. W. Botha,
the racist DefenceMinister, that this was“to safeguardher
51. Once againthe Council is seized of one of the more
security interest” and wasalso “respondingto a call from
seriousfacets of the problem being created in southern
the workers on the Calueque-Ruacana
scheme”.Mr. Botha
Africa by the racist rCgimeat Pretoria, the continued
continued that statement to the racist Parliamenton 28
existenceof which constitutes,in African eyes, a threat to
international peaceand security in the region. The apartMarch 1976by saying:
heid re’gimeand its oppressiveand repressivemachine must
“the military intervention was then extended in order to
be dismantled,and dismantledthey will be in due course.
deflect the effects of the Angolan civil war frotn the
52. At regularintervalswe havewitnessedwith horror the
northern border of South West Africa and to inhibit
manifestationof the panic syndrome of the Vorster regime
SWAP0 efforts”.
of South Africa. That regime,oblivious to the outcry of the
international community and with impunity, has again
And he added:
spread its reign of terror beyond its own borders into
another independentand sovereignState of our continent.
“The other aspectswhere military forceswereinvolved
concernedthe protection and administrationof civil war
53. We heard last night the detailed account of the
refugees.”
atrocities committed in Kassingaand its environs by the
racist air force and paratroops launched against Angola
57. What security interest doesthe racist rdgimeof South
from the morning of 4 May. This invasion of Kassingaby
Africa have in an independent African country? What
South Africa is not only a flagrant violation of the
responsibleGovernment would commit a sizeableportion
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s Reof its armed forces in responseto a call from workersin
public of Angola, but also an act of armed and pre‘another independent country? Would not such action
meditated aggression.
Moreover, this invasion again reflects
constitute direct interference in the internal affairs of
South Africa’s basic insensitivity to the outcry of the
another State? Whatever way the racist rigime may seeit,
international community, which has detnanded again and
we all know how well the racists care for the welfare of
again that the racist rCgime at Pretoria should accord
African workers under their own rCgimc.The pretence of
respect for human dignity in its conduct both of its
the racists that they were acting for the protection and
domestic and of its international relations. When South
administration of civil war refugeesin Angola, an indepenAfrican forces penetrate more than 155 miles into the
dent African country, is beyond our comprehension.
territory of another independent African State to attack
innocent and unarmedrefugeeswho have fled, in the first
58. The continued machinationsof South Africa aimedat
place, from the racist reign of repression and illegal
the destabilization of the People’sRepublic of Angola are
occupation in Namibia, the Council not only should
clearly an attempt to blunt the thrust of the liberation
condemn such acts but should urgently prescribe action
struggle in southern Africa and in particular to inhibit the
againstsuch a rCgitneunder the relevant provision of the
valiant liberation efforts of SWAPO, nobly and steadfastly
Charter of the United Nations.
supported by the Government and people of Angola. The
6

invasion of Kassinga must thus be seen as the latest
manifestation of this evil design of South Africa.

64. For its part, Nigeria expresses its firm solidarity with
the People’s Republic of Angola and supports any measures
which, in the considered judgement of its people, would
help them to repulse this wanton armed aggression against
their country. We reaffirm our commitment to the cause of
liberation in Namibia and Zimbabwe and the complete
eradication of apartheid from South Africa itself.

59. ‘171e invasion of Kassinga cannot but raise serious
doubts in our minds as to South Africa’s intentions as
regards all the genuine and well-meaning efforts to resolve
the Namibian question. South Africa cannot honestly tell
us, as was reported during the ninth special session of the
General Assembly, that it intends to withdraw its illegal
administration from Namibia and allow a suitable climate
for free and fair elections to develop, while it simultaneously plans for execution in a matter of days, precisely
on 4 May, a massive attack on innocent refugees malevolently described as “guerrillas of SWAPO”. That, indeed,
is the organization it intends to allow to participate in a
free and fair election. Does South Africa expect the ghosts
of the Namibian refugees slain in Kassinga to go to the
polIing booths? No. South Africa is manoeuvring to
massacre the members and supporters of SWAP0 and their
innocent families in the vain hope of ensuring an election
victory for its own favourite puppet tribal groups in
Namibia.

65. In conclusion, I wish to quote from the state!ni:nt
made by my head of State when he opened the World
Conference for Action against Apartheid at Lagos last
August. He said:
“It will no longer help for our so-called friends to adopt
pious postures and preach non-violence when our enemies
are busy inflicting mental and physical violence on us. We
shall no longer just watch the racists of Pretoria devise
improvements to their machinery of terror and repression. We should no longer just be outraged-we must act
to discourage the enemies of Africa and humanity.“4
It is thus in keeping with the spirit of this message that the
Nigerian delegation has joined in sponsoring and voted in
favour of the resolution which has just been adopted. We
also hope that the Council will move fast and act firmly and
decisively should the racists persist in their acts of wanton
aggression and brutal oppression.

60. The protection of South Africa from sanctions by
some Western members of the Council has made it possible
for the racist r&ime to flex its muscles, as it has just done
in Kassinga.

66. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation j?om Russian): The Soviet delegation has listened with the closest attention to the
statement of the representative of the People’s Republic of
Angola, Ambassador de Figueiredo, who informed the
Security Council /2077th meeting] of the aggression of the
racist re’gime of Pretoria against the independence and
sovereignty of his country. We entirely share the assessments that he gave of those criminal acts on the part of the
South African racists, as well as those given by the
Chairman of the Group of African States, Ambassador
Konie of Zambia, Ambassador SaIim, representative of the
United Republic of Tanzania and Mr.,Nujoma, the leader
of SWAPO, as well as the assessments we found in the
statement on this question issued by the Co-ordinating
Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries on 4 May [S/12688/.

61. During the delicate negotiations which the five Western members of the Security Council undertook, action
under the provisions of the Charter was suspended in the
hope that the racists of South Africa would retrace their
steps and abandon the present disastrous course. We also
believed that the five Western members of the Council had
the appropriate leverage to make their protegee appreciate
the advantages of a negotiated settlement. That leverage
stems from their known connexions with the racist re’gimc.
It was our understanding that they had put their prestige,
power and credibility into resolving the Namibian question.
62. The Kassinga episode, in the view of my delegation,
appears to put that credibility of the five Western members
to its greatest test to date. The Kassinga episode indicates
once again South Africa’s utter disregard for the international community, which, by implication, includes its
Western friends, It also indicates the inbuilt violence of the
apmtheid system, the dangers of which my delegation,
among others, has been bringing to the attention of’the
Council, for years.

67. This further act of aggression by the South African
racists which took the form of an armed attack by aircraft
and paratroopers on the Angolan town of Kassinga, situated
at a distance of 155 miles inside the frontier, and on the
refugee camp in that area containing refugees from
Namibia, is one further example of the crimes committed
by the Vorster rggime against the People’s Republic of
Angola and other African States. As a result of that
barbarous act of aggression, peaceful inhabitants of the area
were killed in large numbers, Armed bands from South
Africa continue to operate on Angolan soil, as confirmed to
us today by the representative of Angola. The naked act of
aggression on the part of the racists against a sovereign
African State once again confirms the truth of the repeated
statements of the Government of the People’s Republic of
Angola that South Africa is continually carrying out acts of
aggression against Angola, intensifying tension, aggravating

63. The obvious choice before the Security Council in the
face of South Africa’s persistent defiance of its decisions
and resolutions is to take effective measures against the
racist regime. The Council can ill afford to delay action
unless it is prepared to compromise its credibility as
mankind’s custodian of international peace and security.
We have long passed the stage of mere verbal condemnation
and denunciation of South Africa’s inhuman and repressive
policies and practices. The Council, including the five
Western members, should, as a matter of priority, take
immediate steps concerning the imposition of comprchensive sanctions against South Africa under Chapter VII of
the Charter.

4 United

7

Nations

publication,

Sales No. E.77.XIV.3,

annex

IV.

73. It is clear that the Vorster regime has not given up its
intentions of implanting a neo-colonialist regime in Namibia
and it is equally clear that it considers the plan of the
Western Powers as an appropriate instrument for the
attainment of that goal.

the situation and disrupting the lives of the peaceful
inhabitants of areas in southern Africa.
68. Yet one more act of aggression by the South African
racists against Angola was undertaken precisely and immediately after the armed forces of liberated Angola had
successfully
carried out a clearing-up operation in the
southern provinces to rid them of the armed bands which
had been sent there from Namibia by South Africa to
terrorize the population and to make peaceful life in the
coun tiy impossible. It is well known that those bands are
financed and trained by the South African racists, ~110
make it their aim to carry out subversive activity against the
People’s Republic of Angola and to attempt to divide the
country and destabilize the Iegitimate Government of

74. The Soviet delegation calls for the intensification of
efforts designed to produce additional effective measures
which are likely to compel the racists to bow to the will of
the international community. We have in mind the measures which, in particular, were provided for in decisions on
Namibia taken at the recent special session of the General
Assembly. The Soviet Union whole-heartedly supports the
well justified demands of the African countries for the
immediate introduction of additional sanctions against
South Africa in accordance with Chapter VII of the
Charter, a demand for the cessation of all economic
co-operation with South Africa and the establishment of a
state of diplomatic isolation for the Pretoria regime. As we
have repeatedly stated, it can be said with confidence that
the taking of those measures would be the shortest and
most effective way of ensuring early victory, independence
and freedom for the Namibian people and of deterring the
South African racists from committing further acts of
aggression against African States.

A11gola.

69. In undertaking a direct act of armed aggression against
the People’s Republic of Angola, the Pretoria regime was at
the same time striking a blow against the Namibian refugee
camps which are in the region of Kassinga. Those camps
contained refugees who fled from the terror of the South
African racists. As was correctly pointed out by the JornaZ
& Angola, the attack by the punitive expedition sent by
Vorster against the Namibian refugee camps is evidence of
the criminal intent of the racists to deal brutally with the
Namibian patriots headed by SWAPO. Thus, the Pretoria
regime demonstrated its total contempt for the decisions
with regard to the liberation of Namibia adopted at the
ninth special session of the General Assembly.

75. The incessant acts of aggression committed by the
Pretoria regime against Angola and other African States are
the result of the direct connivance with that regime of
certain imperialistic circles which are striving to preserve
their positions in southern Africa. We believe that the
Western countries bear a considerable share of the responsibility for the dangerous situation which has now arisen in
southern Africa. Their active support of the racist regime
has led to virtual immobility on the part of international
organizations and has led to their inability to take
genuinely effective measures against the racist upartheid
regime.

70. The dispatch of South African bombers and paratroopers from air fields situated in Namibia confirms once
again the fact that the Pretoria regime does not intend to
discontinue using Namibian territory as a spring-board for
exerting pressure on the independent African States and for
purposes of direct military intervention in their internal
affairs.
7 I. The Territory of Namibia has repeatedly been used by
the South African re’gime for acts of armed provocation
against neighbouring sovereign States and it has more than
once directed armed aggression against Angola from that
Territory. All this provides ample evidence of the fact that
there can be no peace and security in that part of Africa as
long as South African troops are still to be found on
Nnmibian territory, Therefore, any neo-colonialist plans for
settlement in Namibia which provide for the possibility of
the stationing of those forces on Namibian soil are fraught
with the most serious consequences both for the Namibian
people and for the independent development of the
liberated countries of Africa.

76. The draft resolution just adopted by the Security
Council calls for the immediate cessation of aggression by
the racists and the withdrawal of their troops from the
territory of Angola. The Soviet delegation supported and
voted in favour of that draft resolution although it does
consider that it should have provided for considerably more
effective measures in order to put an end to the policy
Of
brigandage and aggression carried out by the South African
regime. We believe that the Council should take a most
serious view of the need for the Pretoria regime to comply
with the demands of the United Nations and, if necessary,
to meet urgently once again in order to take measures
against the aggressor which would prevent it from further
defying the whole of peace-loving mankind.

72. In conditions where the racists of Pretoria are continuing their aggression against African States, it becomes
particularly clear that it is a matter of urgent necessity
immediately to call a halt to the illegal occupation by that
regime of the Territory of Namibia. The United Nations is
obliged to ensure the transfer of power in that country to
the sole and authentic representative of the Namibian
people, SWAPO. Recent events in Angolan territory have
confirmed the correctness of the stand taken by SWAPO,
which has been extremely cautious and vigilant in its
approach to plans for a settlement in Namibia acceptable to
the South African racists.

77. The Security Council has been meeting year after year
to discuss the aggressive actions of the Pretoria regime
against neighbouring African States, and year after year it
has been unable to take effective measures because of the
position of Western States. The question therefore arises:
How many more times do the South African racists have to
invade their neighbours’ territories and how many more
peaceful inhabitants have to be killed before the Council
takes effective measures against the South African regime?
8

78. The Soviet Union, faithful to the Leninist principles of
its foreign policy, has consistently favoured and supported
the struggle of peoples for national liberation and social
progress and for the ensuring of their independence and
sovereignty. We wish to voice our solidarity with the
struggle of the African peoples against the policy of
colonialism, racism and apartheid and in favour of the
elimination of the hotbed of international tension and the
threat to peace and security which exist in southern Africa.

intensifying their attack in Angola or whether they have
begun to withdraw. However, there are indications that
South Africa may seek to occupy a part of southern Angola
for some time. There has been much talk in South Africa of
adopting Israeli tactics such as those used in Lebanon. Any
effort to do so, it must be said, would constitute the
strongest provocation and could create an explosive situation in sou them Africa.
85. We must, of course, also consider the possibiliry :hat
South Africa is seeking to precipitate an international
conflict by invading Angola, and tllat it intends to press
forward with its attack in order to force Angola to call for
assistance.

79. The Soviet delegation would like to confirm once
again the whole-hearted solidarity of the Soviet Union with
the People’s Republic of Angola in its struggle for the
strengthening of its independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity. As was stated on 19 April this year by the
General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and Chairman of the
Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, Leonid
Llyich Brezhnev, at a meeting in Moscow with the President
of the People’s Republic of Angola, Agostinho Neto, the
Soviet Union has been providing and will continue to
provide every possible support to the heroic people of
Angola.

86. It is too early to attempt an assessment of the
situation. My delegation believes that the Council must
follow the matter closely over the next days and be
prepared to meet again on short notice. South Africa’s rash
action and brutal truculence have made an already tense
and dangerous situation quite unpredictable.
87. The delegation of Mauritius, however, does draw three
conclusions from the facts as we know them today.

80. We express our solidarity, too, with the Namibian
people, which, under the leadership of SWAPO, has been
waging a struggle for national liberation. The Soviet Union
wishes the people of Namibia early victory in its just
struggle.

88. The first is that the whole extremely delicate Western
diplomatic initiative which began last March to force a
“peaceful settlement” of the Namibian problem has so far
proved to be ill-fated, as far as SWAP0 is concerned, and
dangerous, as far as South Africa is concerned, in view of
the latter’s current acts of aggression. My delegation warned
in the General Assembly debate in October last year that
the Western proposals on Namibia, as they then were, could
not bring peace and independence to the long-suffering
people of that country. It was clear from the nature of
those proposals at that time that South Africa intended to
retain control over Namibia. The proposals did not sufficiently conform to the terms of resolution 385 (1976).
For example, they did not call for the total withdrawal of
South African troops; they did not call for the dismantling
of South Africa’s administration in the Territory; they did
not clearly and unambiguously establish a United Nations
presence which would assure supervision and control of
elections.

81. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): As we meet today, it is
clear to all of us that peace in southern Africa hangs in the
balance. South Africa has once again invaded Angola and
carried us into a new and much more dangerous phase of
the conflict over Namibia. The whole of central and
southern Africa could be affected by South Africa’s
actions. Indeed, it would not be too much to say that
South African lawlessness now imperils the peace of the
entire world.
82. On Thursday morning, South African Mirage jets
bombed the mining town of Kassinga, in the Cunene
Province of Angola, 155 miles north of the Namibian
border. South Africa then landed paratroops in the area and
proceeded to fly in reinforcements from Namibia. At the
same time, South African land forces appear to have
crossed into Angola from several points along the length of
the border from the western Ovambo region to the Caprivi.
According to reports from Africa, South African troops
were continuing to move northwards across the border
yesterday, a day and a half after the occupation of
Kassinga. South African forces were reported to be carrying
out military operations in various parts of southern Angola,
where they were meeting strong resistance from the armed
forces of the People’s Republic of Angola and from SWAP0
forces.

89. SWAP0 has shown its willingness to negotiate in good
faith, Any proposal, however, should ensure the free and
fair elections called for in resolution 385 (1976).
90. South Africa has sought to use this Western Powers’
diplomatic effort to elect a client regime in Namibia and to
avoid the awkwardness
of an “internal settlement”
by
administrative fiat. We recall that Mr. Nujomn pointed out
in his statement at the ninth special session of the General
Assembly the other day that, if SWAP0 should sign the
Western proposals, it would be signing its own death
warrant.

83. The South African attack was not aimed exclusively at
military targets; it was also clearly aimed at sowing terror
among the civilian population in Angola. A SWAP0 refugee
camp at Kassinga was attacked and men, women and
children were killed or wounded.

91. Furthermore, the prolongation of the Western Powers’
effort has proved positively dangerous; for South Africa
seems to have gained the impression that the international
community is willing to tolerate its refusal to conform to
Security Council resolutions. And this has encouraged it to
reinforce its position in Namibia and to believe that it can

84. As of this moment, the military situation remains
unclear. We do not know whether South African forces are
9

which it regards its vital interests as threatened, the racist
regime will use its power aggressively. South Africa has
created a garrison State not to promote change but to
prevent it. It will seek to prevent change at whatever cost.
That means that South Africa is at war. Diplomatic
initiatives seem to have been exhausted. To pursue its ends,
South Africa has now declared war not only on Angola but
also on the entire African continent.

continue to exploit and oppress the Namibian people. My
colleague and African brother from Tanzania spoke yesterday evening of South Africa’s contempt for the United
Nations, as indeed 1 myself have done on SOmany previous
occasions. The bypassing of the Security COUrd to engage
in a year ‘of fruitless negotiations-perhaps
not totally
fruitless, but, so far, for all practical pUrpOSeS,
frUitleSS
all
the same-and to prevent action by the Council has CledY
helped to encourage that Contempt.

97. Clearly, the Council must now take drastic action to
force South Africa to change its posture-l repeat, to force
South Africa to change its posture. If the Council does not
take such action in the near future, there is a danger that
South Africa will carry out further and more damaging
attacks on independent African countries. The Council
cannot tolerate such a prospect.

92. The second conclusion which my delegation draws
from the facts is that the Security Council must now come
to terms with a new danger. By attacking Angola, the racist
rCgitlle in South Africa has shown what it thinks of
negotiations. When it cannot have “negotiations”
which
give it control over Namibia, it does not want negotiations
at all: it resorts to force. And, indeed, force-as has already
been observed-is the only way that an arbitrary and
oppressive colonialism can be kept together.

98. The third conclusion which my delegation draws from
the events of the last few days is that the major Western
Powers must reconsider their attitude towards South
Africa. We realize that these Powers do not wish to support
the status quo in southern Africa. However, they have in
effect tolerated South Africa’s efforts to perpetuate it.
Some groups and organizations in certain countries have
even actively and deliberately sought to strengthen South
Africa. The time has come to end confusion and to resolve
ambiguities in policies towards the Pretoria regime. Western
countries can no longer afford to be seen to tolerate or to
assist South Africa, for that regime has now embarked on a
new path in the defence of apartheid. It is a path which will
lead either to war and devastation or to the isolation of
South Africa and the dismantling of apartheid.

93. SWAPO’s refusal to accept the terms of the Western
proposals has caused South Africa to drop the pretence that
it is interested in the independence of Namibia. The fact
that South Africa has taken the offensive when it did not
get what it wanted proves what it wanted all the time. Now,
however, when it cannot achieve its ends by diplomatic
ambiguities, it finds itself on the defensive. And, in keeping
with the military doctrine which it has adopted, it carries
out the “defence” of its interests by attacking other
countries.
94. This is a lesson which Africa must now ponder. For
South Africa, by virtue of the financial aid accorded it by
its supporters, and by virtue of secret arms shipments worth
hundreds of millions of dollars, has been able to build a
frightening military capability. The assistance of certain
Powers has created a military imbalance in Africa. South
Africa has overwhelming power in relation to its neighbours. It has hundreds of combat aircraft, tanks, armoured
personnel carriers, armoured cars and self-propelled artillery
of various origins. Jts power has loomed in Africa as a
constant menace over the last decade. Now, however, South
Africa has shown that it will use that power to try to
overwhelm those States which support the liberation of
southern Africa. Indeed, it has shown that it will use that
power aggressively to attack States seeking to do no more
than press for a resolution of the kmibian
question
according to terms decided upon by the Security Council.

99. To an important extent, it will be up to the major
Western Powers as to how long the present phase will last,
for it is only with their assistance and their tolerance that
South Africa can survive as an apurtheicl State. If they
withdraw
the support which they have in various forms
being giving South Africa, Pretoria will have no choice but
to enter into a process of peaceful settlement in Namibia
and in South Africa itself. If they do not withdraw that
support, the consequences could be incalculable.
100. In conclusion, I should like, since the Council has
aIready unanimously adopted the draft resolution contained in document S/12692, to thank, on behalf of the
sponsors, the other members of the Council for their
co-operation and prompt action.

95. The new danger in this situation is in the combination
of South African power and the so-called forward defence
poficy. My delegation called attention to the danger of
increasingly aggressive South African actions during the
debate on South Africa in the Security Council in March
last year. We pointed out at that time that the international
community could find itself confronted with a situation in
which South Africa would seek to intimidate the nations of
central and southern Africa by a repeated and aggressive use
of its military power. That situation is no longer just a
possibility: we confront it today.

101. My delegation would also like to extend its condolences to the delegation of Angola and the representative
of SWAP0 for the loss of lives and the destruction of
property their respective people have sustained as a result
of the unprovoked, wanton, brutal, savage and barbarous
aggression perpetrated against them by the racist rigime of
Pretoria.
102. Mr. JAIPAL (India): I should like to begin by reading
into the record the statement made by my Minister for
External Affairs on the South African armed invasion of
Angola on 4 May.

96. Any reading
of South African tnilitary writings will
convince an impartial observer that South Africa believes in
its power. Events now make it clear that, in a situation in

“I have seen news agency reports regarding the dastardly attack by South African troops based in Namibia
10

across the border into southern Angola. This is yet
another act of unprovoked aggression which has been
made possible due to the illegal occupation by South
Africa of Namibia. There could not have been a more sad
and unfortunate commentary on South Africa’s recent
qualified acceptance of the proposals put forward by the
Western Powers on Namibia.

me say that an attack on a refugeevillage I.55 milesdeep
inside Angola is clearly not in exerciseof the so-calledright
o:*fhot pursuit: it is a violation of the sovereigntyof Angola,
aild it is alsoa violation of the right of political asylum;it is
an act of defianceof the llnited Nations-by no meansthe
first such act-by a State whose membership in the
Organization is still tolerated,for reasonsthat areno longer
tenable.

“The obduracy and conduct of South Africa, as
typified by such acts, strengthens the conviction of those
who are sceptical about a peaceful and negotiated
settlement of the Namibian question.

107. I have no doubt that, by this invasionof Angola and
this attack on Namibianrefugeecamps,South Africa hopes
to wreck the prospects of the Western proposals for
self-determinationof the Namibianpeople under United
Nations supervision. Let us remind ourselves-especially
those who setstoreby the law of nations-that Namibiahas
the status of an international Territory andthat the people
of Namibia and their rights, including their right to
self-determinationand independence,constitute a sacred
trust of the United Nations and, consequently,our common responsibility. Thosewho have relations with South
Africa cannot evadetheir specialresponsibilityfor securing
its peaceful withdrawal from Namibiaif they are opposed
to further mandatory measures
under Chapter VII of the
Charter. However, if they are unable to dischargethe
responsibility which they have voluntarily assumed,we
have every right-moral and legal-to expect them to
support mandatory economic sanctions against South
Africa.

“The Government of India condemns this treacherous
act of aggression by South Africa. We extend our
heartfelt sympathies to the affected families and hope
that before long the whole of southern Africa will be
freed from the scourge of colonialism and apartheid.
“This event underlinesonce againthe needand urgency
for the Security Council to apply measuresnecessaryto
terminate forthwith South Africa’s illegal occupation of
Namibia and ensure its complete and unconditional
withdrawal from the whole of Namibia.”
103. What happenedon 4 May is not an isolatedincident;
neither is it the first nor will it be the last. It is one of
several manifestations of the declared policy of South
Africa to attack any African country of its choice in the
pursuit of its aim of perpetuating its racist domination of
southern Africa. It is a manifestation of its external
intimidation and internal oppression.It is a manifestation
of its hostility towards the neighbouringAfrican Statesand
its objective of destabilizing them through all possible
means. Unfortunately, it is also a manifestation of the
vulnerability of the newly independentAfrican States.

108. Mr. ROLON ANAYA (Bolivia) (interpretation
jkm
The promptnesswith which the Security Council
hasmet to consideranotheract of aggression
by the South
African rggime-this time againstthe People’sRepublicof
Angola, from the illegally occupiedTerritory of Namibiademonstratesthe deep concern of the Presidentof the
Council that, finally, a situation of peacemay reign in
southern Africa. His prompt action, in exerciseof the
highest responsibilitiesof this body, is also proof of the
effectivenessof the United Nationsand the Council. The
resolution adoptedunanimouslytoday is anotherreflection
of that effectiveness.

Spanish):

104. Where elsecould Angola go with its complaintexcept
to the Security Council in the first instance? Are we going
to be satisfied with yet another condemnationof South
Africa for its latest act of aggression?The catalogueof
South African sins against humanity is so long that the
nations of the world are clearly expected to do more than
be ashamed of them, And yet, whenever there is any
mention of further mandatory action againstSouth Africa,
we are faced with expressionsof pioushorror. Surely there
is an element of doubtful piety in joining the chorus of
condemnation while continuing to maintain diplomaticand
economic relationswith South Africa.

109. Becauseof the constant contempt shown for the
international principlesenshrinedin the Charter,one could
almost use the word “monotonous” to describe the
repeated aggressionby a colonialismwhosecharacteristic
features are racism,armamentand internationaleconomic
speculation;many other speakers
havereferredto this.
110. I do not know what elsecan be saidon this subject,
except to suggestpractical and reasonableremedies.The
delegation of Bolivia, in its quest for such remedies,
co-sponsoredthe draft resolution which has just been
adopted unanimouslyand which we trust wiil successfully
call a halt-with its allusionto the chapter of the Charter
related to sanctions-to a situation which has become
dangerouslyendemic.

105. It is no wonder that South Africa feelssecureenough
to launch its invasionswhen and where it likes. It is clear
that the arms embargois no more than a belatedand futile
gesture. If the Security Council doesnot useall the powers
at its command to deter South Africa, will not the victims
of aggressionbe obliged to seekhelp from whereverthey
can get it? What other choice do they have? And if they
are driven to seek help outside the Council, the responsibility for it will rest on the Council, particularly on those
who prevent it from taking effective mandatory action.
Unfortunately, the veto has turned out to be a most useful
political cover for South Africa.

111. Bolivia’sattitude is that all formsof colonialismmust
be rejected and that all territorial depredationsmust be
condemned.This position, like that of our colleagues,is a
consistentposition, in the GeneralAssembly,in connexion
with the liberation of Namibia,andin the Security Council,
in connexion with the painful andconstantly repeatedacts
of armed invasion,which aregravethreats to world peace.

106. The timing of the latest South African attack against
Namibian political refugeesis not without significance.Let
11

112. we express our solidarity with the people and
Government of Angola and we affirm once again our
solidarity with SWAPO, the legitimate patriotic representative of the people of Namibia. We trust that this new
and prompt effort by the Security Council will achieve the
best results for the maintenance of peace, which Bolivia,
like Latin Aynerica as a whole, seeks, without excessive
verbiage and without ulterior motives.
113. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): I shall be brief.
This does not seem to me to be an occasion for polemics or
disputation-despite
some of the quite extraordinary dlegations made in the course of speeches this morning by
certain delegations, including some that are African, some
that are quasi-African, and some that are nowhere-nearAfrican.
114. On 4 May South Africa attacked a SWAP0 base near
Kassinga, over 1.50 miles into the territory of the People’s
Republic of Angola, On 5 May the Foreign and Commonwealth Office in London summoned the South African
Chargh d’Affaires to express my Government’s concern and
dismay, and to seek an explanation. Later that same day
my Foreign Secretary made clear our view that South
Africa should take no further action of that kind. We
condemn the South African attack on Angola as an
inadmissible act of armed force which must not recur. We
naturay deplore any action of this sort, causing casualties
and loss of life.
11.5. We are often accused by both SWAP0 and South
Africa of showing insufficient sympathy or concern for
their respective views and actions. I do not want today to
get involved in a long argument about whether acts of
violence or of military repression can ever be justified and,
if so, in what circumstances. Our commitment to an early
peaceful settlement in Namibia is well known, and representatives of our five Governments are meeting SWAP0 on
Monday, 8 May, for important talks which we hope will
pave the way for an honourable negotiated settlement
consistent with resolution 38.5 (1976). As my Foreign
Secretary said yesterday, stability in southern Africa is
poised on a knife-edge.
116. I should like to refer briefly to the terms of the
resolution just adopted. In the ninth preambular paragraph
and in paragraphs 5 and 6 there are references to the
legitimate struggle of the people of Namibia. My Government has always supported the struggle of the people of
Namibia. My Government has always supported the struggle
for self-determination, but our views on the limits of
legitimate struggle and our commitment under the Charter
to peaceful means are, I think, well known. In paragraph 7
the Council demands that South Africa should put an end
without delay to its illegal occupation of Namibia. In our
view that paragraph is entirely consistent with the provision
in the proposal transmitted to the Council on 10 April
[S/12636] which seeks the independence of Namibia by
the end of this year.
117. I hope that members of the Council will not lose
sight of our main objectives. The recent escalation of force
by all sides in Namibia has underlined the urgent, the
almost desperate, need to secure an early agreement which

will make it possible to introduce an effective United
Nations presence on the ground in Namibia with the least
delay. The situation in the Territory iS deteriorating and,
frankly, time is not on our side. The longer the situation is
allowed to drift, the greater the risk of further violence and
tension, which can only inflame passions and make a
negotiated settlement more difficult to achieve. We have to
keep our eyes on our longer-term objectives and not ailolv
ourselves to be pushed off course by actions such as the
recent raids, however strongly we may feel about them.
118. 1 therefore appeal today to all sides to show restraint
and avoid further actions which can only undermine efforts
to achieve a peaceful transition to majority rule in Namibia.
The early adoption and implementation of the proposal
transmitted to the Council on 10 April, contrary to what
has been said here today, constitute the best and almost
certainly the only way of overcoming the cycle of Violence
and attacks within Namibia or on neighbouring countries. It
is also the only way of achieving the aims of the United
Nations in relation to Namibia. We want elections to take
place there in a stable and peaceful atmosphere, and
Namibia to emerge as a free, democratic and independent
State, It is not always easy to remain calm, but calmness
and a determination not to allow Namibia’s prospects of
attaining peaceful independence to be sacrificed are what is
now needed. A settlement in Namibia would have immense
positive repercussions elsewhere in southern Africa. Let us
never forget that we are all here to help the people of
Namibia enjoy the rights which all of us here already enjoy.
119. Mr. VON WECHMAR (Federal Republic of Germany): WC welcome the unanimous decision by the Council
in adopting the resolution. We are gratified that members
were able to take quick action once again.
120. My delegation has listened with great attention to the
statements made by the representative of Angola, the
President of SWAP0 and others on the South African
attack on Angofan territory on 4 May. Angola indeed has
every reason to seize the Council of its complaint and to
ask us to pronounce judgement on these latest developments, which have again highlighted the danger to peaceful
development in that part of Africa.
121. We have time and again voiced our conviction that
acts of violence only bring about new violence, and
aggravate rather than alleviate the conflict. We deeply
deplore the human suffering and the damage inflicted upon
the people of Angola and Namibia, and emphatically
denounce this new armed invasion.
122. I need not reiterate the position taken by the Federal
Republic of Germany against those who disregard the
integrity of neighbouring sovereign countries and the right
of all peoples to self-determination and independence. We
can only repeat that we strongly condemn such aggressive
acts, which endanger our serious efforts to bring about the
necessary political changes in southern Africa by peaceful
means. Immediately after being informed of the attack on
Kassinga, my Government officially expressed its shock and
dismay in the strongest possible terms to the Government
of South Africa. We have deep sympathy with the people of
Angola and the numerous Namibians who have again been
the victims of an armed attack by South Africa.

I

123. In response to one of the conclusions drawn by the
representative of Mauritius in this chamber today, I should
like to state the following. My Government particularly
deplores this armed invasion because it comes at a time
when the efforts undertaken by the five Western members
of the Security Council to achieve an internationally
acceptable settlement of the Namibian question in accordance with resolution 385 (1976) have made substantial
progress and have reached the point where the proposal
contained in document S/12636 offers the basis for an
agreement between the parties concerned and for the early
implementation of a settlement, starting immediately with
a phased withdrawal
of South African troops from
Namibia. The condemnable .act of 4 May by South Africa
will not deter us from continuing, and even intensifying,
our effort, together with our friends, all co-operative
Governments and the parties concerned to fiialize this
initiative aimed at a just and peaceful solution in Namibia.

massive violence. On the contrary, at this delicate juncture
South Africa would be well advised to exercise utmost
restraint, in order to give forces of peace an opportunity to
.L,ld a way out of the situation created by South Africa’s
own misguided policies.
128. At the same time, I wish to recall that only a few
days ago the United States representative in the special
session of the General Assembly debate on Namibia called
attention to the possibility of escalated violence if agreement was not reached soon. I wish to repeat those remarks
here today:
“Our considerations here do not take place in a
vacuum. In recent weeks the cycleaf repression, violence
and the resulting bitterness and distrust has continued in
Namibia at a disturbing pace. The level of fighting along
Namibia’s borders has increased markedly and from all
indications it will increase more. There is an increasing
tendency to resolve differences within the Territory
through the barrel of a gun, rather than through
democratic processes. Scores have been killed.

124. We fully share the view expressed by the President of
SWAPO, Mr. Sam Nujoma, in his statement yesterday
(2077th meeting], that conditions for holding free, fair and
democratic elections leading to genuine independence for
Namibia have to be ensured. Having voted for the resolution just adopted, we want to urge South Africa to
withdraw immediately from Angolan territory. In joining
all other members in our unanimous decision, we also want
to issue a most serious warning to the South African
Government to refrain from further aggressive acts against
neighbouring countries.

“In addition, while the South African Government is
commendably engaged in discussions which might lead to
a peaceful settlement, it has once again resorted to the
deplorable practice of politically based arrests without
charge or trial, so that today virtually the entire leadership of SWAP0 in Namibia is in detention.
“It is of little value to engage in sterile arguments over
which of the parties should first cease its actions. We can
and should call upon all parties to exercise restraint and
to give the forces of peace a chance. However, it is clear
that the cycle of repression and violence, violence and
repression and the inevitable hatred to which they give
birth will not end until a comprehensive resolution is
found, We in the international community must therefore
redouble our efforts to find a solution if we are to avert
the addition of further complexities to an already
complex task.“S

125. Mr. LEONARD (United States of America): The
Security Council is considering today a matter of utmost
gravity. South Africa has crossed an internationally recog
nized border and attacked Angola. The action taken is
particularly reprehensible in that South Africa launched its
attack from Namibia, a Territory which it illegally occupies,
and from which it should Iong ago have withdrawn. This
massive attack on a site located some 155 miles north of
the Angolan/Namibian border cannot be considered anything other than a serious escalation of the level of violence
at precisely the time when South Africa, above all others,
should be demonstrating its desire for peace. Consequently,
the United States joins the other members of the Council in
condemning South Africa’s action and in warning South
Africa against any repetition of such action.

129. It is with these considerations in mind that the
United States is determined to press forward in the Namibia
initiative which we have undertaken with our colleagues.
We are more convinced than ever that the goal of peace in
that area, the realization of the hopes of the people of
Namibia, can only be achieved by the decision of the
parties to make peace now. We intend to use every practical
means at our disposal to create conditions in the area wIJ.M~
would prevent the kind of tragic acts of violence we have
today joined in condemning. We welcome the surge of
desire for peace represented in the action we have taken
today in the Council.

126. In speaking on this issue, I must express my deep
dismay at the senselessness of the action which we meet
today to discuss.
127. After more than a year of intensive discussions, a
solution to the Namibia question is nearer than ever before.
South Africa has been commended publicly and privately
for its acceptance of the proposal of the Five. The Five
have been encouraged to redouble their efforts to persuade
SWAP0 also to accept the proposals for settlement. HOW
then is an already sceptical world to judge an action such as
we have just witnessed on the eve of further and, we hope,
decisive talks? South Africa must be under no illusions. Its
commendable agreement to leave a Territory in which it has
no right to remain and under terms which it has no right to
demand has made no more legitimate its illegal presence in
Namibia. Nor does it now have any licence to resort to

130. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): 1
should now like to make a statement in my capacity as
representative of VENEZUELA.
13 1. My delegation has listened carefully to the statement
made by the representative of Angola (2077th meeting] on
5 Official
Records
of
Session, Plenary Meetings,

13

the General
14th meeting,

Assembly,
Ninth Special
paras. 131-133.

the brutal aggression perpetrated against his country by the
South African re’gime. The position of Venezuela has been
clearly expressed in our sponsorship of and vote for the
draft resolution that we have adopted. My country fir&Y
rejects intervention of all kinds, especially military aggression such as the type that is becoming institutionalized in
southern Africa.
132. We have just conchlded a special session of the
General Assembly on Namibia, a Territory which has been
subjected to South African colonialism. At that special
session WC were not able to obtain the necessary guarantees
to promote and speed up Namibia’s achievement of
self-determination, Today, we are again faced with an act of
disregard for the most basic principles of the Organization
and its authority. My country, therefore, cannot but
reaffirm at this time its rejection of the acts which South
Africa continues to commit to consolidate and maintain its
presence in those territories which it illegally occupies in
that part of the world, despite our condemnation, despite
our disapproval of those acts and in flagrant disregard of
the international community.
133. I do not wish to conclude this statement without
conveying to the noble and courageous people of Angola
and its Government, represented by Ambassador de
Figueiredo, our heartfelt sympathy and condolences at the
loss of human life and the material losses which have been
the tragic outcome of the most recent act of colonial
aggression by South Africa.
134. To SWAPO, represented by its President, Mr. Sam
Nujoma, we convey our solidarity and support in its heroic
struggle for the independence of Namibia.
135. Speaking again as PRESIDENT, I invite the representative of Benin to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
136. Mr. HOUNGAVOU
(Benin) (interpretation from
hxch):
Mr. President, the delegation of the People’s
Republic of Benin is grateful to you and the other members
of the Council for having invited us to participate in this
important debate on the act of armed aggression committed
by the Pretoria racist rCgime against the free African land of
the People’s Republic of Angola.
137. My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of May. Your qualities
as a skilled diplomat and the proven experience of your
dynamic team of assistants, particularly with the question
before us, are a guarantee of a successful and equitable
conclusion to this series of meetings of the Council. Your
beautiful and great country, Venezuela, plays an important
and positive role in the concert of nations,
138. The frequency with which the Security Council has
had to deal with acts of armed aggression committed every
day against independent African front-line countriesparticularly Angola, Zambia and Botswana-by the minority racist and colonialist regimes of Pretoria and
Rhodesia is clear proof of the actual existence of plans for
the colonial reconquest of the African continent by
international imperialism.

139. Thus the armed attacks by Pretoria and Salisbury are
bY no means isolated ones COnCeiVed
and executed without
reference to a general strategy Of imperialism. Certain
Western Powers should not try to make US believe that they
are surprised by these armed attacks by Pretoria and
Salisbury; for these are rigimes Which they have created
and which they control and protect, despite the determined
will of independent Africa to put an end to them once and
for all, The Western Powers, which content themselves wjth
verbal condemnations and shed crocodile tears in circum.
stances of this kind, are perfectly aware of the details of
these plans for attacks, subversion and armed aggression
against African countries.
140. But today, particularly, we are at the moment of
truth: the act of armed aggression being committed against
the People’s Republic of Angola is provided for in the
secret clauses of the “peace plans” of the strategists of
international imperialism against SWAPO. Deciphered, that
means the military elimination of SWAP0 to facilitate the
installation in Namibia of a puppet rggime in the pay and at
the service of imperialist interests in the area. It is a matter
of sounding out the situation in Angola in order to pave the
way for political subversion and to use puppets and other
gangsters to recover Angolan territory, which was so hard
won, and at the cost of great sacrifices by the Angolan
people.
141. The People’s Republic of Benin will never cease to
denounce in this forum the imperialist manoeuvres in our
continent and the dangers they pose to international peace
and security. The Security Council, faced with these serious
threats, should take effective measures to block the way to
these neo-colonialist adventures.
142. The continued illegal occupation of Namibia, which
is being used as a base for aggression by the inhuman
Pretoria re’gime, is a defiance of the international community and a particular challenge to Africa. But what the
henchmen of Pretoria and their masters in the West are
lacking is a sense of history, and history indicates that our
liberation from the yoke of imperialist oppression and
exploitation is inevitable.
143. My delegation wishes to declare its active and
militant solidarity with the Angolan people, which has been
subjected to such trials and tribulations, and to demand
that the Council should take the measures provided for in
Chapter VII of the Charter. My delegation also demands the
immediate and unconditional withdrawal
of all South
African troops which have invaded Angola. It wishes to
make it absolutely clear that the establishment of peace and
security in Africa involves the total elimination of the
minority racist and colonialist r&gimes of Pretoria and
Salisbury, and the unconditional exercise of the right to
self-determination and independence by the oppressed
peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia engaged in an armed
struggle for their national independence.
144. The resolution just adopted by the Council certainly
does not ljve up to our expectations, because it postpones
effective and specific measures properly provided for by the
Charter to counter such criminal actions. Indeed, the
repetition of these acts of aggression fraught with danger by

the Pretoria racists against neighbouring independent
African countries should have induced the Council this time
to decree a fuller arms embargo and to adopt economic
sanctions to compel the Pretoria racist rcigime to comply
with the decisions of the Organization. It is with painful
consternation that my delegation wonders just how many
acts of armed aggression are necessary and how many
innocent victims must still be sacrificed before the Council
fmally shoulders its responsibilities vis&vis the South
African racist regime pursuant to Chapter VII of the
Charter.

people of its national rights and which persists in occupying
Arab territories, and the white racist minority of South
Africa, which is striving so assiduously to maintain the
people of Namibia under its domination by establishing a
reign of terror in that Territory. Thus Israel and South
Africa, the bridgeheads of colonialism, are attempting to
throw a cordon around our continent from the north and
the south, linked as they are from the very beginning by
close ties constantly strengthened as the resistance of the
dominated peoples becomes stronger. The occupation
r6gime of South Africa, like that of Tel Aviv, is striving to
undermine stability and peace and to violate the territorial
integrity of neighbouring independent States, thus adding
external aggression to internal oppression.

145. In spite of the acts of intimidation and aggression
which have been repeated so often by the Pretoria and
Salisbury regimes against neighbouring countries and the
positions of the freedom fighters, the front-line countries
and Africa as a whole are more determined than ever to
help the liberation movements in their struggle against the
oppressive rCgintes of southern Africa until final victory has
been achieved.

150. The integrity and sovereignty of the People’s Republic of Angola have been violated by the racist forces of
Pretoria operating from illegal military bases established in
Namibia, which were the subject of shameless expropriation
by South Africa. This invasion of a Member State is a grave
violation of the Charter. This evokes in us certain reactions
which are reminiscent of the worst moments of colonization. Using the paths blazed by tlte colonial Powers long
before it, the racist rrSgime of Pretoria has adopted a
posture of intolerable defiance of the international cornmunity. But this path will lead it inevitably to the same
result, because, in its turn, it will have to bow to the winds
of change which in recent years have been sweeping across
the African continent. But South Africa persists in ignoring
developments in the world around it. Its arrogance stems
from the fact that it does not feel alone, because, as we
have already had occasion to say in other circumstances,
there are certain countries which offer it open assistance.
These countries condemn colonialism and associate themselves with us to reaffirm the right of peoples to selfdetermination and independence. However, they still continue to provide military and economic assistance, without
which South Africa could not continue its aggression and
apartheid policy, for it is the apartheid system existing in
South Africa which, in our view, underlies all the tensions
affecting southern Africa. It is this system of injustice and
oppression imposed upon a people in the name of the
superiority of one race over another which we have to
destroy. The illegal occupation of Namibia and the acts of
aggression against neighbouring countries-and Angola is
the principal target here-can only delay the real battle
which will inevitably be waged against the white racists
inside South Africa itself. We certainly do not want t0
arouse any sjlmpathy among those who are not embarrassed
by considerations of principle to come to the assistance of
Pretoria when this regime becomes an outlaw. What we fail
to understand is that the supporters of the system of
apartheid should be involved in settling problems whose
origin resides only in the apartheid rCgime itself. We
therefore call upon those countries to review their position.

146. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Algeria, whom I invite
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
147. Mr, BOUAYAD-AGHA
(Algeria) (interpretation
porn French): Once again the Security Council is meeting
to consider a complaint by Angola against South Africa.
Once again the international community is confronted by a
premeditated criminal attack of the outlaw South African
r6gimc. Its forces have launched a premeditated savage
attack against the People’s Republic of Angola, where the
Namibian refugee camps have been systematically bombed.
148. It is upon you, Mr. President, that the weighty
privilege falls of conducting the proceedings of the Council
at the very time when we are receiving alarming news
following the violation by the racist rCgime of Pretoria of
the integrity and sovereignty of an African country, a
Member of the Organization. I should like, therefore, to
convey to you our pleasure at seeing the representative of
Venezuela discharging the functions of the presidency of
the Council and to express to you the great esteem in which
we hold you. This is a well-deserved tribute to a friendly
country and to the Latin American continent and its active
role in efforts being made by Africa to do away with the
last vestiges of colonialism and intransigent apartheid.
149. The Council is meeting today at the request of
Angola, which has been the victim of a new act Of
aggression by the South African racist rCgime. It is our duty
to say here that this aggression makes a mockery of certain
initiatives recently taken in order to bring about a
negotiated settlement of the Namibian question. Who can
still believe that it is possible to associate the Pretoria
racists with any settlement of the problems of southern
Africa? It is therefore no accident that this aggression
began at the very time when the work of the successful
special session of the General Assembly devoted to Namibia
was drawing to a close. Nor is it a coincidence that this
special session was a kind of continuation of the eighth
special session, because both highlighted the kinship between the Zionist entity, which has robbed the Palestinian

151. lt is time for the Security Council to give serious
thought to the danger represented by the aggressiveness of
the Pretoria re’gime in southen Africa and the conduct
which today is being manifested directly and brutally
against the People’s Republic of Angola. The obstinate
arrogance, the intemperate arrogance displayed by South
Africa towards the United Nations should give food for
thought to those who are so imprudent as to give it their
1.5

1.57. The Security Council has been convened urgently to
consider the complaint by the People’s Republic of Angola
against the seditious Republic of South Africa for the
aggression it committed against the peaceful people of
Kassinga, 155 miles from the border with the international
Territory of Namibia. Using their occupation bases in that
Territory-only
a few hours after the unanimous condemnation by the General Assembly and no doubt as an
expression of their contempt for the Assembly’s decisions-the
South African racists bombed and savagely
massacred Angolans and Namibian refugees. This was done
for the same spurious reasons as those invoked by the
Israeli Zionists for attacking, a few weeks ago, Lebanese
and Palestinian resisters. Vorster’s shamelessness knows no
bounds. Today he states that he attacks Angolans as a
reprisal for the liberation struggle of Namibia, led by
SWAPO; yet, only a few days ago he “astonished” world
public opinion by “accepting” the proposals of the five
Western Powers for a peaceful solution to his conflict with
Namibia. Clearly, the only ones that have the right to adopt
any and all forms of struggle against the numberless crimes
of South Africa and its oppressive rdgime are the Namibian
patriots, whose country has been invaded and despoiled by
those who uphold apartheid.

support, because we know the economic ties existing
between the South African racists and certain Western
countries; we know who provides them with arms, the very
arms that are being used in considerable quantities against
the fraternal country of Angola and against the Namibian
people. Wowever, the objectives of the South African racists
are well known to all and no one can be deluded about
their intentions. No one can claim to be unaware that the
Pretoria racists want to expropriate for their own benefit a
Territory which they illegally occupy. One of the fundamentnl problems is that of the future of the Namibian
people which, under the leadership of SWAPO, is struggling
for its self-determination
and independence. Neither the
criminal practice of apartheid nor periodic acts of violence
committed against neighbouring countries can divert it
from this course.
1.52. Yesterday [2077th meeting] we listened with strong
feeling to the President of SWAPO, Mr. Sam Nujoma, and
through him it was the Namibian people who spoke. Let
those who still rely upon the Pretoria racists show some
far-sightedness, because Africa belongs to the Africans, who
are already in a position to distinguish between hostile
forces and those which are favourable to their liberation.

158. Above all, we must make it clear that the people of
Cuba regard any act of agitression committed against the
fraternal people of Angola as :m act of aggression against
our own people.

153. The aggression to which the people of the People’s
Republic of Angola has fallen victim today is further proof
of the disarray in which the South African racist rdgime
finds itself, isolated more and more in the international
community. The recourse of the Pretoria r6gime to territorial invasion of neighbouring independent countries, the
massacre of civilians and innocent refugees, like measures of
intimidation against the international community, strengthen Us in our conviction that, in spite of its open arrogance,
this regime will not escape its final destiny and that the
forces of national freedom and independence will succeed
finally in destroying this bastion of imperialism, racism and
exploitation,

159. For more than a decade, WChave been discussing the
so-called question of Namibia. I state once again that the
people of Cuba, their Communist Party and their Government have supported and will continue to support SWAPO,
the sole authentic representative of the people of Namibia,
and we shall continue to give it our unconditional support
until every single inch of the territory of Namibia is free
from the South African presence. Cuba has been and is in
favour of the complete independence of Namibia and the
full exercise of its sovereignty in the entire country,
including Walvis Bay.

154. In these difficult times for the People’s Republic of
Angola, the people and the Government of Algeria, as we
have always done in any struggle for freedom, are rallying
alongside the people of Angola, and we should like to
assure them of our unswerving solidarity !n their struggle
for the preservation of their national independence and
against any attempt to jeopardize their sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

160. This new act of aggression by South Africa, like
those perpetrated against Zambia and Mozambique by the
hired assassins of Ian Smith-a monstrous creation of
apartheid and monopolistic capital, that is to say, of the
transnational companies which today squeeze and bleed the
peoples of South Africa, Zimbabwe and Namibia-is but the
logical concrete form of the intentions of those who refuse
to recognize Walvis Bay as an integral part of Namibia,
those who extract enormous dividends from the natural
wealth and resources which by right are and must be the
exclusive heritage of the people of Namibia.

15.5. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
156. Mr. ROA KOURI
(Cuba) (interpretation
from
Spanish): I am pleased indeed to see a representative of the
“pure land of Venezuela”-as it was called by the illustrious
poet and fighter And& Eloy Blanco-presiding over these
meetings of the Council. Coming from the country of the
liberator Simbn Bolivar, who travelled throughout America
“distributing
freedom to the peoples”, he is aware, I am
sure, that the spirit of Santos Luzardo is today fighting in
Africa against the centuries-old foothold of conquest to
which R6muIo Gallegos, almost 50 years ago, gave the
unforgettable name of ‘<Mr. Danger”.

161. The people of Angola, under the leadership of MPLA
[Movimento Popular de Libertaciio de Angola] and its
President, Comrade Agostinho Neto, won national independence after a hard battle. They successfully dealt with the
racist aggression by South Africa and the slavery movements established, financed and armed by those who today
support the degenerate apartheid rCgime and answer to the
names of UNITA [ Uniao National para a, Independ&cia
Total de Angola] and FNLA [Frentc National para a
16

Liberta@o de Angola/, but who-lap
dogs that they
are-heed only the voice of their imperialist masters.

of the Charter, particularly as regards the ending of all
economic relations, an oil embargo and the diplomatic,
Political and military isolation of those international
delinquents, who, with the connivance of their masters, are
trying to convert the entire African continent into a
gigantic Auschwitz in the name of white supremacy,
neo-colonialism and, of course, western Christian democracy.

162. My country has suffered profoundly from the perfidy and aggressiveness of imperialism. A few days ago,6 the
head of the Cuban delegation to the ninth special session of
the General Assembly, on Namibia, Commander of the
Revolution Juan Almeida Bosque, reminded the Assembly
that the Guanttiamo naval base was imposed on us at the
beginning of the century by means of the same threats and
pressures that today are part of the attempts to impose on
Namibia a colonial enclave in Walvis Bay. But the Cuban
people have never accepted and will never accept the
insulting permanent presence of foreign troops in that
inalienable part of its territory, nor will the SWAP0
patriots compromise in aby way their right to see their flag
flying over the whole of their country one day.

168. Fascism will not return to Angola. Zimbabwe and
Namibia will inevitably become genuinely independent. The
Kassinga crime will not go unpunished, whatever may be
the manoeuvres and the schemes of those who strive to go
against the current of history. South Africa and its allies
will therefore have to face the consequences of their gross
violation of the most elementary Standards of international
law.

163. The Vorster minority rigime, which is carried against
wind and tide on the shoulders of imperialist monopolies
and known financial groups, armed by the very Powers
which try to disguise themselves as white innocents before
the international community, proclaiming their “good
faith” and their “desire to put an end to violence” in
Namibia, Zimbabwe and wherever else a good blow is being
struck, can never subjugate or deter, much less vanquish,
the heroic people of Angola.

169. With the conviction of the internationalist Cuban
fighters we raise our voice to utter here the watchword of
our Angdan brothers: the struggle continues, victory is
certain.
170. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Mozambique, whom I
invite to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
171. Mr. LOB0 (Mozambique): It is a great honour and
privilege, for which I am profoundly grateful, to speak in
the Security Council today as it meets to carry out one of
its most challenging tasks: that of coping with the problems
which threaten international peace and security, such as the
recent armed aggression by the apartheid regime of South
Africa against the People’s Republic of Angola.

164. It is deeds, not words, which influence history. It was
not by chance that the people of Angola won their freedom
in full fight. The peoples have never feared reactionary
violence; it is only the well-spoken hypocrites, the fainthearted and the false apostles of freedom who preach
pacification at any price in the face of the fierce attacks of
racist barbarism. But there can be no peace, nor,wi!l there
be, as long as the barbarian Vorster, the barbarian Smith
and their Hitlerian followers and supporters continue to
deny the millions of Africans in South Africa, Zimbabwe
and Namibia the right to be human beings.

172. Similarly, it is both an honour and a privilege to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and the other members of
the Council, as well as the peoples you represent, on the
dedication you have demonstrated and the efficiency you
have applied in handling the business of the Council, to
which the People’s Republic of Mozambique reaffirms its
total commitment and support.

165. The pious messengers of neo-colonialism appeal daily
for calmness and docility. Like good pharisees they like to
bring their sardines close to the fire. Nevertheless, I have no
doubt that they will be swept out of their banking and
transnational temples. As Jod Marti said, “a just idea from
the depths of a cave is more powerful than an army”.

173. Less than 24 hours had elapsed since the conclusion
of the ninth special session of the General Assembly,
devoted to the question of Namibia, when the blood-thirsty
guns of aggression resumed fire on the downtrodden and
oppressed people of Namibia and violated the territorial
integrity of the neighbouring independent State of the
People’s Republic of Angola.

166. I shall not trouble the Council with what in fact
would be no more than an incomplete repetition of the
denunciations here, in the General Assembly and in various
international forums and conferences of the crimes, betrayals and depredations of the South African racists and
their imperialist masters directed against the peoples of
Africa. On 16 June it will be precisely two years since the
horrible Soweto killings. The revolting criminal remains
unpunished.

174. The sudden and unjustified military incursion by
Pretoria’s racist forces, fully armed with modern weaponry,
both on the ground and in the air, in order to massacre
civilian refugees, the victims of apartheid and injustice,
could only be the act of a re’gime seeking to satisfy its
colonialist and expansionist ambitions at all costs, including
that of the very stability of international peace and
security. Sudden as it may have seemed, however, it was
not surprising; such an unprovoked attack on the sovereignty of the peaceful and independent territory of Angola
is but the natural consequence of the latest display of
armament build-up now in progress in Namibia.

167. My delegation deems it essential that the Security
Council should firmly condemn the South African aggression against the peaceful people of Kassinga and that it
should apply with the utmost strictness against the Fascist
Vorster rkgime, the sanctions provided for in Chapter VII
6 Ibid.,

6th

meeting.
17

another aggressivescheme,colonial manipulationor more
racist pre-conditions.

175. The reality of the situation is that the latest
development in our part of Africa should only help further
to open our eyes to the real nature of apartheid South
Africa as regards its sincerity about providing for the true
independence of Namibia, in accordance with its verbal
declarations, while intensifying the militarization of the
area. The President of SWAPO, Mr. SamNujoma, stated the
following at the opening of the ninth specialsession0f the
General Assembly:
“We have gathered irrefutable evidence through our
own sourcesinside Namibia and from the combatants in
the People’s Liberation Army of Namibia of extensive
enemy military build-up and activities in Namibia. For
exatnple, the regime hasembarked on a reinforcement of
its already huge army in Namibia. Concurrently, it is
deploying new types of heavy and sophisticated armaments. This scheme involves the shipment into Namibia
of large numbers of tanks, combat aircraft and artillery
pieces and large quantities of ammunition. To facilitate
this ever-expanding military build-up in Namibia, new
bases,barracks and military airfields are being built in
stiategic areas in the country for offensive purposes
againstSWAP0 and the Namibian revolution.“’
176. The horrible effects of this new South African
Iggressioninto Angola leavesno room to tolerate whatever
Imount of justification may be left in the imagination of
the racists. The fact is that South Africa’s persistencein not
only illegally occupying Namibia but also terrorizing the
neighbouring countries and defying the international community has provided that racist Government with a
convenient outlet to perpetrate wanton aggressionagainst
the People’sRepublic of Angola as well as the Republic of
Zambia throughout all theseyears. Such attacks are simply
another clear manifestation of the continuing expansive
militarization of South Africa and the attendant show of
force, and are desperately designed to neutralize the
increasing determination of Namibians to gain their Iong
overdue independence, even to the extent of internationalizing the contlict.
177. The People’s Republic of Mozambique, which is a
front-Iine State, asis the People’sRepublic of Angola, aside
from also being a victim of armed aggressionby Pretoria’s
racist ally at Salisbury, vehemently condemnssuch action
as being a direct provocation to escalatethe conflict into
international proportions. Moreover, South Africa’s latest
crime againstinnocent Namibiansis a frontal assaultagainst
and an insult to the sincerity and dedication of the efforts
of the international community over the last decade,which
only two days logowere highlighted by the overwhelming
adoption of the Declaration and Programmeof Action for
Namibia [General Assembly resolution S-9/2]. Therefore,
no amount of provocation should be allowed to obstruct
Namibia’s inevitable achievement of independence and
freedom from colonial domination and oppression, an
obstruction which the South African Government intends
to bring about through its aggression.The intolerable
situation in Namibia, which has beenrepeatedly stressedin
the General Assetnbly, both in regular and in special
sessions,can no longer be permitted to pass through
7 Ibid., 1stmeeting,para.117.
18

178. This particular meeting convened by the Security
Council, coming as it does on the heels of the measures
newly adopted by the General Assembly, shouldprovide
the necessarysupport not only becauseof the freshwaveof
intrusion into the territory of the People’sRepublic of
Angola but more sobecauseof the needto suppress
threats
to international peaceand security. Such support caneven
be strengthened as we note the casualty figuresresulting
from that aggression,which is continuing up to this very
hour. Early morning press reports have indicated that
fighting between the aggressorsand innocent Namibians
along with their Angolan comradesis taking place in the
town of Chitiquela. The following is the latest casualtylist:
number of Namibianskilled, 504; Namibiansinjured, 224;
number of AngQlanskilled, 16; Angolansinjured, 64.
179. Decolonization efforts in Africa during the Iast few
years have seengreat advancesboth regionally andinternationally with the positive gainsdemonstrated’bythe newly
independent States of Guinea-Bissau,
Mozambique,Angola,
Cape Verde and Sao Tome. Those countries that made
extreme sacrifices to win freedom and independencefrom
colonial oppressionare now forging aheadin the areasof
reconstruction and development,aswell asco-operation,to
sharefurther their experiencewith their oppressed
brother
Africans. It is againstthis background of potential peace
and tranquillity in the region that South Africa has
intruded with another act of aggression.
180. The People’s Republic of Mozambique, having
known the price of freedom asit now experiencesthe fruits
of its own struggle, can do no more than strongly condemn
that aggression,which is without question intended to
weaken the independenceof the Republic of Angola and
destroy the collective efforts of the rest of the international
community in general as well as the efforts of the five
permanent members of the Security Council to make
possible the achievement of a peaceful independenceby
Namibia.
181. South Africa’s recent aggressiveacts clearly prove
that it is a real threat to southern Africa. South Africa’s
continued presencein Namibia with the blessingsof its
allies, which provide material and military support, can
only sow further destruction not only in Namibia and
Angola but alsoin the rest of Africa and in the world.
182. The People’sRepublic of Mozambique,greatly apprehensive Over this grim reality, insiststhat the only way to
achieve peace in our areais to stop the military collaboration between South Africa and the WesternPowersthat
assistthat apartheid country.. At the sametime, we repeat
our constant appeal that all efforts should be exerted and
exhausted to end the evil character of the apartheidrCgimes
in South Africa and Namibia.
183. Accordingly, the People’sRepublic of Mozambique,
as a front-line State, a people who have shedtheir blood
with the blood of the oppressedpeoplesof southernAfrica,
particularly in Zimbabwe, recommits its support to the
Angolan people and to the Namibian people under the

leadership of SWAP0 to the further strengthening of their
vigilance, along with other African countries, to assure the
emergence of a truly independent Namibia at this most
challenging moment of its struggle, during this very year,
and no later.
184. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the President of the United Nations Council
for Namibia, Ambassador Gwendoline Konie, representative
of Zambia. Under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure, I invite her to take a place at the Council table
and to make her statement.

resources. This same regime, in its scheming and conniving
style,has the audacity to address the Secretary-General and
suggest that:
“All the elements which formed the basis of so many
years of dispute and acrimony between Soutll Africa and
the United Nations can now be eliminated.” [S/12678,
annex J
19 1. While these lines were being written, plans were being
made for a brutal assault in violation of the principles and
purposes of the United Nations. For how long can a regime
which practices such duplicity endure? For how long can
the international community tolerate the flouting of all
standards of civil&d behaviour by a band of colonialist and
racist exploiters claiming to constitute a responsible member of the international community?
Their policies of
apartheid and bantustanization are a denial of all principles
of human dignity and solidarity. Their ruthless exploitation
of the African people is an intolerable affront to all
standards of human justice. Their acts of military aggression
are a continuous threat to international peace and security.

185. Miss KONIE (President of the United Nations Council for Namibia): Sir, 1 should like to congratulate you on
your accession to the presidency of the Security Council, I
am certain that you bring to this difficult post the
well-known
political skills of the diplomacy of your
country.
186. I should also like to thank the members of the
Council for this opportunity to participate in their deliberations concerning the attack against the People’s Republic of
Angola by the colonialist and racist Pretoria regime. This is
a fitting recognition of the Council for Namibia, the organ
established by the General Assembly with the mandate to
administer Namibia until independence.

192. Peace and security will prevail in southern Africa
only after the complete withdrawal of South Africa from
Namibia and after the dismantling of the institutions of
upartheid and bantustans in South Africa. Member States
must endeavour by all means at their disposal, in accordance with the Charter and all other international instruments in force, to bring South Africa to its senses.

187. 1 wish at the outset to draw attention to the
statement issued yesterday by the Council for Namibia
expressing its indignation at the invasion of Angola by
South Africa, and condemning the Pretoria regime in the
strongest terms for this blatant act of aggression. The
statement has been circulated as a document of the
Security Council [S/12691],
and of the General Assemb1y.s

193. In its reckless assault against the People’s Republic of
Angola, South Africa has once again used its illegal military
bases in Namibia for its policies of permanent aggression
against the peoples of southern Africa. In order to continue
using Namibia to fulfil its hegemonic obsessions, South
Africa continuously fabricates criminal schemes to deprive
the people of Namibia of their inalienable rights to
self-determination, freedom and national independence in a
united Namibia. Its security police is constantly harassing,
detaining, torturing and murdering men, women and
children in Namibia in a vain attempt to break the will of
the people. The Namibian people, under the leadership of
their sole and authentic liberation movement, SWAPO,
must receive from all Member States full support in their
struggle to liberate their country from the illegal occupation of the colonialist and racist Pretoria regime. It is clear
that the puppets of the Turnhalle Alliance, who are
subservient to the treacherous policies of South African
domination, cannot and must not be allowed to represent
the Namibian people, whom they betray by serving the
interests of the colonialist oppressor.

188. The vicious and irresponsible attack of South Africa
against the People’s Republic of Angola is a clear confirmation of the hegemonic ambitions of the reckless colonialists
and racists of Pretoria in southern Africa. It is, furthermore,
another instance of its systematic policy of intimidation
through military incursions against neighbouring independent African countries from its illegal military bases in
Namibia,
189. What is profoundly disturbing about the criminal
policies of the Pretoria regime is that such policies reflect
the utter contempt of Afrikaner racism and colonialism for
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, of
which South Africa is a signatory, and for the systematic
condemnation of its actions by the international community throughout recent decades.

194. It is claimed in certain quarters that South Africa has
expressed its willingness to reach a negotiated settlement on
its withdrawal from Namibia. The credibility of such claims
is seriously undermined by the brutality of South African
military adventurism as expressed in its recent incursions
deep into Angolan territory. The ninth special session of
the General Assembly, on Namibia, clearly was more
realistic in its appraisal of the situation in Namibia today.
The Security Council, in carrying out its solemn deliberations, should bear in mind the collective ‘wisdom
as
expressed both in the debate of the ninth special session as
well as in the Declaration on Namibia and Programme of

190. As if to underline its criminal disregard for the well
considered views of the international community, South
Africa unleashes a brutal attack against the People’s
Republic of Angola shortly after a special session of the
General Assembly in which an overwhelming majority of
the Members reaffirmed their demands for the immediate
withdrawal of South Africa from Namibia, a Territory
which it occupies illegally, and in which it pursues
systematic policies of exploitation of its people and
8 A/.33/95.
19

Action in Support of Self-Determination and National
Independence for Namibia adopted by the overwhelming
majority of the General Assembly /resolution s-9/2].
195. The magnitude of the loss of life and property, as
outlined this morning by my colleague and brother the
representative of Angola, cannot but alarm the entire
international community. In its attack against Angolan
territory, South Africa has caused many casualties amongst
the Angolan population and Namibian refugees sheltered in
Angola. On behalf of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, I wish to convey, through him, to the gallant
people of Angola our profound sympathies and condolences on this l&s of life. I would also take this
opportunity to convey similar condolences to the President
and leader of the delegation of SWAPO.
196. Lives cannot be restored, but South Africa must be
made to suffer the penalties at the disposal of the
international community. In the Programme of Action
adopted at its ninth special session, the General Assembly
strongly urged the Security Council to take the most
vigorous measures, including sanctions provided for under
Chapter VII of the Charter, particularly comprehensive

economic sanctions, an oil embargo and an arms embargo,
These measures were justified in the light of the policies
and practices of the colonialist and racist Pretoria rkgime,
In the light of the most recent Confirmation of the criminal
policies of Afrikaner colonialism and racism, the recom.
mendation of the General Assembly becomes ever more
urgent and necessary.
197. The PRESIDENT (interp?YtUtiOn from Spanish): 1
now call on the representative of Angola, who wishes to
make a brief statement.
198. Mr. DE FIGUEIREDO
(Angola): Mr. President, it
was thanks to your brilliant talents that you were ableto
convene this august Council. I hope that, with the same
brilliance, you will be able to implement immediately the
resolution just adopted by the Council. I should like to
express to you and to the members of your delegation my
delegation’s sincere gratitude for the efficient, swift aad
brilliant manner in which YOU have conducted the Council’s
deliberations.
The meeting rose at 3.15 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
your bookstore

may

LES PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
ECAFl l-IOJI;YZIMTb

COMO

CONSEGUIR

HBAAHLIR

OPI’AHH

PUBLICACIONES

3AI4MH

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
e&in
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

OlThE~MHEHHMX

NACIONES

HAlJ$fH

UNIDAS

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones
