General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Sessio1'-

70

DafC' of

Other deciaions

Freedom of information
Measures to be taken against ideologies and practices based on teHor or on incitement to racial discrimination or any other form of group hatred . . . . . . . .

3057 (XXVIll). Decade for Action to Comhat
Racism and Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its firm resolve to achieve t~e t~tal _an~
unconditional elimination of racism and racial d1scnm1niation, against which the conscience and sens~ of ~ustice
of mankind have long been aroused and which m our
time represent serious obstacles to further progress ~nd
to the strengthening of international peace and secunty,
Recalling its decision, in resolution 2919 (XXVII)
of 15 November 1972, to launch the Decade for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination ,and to
inaugurate the activities thereof on 10 December 1973,
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Having examined the draft programme for the Decade transmitted to it by the Economic and Social Council, 1 and the views on the draft programme expressed
by Governments, 2
l. Designates the ten-year period beginning on 10
December 1973 as the Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrmination;
2. Approves the Programme for the Decade for
Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination
annexed to the present resolution and calls upon all
States to co-operate in every possible way in its implementation;
3. Invites Governments, United Nations organs,
the specialized agencies and other intergovernmental
organizations, and non-governmental organizations in
consultative relationship concerned, to participate in
the observance of the Decade by intensifying and expanding their efforts towards ensuring the rapid eradication of racism and racial discrimination;
4. Calls upon a11 Members States to submit every
two years to the Economic and Soda! Council a report
on the action taken under the Programme;
5. Requests the Economic and Social Coundl to
assume, with, the assistance of the Secretary-General,
responsibility for co-ordinating the Programme and
c:valuating activities undertaken during the Decade as
provided in the Programme;
6. Recommends that the Economic and Social
Council should perform these functions in plenary
meetings;
7. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
report annually to the General Assembly on the implementation of the Programme;
8. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To transmit the Programme to Governments
and to the specia1ized agencies and other intergovernmental organizations for such action as they may undertake in order to give effect to the suggestions contained therein;
1 A/9094 and Corr.I, annex I.
2 A/9094 and Corr. I, chap. III,

A/9094/ Add. I and 2.

Item

adopti.m

Paqe

64

14 December 1973

89

66

14 December 1973

90

(b) To transmit the Programme and the recommendations on the role of non-governmental organizations3 to the non-governmental organizations in consultative relationship concerned;
(c) To take the necessary measures for the implementation of those suggestions contained in tjle Programme which fall within the Secretary-General's area
of responsibility or which require action by other
organs of the United Nations;
(d) To serve as a central point from which information relating to the implementation of the suggestions
contained in the Programme may be obtained;
( e) To ensure the closest possible degree of collaboration between United Nations bodies and their
respective staffs in the work required for the implementation of the suggestions contained in the Programme;

~- Decides to consider this question annually on the
basis of the report of the Economic and Social Council
on the implementation of the Programme.
2163rd plenary meeting
2 November 1973
ANNEX
Programme for the Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination

I. The United Nations, having solemnly proclaimed, in the
Preamble to the Charter, faith in fundamental human rights
i~ the dignity and worth of the human person, and in the equai
rights ?f men and women and of nations large and smaill, is
determined:
(a) To establish conditions under which justice and respect
for obligations arising from treaties and other sources of international law can be maintained;
(b) To promote social progress and better standards of life
in larger f.reedom.

2. The United Na.lions has opposed all manifestations of
racial discrimination and has in particular condemned the
policy of apartheid and similar policies based on racial theories
and, consequently, its competent organs have:
(a) Declared that discrimination between human beings on
the ground of race, colour or ethnic origin is an affront to
humanity and shall be condemned as a violation of th<: principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of the human
rights and fundamental freedoms proclaimed in the Universal
Decla,ration of Human Rights, as an obstacle to friendly and
peaceful relations among nations and as a factor capable of
disturbing peace and security among peoples;
( b) Decla,red that any Government or regime whose official
policy or actual practice is based on racial discrimination contravenes the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter, and called upon them to desist forthwith from pursuing such policies;

(c) Condemned all military, economic or political collaboration with the racist regimes that enables and encourages
these regimes to enforce and perpetuate their racist policies,
and called for an immediate end to such collaboration;
3 A/9094 and Corr.I, annex II.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
(d) Reaffirmed ,time and again the legitimacy of the struggle
of all oppressed peoples, in pairticular in the territories under
colonial, racial or alien domination, to obtain racial equality
and freedom, and called for increased and continued moral
and material support for those peoples.
3. Action has been taken by a number of countries, as
well as international and national institutions, to oppose racial
discrimination and promote respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all, irrespective of race, colour,
descent or national or ethnic origin, through:
(a) Ratification of or accession to, and implementation of,
the widely-accepted International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination4 and other international instruments with similar objectives;
(b) The continuing efforts of specialized agencies such as
the International Labour Organisation and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, and of
United Nations bodies such as the United Nations Institute
for Training and Research;
(c) Instruments, procedures and programmes instituted by
regional organizations;
(d) The enactment of legislation and the putting into effect
of procedures by Governments to combat racism and racial
discrimination and improve relations among racial groups;
(e) Activities carried on internationally or within a particular country to reduce and even eliminate iracial hostility
and prejudice, protect persons and g,roups from discrimination,
and promote respect for all people regardless of race, colour,
descent, national or ethnic origin or other status.
4. The actions referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 above
have been successful in promoting a greater understanding of
the fallacy and injustice of racist dogmas and practices but
have been disregarded by a number of Governments and
racist regimes, in particular in southern Africa; it is also
noted that in several countries segments of the population
have continued to maintain attitudes based on racial prejudice
and discrimination.
5. The United Nations is convinced more than ever of the
need for constant national, regional and international efforts
to eliminate racism, apartheid and racial discrimination.
6. The ultimate success of the efforts of the Uni,ted Nations and other bodies in combating racial discrimination will
depend upon:
(a) Full adherence to the purposes and principles of the
Charter in creating conditions of universal respect for and
observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms for
all, without distinction as to race, colour, descent or national
or ethnic origin;
(b) The vigour with which action is ,taken by individual
Governments and the degree of co-operation between them,
inside and outside the United Nations, to fulfil the purposes
and principles of the Charter and to implement the resolutions
re'1a ting to the eradication of racist policies and practices, as
well as colonialism;
( c) The full utilization of the desire and readiness of men
and women to devote their energies, talents and abilities to
the benefit of society and more particularly to combat racism
and racial discrimination.
7. To this end, the General Assembly proclaims the years
1973 to 1983 as the Decade for Action to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination.
GOALS AND OBJECTIVES

8. The ultimate goals of the Decade are to promote
human rights and fundamental freedom for all, without distinction of any kind on grounds of race, colour, descent or
national or ethnic origin, especially by eradicating racial prejudice, racism and racial discrimination; to arrest any expansion of raci~t policies, to eliminate the persistence of
racist policies and to counteract th1: emergence of alliances
based on mu,tual espousal of raci,rn and racial discrimina4 Resolution 2106 A

(XX), annex.

71

tion; to resist any policy and practices which lead to the
strengthening of the racist regimes and contribute to the
sustainment of racism and racial discrimination; to identify,
isolate and dispel the fallacious and mythical beliefs, policies
and practices that contribute to racism and racial discrimination; and to put an end to racist regimes.
9. To this end, appropriate measures should be taken to
implement fully United Nations instruments and decisions
concerning the elimination of racial discrimination, to ensure
support for all peoples striving for racial equality, to eradicate
all forms of racial discrimination, and to pursue a vigorous
world-wide campaign of information designed to dispel racial
prejudice and to enlighten and involve world public opinion
in the struggle against racism and racial discrimination, emphasizing, inter alia, the education of youth in the spirit of
human rights and fundamental freedoms and in t:1e dignity
and worth of the human person and against theories of racism
and racial discrimination, as well as the full involvement
of women in the formulation and implementation of these
measures.
POLICY

MEASURES AND TARGET DATES

10. The above goals and objectives call for a continuing
effort by all peoples, Governments and institutions to eradicate racial discrimination and to promote respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all, irrespective of race,
colour, descent or national or ethnic origin, both within
their national jurisdiction and universally.
11. To this end, the following measures need to be taken
at the national, regional, international and United Nations
levels:
National

12. (a) Measures in the economic, social, cultural and
political fields that would ensure the full equality of aU
peoples and individuals, without distinction of any kind on
grounds of race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin,
should be pirepared and implemented. This would necessitate:
(i) Assistance on a bilateral basis to peoples which ace
victims of racial discrimination;
(ii) No support being given to Governments or regimes
which practise racial discrimination that will enable
them to perpetuate racist policies or practices;
(iii) In the case of States not parties to the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination, the urgent enactment as a
matter of the highest priority of appropriate legislation and other suitable measures to prohibit and
bring to an end racial discrimination, to abrogate,
amend, !rescind or nullify any policies or regulations
that have the effer,t of creating or perpetuating racial
hatred, and, with due regard to the principles embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, the United Nations Declaration on the Eli-·
mina.tion of All Forms of Racial Discrimination~ and
the rights set forth in article 5 of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination, to declare the dissemination
of ideas based on racial superior~ty and hatred to be
an offence punishable by law;
(iv) The establishment by every national and local Government of recourse procedures to be invoked against
any acts of racial discrimination which may be suffered by an individual and which violate his human
rights and fundamental freedoms; it is necessary that
there should be adequate machinery and procedures
for handling complaints, with easy access thereto,
facilitated by all appropriate encouragement and support to persons in the protection of thei-r rights;
5 Resolution 1904 (XVIII).

72

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session
(v) The granting of scholarships by the competent authorities and institutions to the youth of the territories
where racial discrimination prevails, in particular
thrnugh increased contributions to the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa;
(vi) The encouragement of the preparation and publication of studies based, in particular, on the provisions
of the United Nations Declaration on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination;
(vii) The wide publicizing of the contents of this Programme by Governments and all institutions concerned, using every means at their disposal, including
all the appropriate communications media;
(viii) Ratification of or accession to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, on a universal basis, and the effective
implementation of ,that Convention, in co-operation
with the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination, in particular by the preparation of
full and comprehensive reports under article 9 of
the Convention;
(ix) No discrimination for any reason or on any basis
whatsoever in education and school systems; this
should be implemented as rapidly as possible during
the first half of the Decade;
(x) No discrimination on any of the grounds mentioned
above in the immigration laws and policies; this
should be attained as soon as possible and in any
event not later than the end of the Decade.

(b) The inclusion in the curricula of education of children
and youth of the subject of human rights, with special emphasis, in the primary stages of education, on the equality of
all human beings and the evils of racial discrimination, should
be attained as soon as possible during the Decade.
(c) The use of available media of information to educate
the pubE ~ continuously and systematically in the spirit of respect for human rights and, in particular, against all policies,
practices and manifestations of racism and racial discrimination should be embarked upon as from the first year of the
Decade.

Regional and international

13. (a) As a major feature during the Decade, a world
conference on combating racial discrimination should be convened by the General Assembly as soon as possible, but preferably not later than 1978. The conference should have as its
main theme the adoption of effective ways and means and
concrete measures for securing the full and universal implementation of United Nations decisions and resolutions on
racism, racial discrimination, apartheid, decolonization and
self-determination, as well as the accession to and ratification
and enforcement of the international instruments relating to
human rights and the elimination of racism and racial discrimination.
(b) The convening of international and regional seminars,
conferences and other similar activities in line with the goals
and objectives of this Programme should be undertaken; the
Secretary-General should be informed of all the activities
undertaken in this connexion.
(c) Activities undertaken in connexion with the International Women's Year should reflect the importance of
women's effective contribution to the struggle against racism
and racial discrimination.

/J·, , ;-;.! con~H.lcr~n;.~,a of \-\'JYS :ir.C mean~ of pc~p:i;-i~~
concrete proposals in support of the etforts of all oppres~.:d
peoples suffering from racism and racial discrimination. including the establishment of regional funds on a voluntary
basis to support the efforts of those peoples, should be undertaken; reports on the subject would be forwarded to the
Secretary-General every two years.

(e) Racist regimes should be denied any support or assistance that could enable them to perpetuate racist policies or
practices, including policies aimed at depriving the indigenous
people of their inalienable rights.
(f) States should adopt measures to prevent the activities
of persons and groups which incite sectarian and racial
passions that would provoke people to leave their land and
settle in lands belonging to others in accordance with policies
designed to consolidate settler-colonialism or to settle natives
in reservations, thus condemning them to a miserable existence.
(g) It is essential to consider ways and means of ensuring
the international and regional isolation of racist regimes.
(h) It is essential to provide support and assistance, in
accordance with the United Nations Charter and the relevant
United Nations declarations and resolutions, to liberation
movements struggling ag,iinst colonialism and racial discrimination, as well as to Governments that wish lo embark on
concrete programmes to eradicate racial discrimination.
(i) The implementation of the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
as well as Uruted Nations resolutions on this question, is
imperative; the regional organizations should be invited by
the United Nations to give attention to this question in order
that the total eradication of all forms of racial discrimination
may be attained within the shortest possible time.
(j) The adoption of new international instruments regarding the elimination of racial discrimination in all its forms
and the suppression of the crime of apartheid should be
considered.
(k) The co-ordination by all Governments of their activities in the field of information is advisable; such co-ordination should be achieved through the United Nations, the
regional organizations or through bilateral or multilateral
agreements.

United Nations system

14. In addition to the measures referred to above, the
activities set forth below should be undertaken by organizations within the United Nations system.
Research ana study

15. (a) The existing studies and research in the field of
apartheid and racial discrimination should be updated and
developed.
( b) Student workshops should be organized for the teaching of international law, with particular reference to topics
related to the United Nations Declaration on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, as well as the Declaration on Principles of
International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, 6 which refers to the principle of equal
rights and self-determination of peoples.
(c) Further research and publications should be envisaged
dealing with racial discrimination in regard, inter alia, to:
(i) The right to security of persons and protection by
the State, in particular judicial or quasi-judicial
guarantees against violence, maltreatment or arbitrary
measures exerci~ed by government officials or by any
individual, group or institution;
(ii) The right of access to any place or service intended
for use by the general public, such as transport,
hotels. restaurants, cafes, theatres and parks.
(d) Pilot studies on racism and racial discrimination in
the economic, political, social, cultural, sociological and other
fields should be undertaken, continued and co-ordinated, and
special attention should be given to:
!i) Tht kinds of s;tuation~ t'1a! !~ad to racism;
(ii) Charting the spread or decline of racism or racial
discrimination, diagnosing and detecting the introduction of racism or racial discrimination into any
e Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

area early enough to permit effective preventive
action;
(iii) The propagation, consciously or otherwise, of racial
prejudice by the press, cinema and television, in
particular in publications and programmes for children and youth;
(iv) The role of education and science, especially social
science, in combating racism and racial discrimination and in solving racial problems;
( v) The preparation and implementation of economic,
social and political measures that would ensure the
real equality of all peoples and individuals, without
distinction of any kind on grounds of race, colour,
descent or national or ethnic origin;
(vi) Problems of discrimination arising in connexion with
immigration of men, women-married and unmarried-and their children and foreign workers of both
sexes;
(vii) The crime of apartheid under international penal
law, with particular reference to the responsibility
of individuals;
(viii) Problems of racial discrimination arising in connexion
with housing, sporting activities, and so forth:
(ix) The role of private group action in combating racism
and racial discrimination, consistent with the objectives of this Programme.
( e) Seminars on special aspects of combating racism and
racial discrimination and promoting racial harmony should
be organized at both the international and regional levels.
(/) The United Nations should address an appeal to various
scientific international organizations ( for example, associations of jurists, sociologists, anthropologists, historians, economists) to devote special efforts during the Decade to the
analysis and study of aspects of racial discrimination within
their competence.
Education, training and information
I 6. (a) The need for inter agency co-ordination and cooperation in the field of education and training on problems
and activities concerning the elimination of racial discrimination undertaken in the implementation of this Programme
should be identified.
( b) The procedures and types of action used by various
agencies in the field of education and training related to
racial discrimination with a view to any necessary harmonization should be examined in the light of the experience acquired.
(c) New educational and information materials should be
prepared to dispel racial prejudice and to combat racism
and racial discrimination, such as teaching materials for use
in every type of institution of learning, at the elementary, secondary and higher levels of education.
( d) Popular publications, films and radio and television
programmes should be produced for distribution or broadcasting to the general public.
International funds
17. The General Assembly should establish an international fund on a voluntary basis to help the peoples struggling against racial discrimination and apartheid.
Co-ordination, review and appraisal, and reporting
18. (a) The General Assembly shall entrust the Economic
and Social Council, in co-operation with the SecretaryGeneral, with the responsibility for co-ordinating the programmes and evaluating the activities undertaken in connexion
with the Decade.
(b) The Economic and Social Council ah::ll, du1ing the
period of the Decade, submit an annual report to the General
Assembly containing, inter a/ia:
(i) An enumeration of the activities undertaken or contemplated to achirve th~ objectives of the Decade,
including the activities of Governments. Unit-:d Na-

73

tions organs, the specialized agencies and other international organizations;
(ii) A review and appraisal of those activities;
(iii) Its suggestions and recommendations.
(c) The Economic and Social Council shall also act as the
preparatory committee for the world conference to be convened as a major fe;iture of the Decade.
(d) The Secretary-General shall provide the Economic and
Social Council with such assist;incc as may be necessary for
the performance of its functions relating to the Decade.
( e) Governments should forward a report every two years
on the action taken under the Programme for the Decade, on
the basis of a questionnaire circulated by the SecretaryGeneral; these reports shall be transmitted to the Economic
and Social Council for its comid~ration.
(/) The Secretary-General shall submit to the Economic
and Social Council an annual report containing:
(i) A summary of the actions, suggestions. trends, etc.,
emerging from the deliberations of United Nations
organs and bodies and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, as well as from the
deliberations of the specialized agencies concerned
with the question of racial discrimination and apartheid;
(ii) A summary of information relating to the elimination
of racism and racial discrimination as may be received
by the United Nations under the system of periodic
reports on human rights;
(iii) Information concerning the activities undertaken or
contemplated during the Decade under the programme
of advisory services in the field of human rights in
regard to the elimination of racial discrimination;
(iv) Information submitted by non-governmental organizaticns in consultative relationship concerning activities undertaken or contemplated during the Decade;
(v) A report on the action of the Office of Public Information with respect to the Decade;
(vi) A report on any action hy the United Nations Institute
for Training and Research in relation to th~ Decade.
(g) Adequate resources shall be made available to the
Secretary-General to enable him to undertake the activities
entrusted to him under the Programme for the Decade and. in
particular, to enable him to provide the Economic and Social
Council with such assistance as may be necessary for the
performance of its functions relating to the Decade.
(h) The General Assembly shall consider annually the item
entitled "Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Raci:il
Discrimination" on the ba,is of the report of the Economic
and _Social Council and of other relevant reports which it may
receive from the Secretary-General. and shall review the
implementation of this Programme.
(i) The General Assembly shall address itself at the e.irliest
opp~rtunity to t_he question of ways and means of ensuring
the 1mplemcntat1on of United Nations resolutions on apartheid, racial discrimination and rcl:Jted matters.

3058 (XXVIII). Protection of journalists engaged
in dangerous missions in areas of armed
conflict

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2673 (XXV) of 9 December 1070 and 2854 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971, in
which it expressed its conviction that there was a need
for an additional humanitarian international instrument
to ensure the better protection of journalists engaged
in dangerous missions in areas where an armed coullict
was taking place,
