h
MEETING:

17 JUNE

1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2594)

Adoption

of the agenda

The situation

,*..*...*,.........

. . . . .. .. .. . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . .. . . . . ..

1
1

. . . . . . ..****I*......*........

in Namibia:

(a)

Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17213);

(b)

Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17222);

(c)

Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I..................
Namibia (S/17242)

WPV.2594

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ , . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Qffiial Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2594th MEETING
Held
President: Mr. Errol MAHABIR

in New York on Monday,

17 June 1985, at 3.30 p.m.

(Trinidad and Tobago).

2. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite the Acting President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia and the other
members of the delegation to take a place at the Council
table.

Present; The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ouyahia, Acting
President, and the other members of the delegation of the
United Nations Councilfor Namibia took a place at the
Council table.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2594)
1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT: In accordancewith the decision
taken at the 2583rdmeeting,I invite Mr. Nujoma to take a
place at the Council table.

The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17213);
(6) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Mozambique to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17222);
(c) Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of Namibia (S/17242)

At the invitation of the President,Mr, Nujoma took a
place at the Council table.
4. The PRESIDENT: In accordancewith decisionstaken
at previous meetingson this item [2583rdto 2587th,2589th,
2590thand 259&d meetings],I invite the representativesof
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bangladesh,Barbados,Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana,Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada,the Congo, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia,
Democratic Yemen, Ethiopia, the German Democratic
Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany, Ghana, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Indonesia, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya,
Kuwait, the Lao People’sDemocratic Republic, Lesotho,
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Panama, Poland, Seychelles,South Africa, Sri
Lanka, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey,
Uganda, the United Arab Emirates,the United Republic of
Tanzania, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zambia and Zimbabwe
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

The meeting was called to order at 4.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:

(0) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Repre(4

sentative of India to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/17213);
Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council

At the invitation of the President,Mr. Zar~(Afghanistun),
Mr. Bessaieh(Algeria), Mr. Van-Dunem(Angola), Mr.
Muiiiz (Argentina),Mr. Choudhury(Bangladesh),
Mr. Moseley (Barbados), Mr. Tshering (Bhutan), Mrs. Carrasco
(Bolivia), Mr. Legwaila(Botswana),Mr. Maciel (Bra@, Mr
Tsvetkov(Bulgaria),Mr. Engo(Cameroon),Mr. Lewis(Canada), Mr, Gayama (Congo), Mr, Malmierca (Cuba), Mr.
Moushoutas(Cyprus),Mr. Cesar(Czechoslovakia),Mr. AlAshtal (DemocraticYemen),Mr. Dinka (Ethiopia), Mr. Ott
(German DemocraticRepublic),Mr. Lautenschlager(Federal Republicof Germany),Mr. Asamoah(Ghana),Mr. Sinclair (Guyana),Mr. Charles(Haiti). Mr. Foldeak(Hungary),
Mr. Kusumaatmadja(Indonesia),Mr. Shearer (Jamaica),
Mr. Kuroda (Japan), Mr. Kiilu (Kenya), Mr. Abulhassan

(S/17222);

(4 Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the

implementation of Security Council resolutions 435
(1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/17242)

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite the representative of
Liberia to take a place at the Council table.
At the invilation of the President, Mr. Kofa (Liberia) took
a place at the Council table.
1

9. I must also claim the privilege of congratulating your
predecessors, the representatives of Thailand, for the excellent manner in which they guided the work of the Council
during the month of May.

(Kuwait), Mr, Vongsay (Lao People’s Democratic Republic),
Mr. Makeka (Lesotho), Mr, Azzarouk (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr Zain (Malaysia), Mr. Gauci (Malta), Mr. Mufioz
Ledo (Mexico), Mr. Nyamdoo (Mongolia), Mr. Alaoui
(Morocco), Mr. Murargy (Mozambique), Mr. DEscoto
Brockmann (Nicaragua), Mr, Gambari (Nigeria), Mr. Shah
Nawaz (Pakistan), Mr. Cabrera Jovane (Panama), Mr.
Nowak (Poland), Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles), Mr. von
Schirnding (South Africa), Mr. WiJewardane (Sri Lanka),
Mr. Birido (Sudan), Mr. Al-Atassi (Syrian Arab Republic),
Mr. Ttirkmen (Turkey), Mr, Odaka (Uganda), Mr. AlMosfir, (United Arab Emirates), Mr. Mkapa (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Le Kim Chung (Viet Nam), Mr. Golob
(Yugosiavia), Mr. Goma (Zambia) andMr. Mudenge (Zimbabwe) took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

10, The question of Namibia has been aired and debated
so thoroughly and so often that it seems difficult to conceive why it should still be necessary for so many representatives to say so much on the matter. It seems difficult, too,
to believe that so much should have been said for so long
with such little result, It is now nearly 19 years since the
General Assembly by its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966 terminated South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia. In 1978 this Council adopted resolution 435 (1978),
which approves a negotiated and agreed plan for the independence of Namibia. And yet, in spite of the numerous
strong resolutions that have been adopted both in the
Council and in the General Assembly, the people of Namibia are no nearer to independence than they were in
1966. In fact, if the plans of the Pretoria Government are
successful, on this very day the people of Namibia may
well have moved further from true independence than they
were in 1966. That, in brief, is the amazing record of Pretoria’s success so far in frustrating the will of the whole
international community.

5. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran in which he requests to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,

11. I am sure that there are very many delegations which,
like mine, believe that what is at stake as we consider the
question of Namibia once again is not only independence
for the Namibian people but also the very authority of the
Council. This, I believe, is one reason why so many Ministers for Foreign Affairs and so many delegations have
elected to join their voices in public affirmation of support
for the Council, in solidarity with the Movement of NonAligned Countries and in evidence of a determination that
Namibia shall be independent.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Rajaie-Khorassani
(.slamic Republic of Iran) took the place reservedfor him at
the side of the Council chamber.
6. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of Barbados. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
7. Mr. MOSELEY (Barbados): My delegation is very
grateful for the privilege accorded it of being allowed to
speak on this important occasion when the question of
Namibia is being debated once again.

12. From all that has been said in the course of this
debate there can be no doubt that at the root of the failure
of all efforts to achieve the goal of independence for Namibia lie at least two factors: first, there is the determination repeatedly stated by Pretoria that no power on earth
can make that Government alter its policy of apartheid;
and, secondly, there are the natural resources of Namibia,
the greed for which compels so many fair-speaking countries to betray their inner conviction that the “grab for
Africa”, so brazenly practised in the nineteenth century,
should now be discontinued-even
at the end of the
twentieth.

8. I call this occasion important for at least two reasons,
First, in a general sense, it is important since every time the
question of Namibia comes before this Council it involves
a picking up of the gauntlet of defiance flung in the face of
the whole of the United Nations by an arrogant Pretoriathat Government which is so confident of its support in the
corridors of international power. that it boasts that no
power on earth will make it deviate from the policy of
apartheid and the perpetual domination of the majority in
southern Africa by the minority. Secondly, Mr. President,
and for a happier and more private reason, this occasion is
important because, for the first time, my delegation sees
the Council presided over by the representative of Trinidad and Tobago. I am confident that you will agree that,
until some device is invented to lift one or other of our
countries and transport it physically to some region outside the Caribbean, our destinies, like our pasts, will
remain economically, sociologically and emotionally inextricably bound up. My delegation has every confidence
that your ability, your integrity and your experience will
provide outstanding guidance to the Council for the conduct of its affairs during the month of June.

13. Earlier in the course of this debate, those present in
the Council chamber were treated to what may best be
described as a test of their gullibility when the representative of the Pretoria regime was permitted to speak in the
Council. Without daring to mention even once the word
apartheid, he delivered a statement which must surely rank
among the most cynical and specious ever heard in this
chamber. Let me illustrate a few examples. In almost his
first sentence, he said: “Furthermore, South Africa is an
integral part of the southern African region, Whether one
likes it or not, this is a fact” [2583rd meeting, para. 2001.
That out of the mouth of the representative of a Govern2

n-rent whose creed is apartheid. The brazenness of this cynicism fills the mind with a sense of horror. If there was a
divine right given to the Afrikaaner to leave his home,
travel thousands of miles and take by force, or even otherwise, the lands of other people, surely that right could only
have been given upon condition that there should be a fair
sharing of and a partnership in the lands usurped. A fair
sharing and integration such as would justify the use of the
term “integral part” is the very opposite of the abomination that is apartheid. By no stretch of the imagination can
practitioners and disciples of apartheid be considered an
integral part of those who are truly African.

resentative of the Namibian people; and is most earnest in
its appeal to the contact group to recognize the basic
insincerity of the Pretoria regime, which will clearly use
every excuse, however fraudulent, to maintain its illegal
hold on Namibia.
18. The Council must not impotently surrender to the
deceit and arrogance of Pretoria. It must act in the firm
belief that the majority of Africans will never accept the
application of apartheid in their land. The Council must act
with the solemn determination that, in spite of the obstacles
imposed by greed, Namibia must gain independence if the
Council itself is not to be for ever humiliated and rendered
altogether impotent.

14. This Council was told by the representative of Pretoria
that countries in the region should abide by certain ground
rules. He said:

19. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Lesotho. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

“First, no State should make its territory available to
individuals or organizations that wish to promote or
prepare for violence against other States in the region.
The fact is that all the countries of southern Africa have
disaffected groups and dissident movements.” [Bid.,

20. Mr. MAKEKA (Lesotho): We wish to express our
profound gratitude, through you, Mr. President, to the
Council for granting us the opportunity to participate in
these very important deliberations on Namibia’s future. We
are more than delighted to see you presiding over these
deliberations and are confident that, under your very able
guidance, the Council will live up to its responsibility and
adopt a decision that will lead to the implementation of its
resolution 435 (1978) and eventual freedom and independence for the Namibian people.

para. 201.1

Apart from the patent absurdity of the implication that
there is a single country in the whole world in which there
are no disaffected groups or dissident movements, there is
the absolutely incredible invitation to regard 20 million
black Africans fighting for the most basic of human rights
in their own land as a disaffected group or a dissident
movement. In the eyes of Pretoria, it is monstrous and
unthinkable that those whom they disparagingly refer to as
Kaffirs should not sit still and accept genocide as their just
fate.

21. Permit me also to pay tribute to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and the representative of Thailand for
guiding the Council’s work during the month of May.
22. The United Nations as a whole, and its General
Assembly and the Security Council in particular, have been
seized of the vexing problem of the illegal occupation of
Namibia by South Africa since the inception of the Organization. During all these years the international community,
through numerous Assembly and Council resolutions, and,
indeed, through decisions and opinions of the International
Court of Justice, has tried in vain to get South Africa out of
Namibia. Council resolution 435 (1978) represented a leap
forward in this endeavour, because not only was it fully
backed by the Western countries, but it was acceptable to
South Africa, at least on paper. It is clear, therefore, that
resolution 435 (1978) represents the only acceptable basis
for a solution to the problem. Like previous speakers, we
would like to add our voice in calling for a speedy implementation of the resolution. The report of the SecretaryGeneral reveals that virtually all outstanding issues have
been resolved; except that South Africa still maintains that
the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola is a precondition for the implementation of the resolution

15. The following is another so-called ground rule: “no
foreign forces should be permitted to intervene in the
region” [ibid., para. 2021. No comment is needed here but to
say that that is a plain demand that Pretoria should be
allowed free rein to stamp Angola and Botswana, Namibia
and the rest with the evil hoofmarks of apartheid while the
world looks on and applauds.
16. The third “ground rule” states: “South Africa believes
that the problems of conflict in our region should be solved
by peaceful means” [ibid., para. 2031. How a problem of
conflict can be solved by peaceful means we are not told; but
at least the representative of Pretoria recognized that, for
millions of black Africans, the problem of apartheidon their
native soil is a problem of conflict, not just a mere problem.
For, contrary to the fraud which the apologists for the
system perpetrate upon the ndive and simplistic, apartheid is
not merely colour prejudice to be solved by simple and
peripheral civil rights legislation. It is far more sinister than
that-it is a doctrine of perpetual domination, dispossession and degradation.

[S/l 7242, para. 451.

23. From the very first day that the international community called upon South Africa to leave Namibia, South
Africa has come up with one excuseafter another, designed
to frustrate that will and perpetuate its presence there,
which has brought untold suffering to the Namibians,
whose welfare and freedom are pivotal in this exercise. Not

17. It is not necessary for me to say much more. I would
only add for the record that Barbados stands firmly behind
the demand that Council resolution 435 (1978) be fully
implemented; is unshaken in its support of the South West
Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), the authentic rep3

only is apartheid and racial discrimination against the
majority of people, who are of non-European origin, being
extended from South Africa to Namibia, not only are the
immense natural resources of Namibia being depleted by
foreign and South African companies, but thousands of
Namibians are being killed, imprisoned and forced to flee
their country, and more recently they are being forced to
join the forces of oppression and occupation. As if this were
not enough, South Africa has used and continues to use the
territory of Namibia as a base for attacks and acts of
aggression against neighbouring countries. The recent
events in Cabinda, where South African soldiers en route
to commit acts of sabotage were killed, after South Africa
had made a fanfare of the withdrawal of its forces from
Angola, must convince even non-believers that South
Africa is more than ever determined to stay in Namibia.
24. South Africa used all forms of delaying tactics while in
fact it was consolidating its position in Namibia. We have
seen the Turnhalle agreements, we have heard. and still
hear, about the linkage issue of the withdrawal of Cuban
forces in Angola, and we now hear about the setting up of a
transitional government in Namibia. Where will this lead
to? When will South Africa learn that nothine short of
resolution 435 (1978) and full sovereign independence for
Namibia will be acceptable to the Namibians and to the
international community? It should not surprise anybody
that the people of Namibia, under the sole, authentic leadership of SWAPO, whose very able President, Mr. Sam
Nujoma, is here with us, will continue their armed struggle
until victory is achieved. South Africa and those who pat it
on the back must know that SWAP0 and the people of
Namibia will ultimately win, because time is on their side,
and their struggle is historic and noble. It follows, herefore,
that the so-called transitional government is nothing but a
sham, and must be declared null and void by the Council.
25. Those developments are of serious concern not only to
my country, which is a neighbour of both South Africa and
Namibia, but to the whole world community. The existence
of apartheid and racial discrimination in South Africa has
brought untold difficulties, problems and misery not only
for South Africans, but for my country and other neighbouring countries. The recent events, which resulted in
massacres of unarmed South Africans who have skin of a
different colour from that of their masters, show that the
South African Government is far from abandoning uparrheid in the interest of peace in our region. The callous
brutality of apartheid in South Africa and in Namibia
breeds refugees who flee in huge numbers into my country
and other neighbouring countries. In our giving asylum and
haven to these refugees, most of whom are school-going
children, we bring upon ourselves the wrath of Pretoria. It is
sad that South Africa has accorded to itself police powers in
the region, hitting left and right in a fury blinded by upartheid. In its determination to protect and preserve apartheid
in South Africa and Namibia, South Africa has become a
bully, engaging in terrible acts of aggression against its
powerless and poor neighbours. The Council may recall
that in 1982 we were forced to appear before it following an
attack on our capital city, Maseru, by South Africa, in
which 42 innocent refugees and citizens of Lesotho were
killed in cold blood.

26. Never before has South Africa defied the Council as it
did early in the morning of Friday, 14 June, when South
African troops, with impunity and in South Africa’s usual
high-handed manner, committed yet another act of wanton
aggression, this time against Botswana. What is iionic’is
that the barbarous attack on the capital city of Botswana
takes place at a time when the Council is seized of yet other
acts of aggression just across the border of Botswana-in
Namibia. Indeed, the South African presence in Namibia
cannot be described as anything but an act of aggression
against the Territory and people of Namibia. That gross
violation of sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
peace-loving people of Botswana proves beyond reasonable doubt that South Africa cannot be referred to as a
force of peace in our region. Not one country has ever
attacked South Africa, but South Africa has been the
aggressor and a source of insecurity for all of us, and as
such it is more than a serious threat to international peace
and security.
27. As the Prime Minister of my country stated in his
message of support, sympathy and condolences to the
Government and people of Botswana,
“We can understand the indignation of the people of
Botswana over this wanton attack, which is all the more
objectionable because your Government has consistently advocated peaceful resolution of problems of
southern Africa whilst drawing attention to the danger
posed to the entire region by the cynical and immoral
policy of apartheid. We are aware that the allegation
that there were ANC [African National Congress of
South Africa] bases in Gaborone is an empty pretext for
the flexing of muscles at the expense of defenceless
people by a country which sees itself as a regional superPower, We reiterate that problems of South Africa are
internal, and no venting of emotions by the apartheid
regime-through
attacks on neighbours-shall
disguise
this truth to the friends of South Africa nor to the
world.
“The attack on Botswana is reminiscent of the
December 1982 attack on Lesotho and should demonstrate conclusively to the international community that
there can be no lasting peace in the southern African
region unless the edifice of aparrheid is destroyed. We
are confident that all peace-loving peoples will stand
with the people of Botswana and we should like to
assure you of our moral support now and in the future
until we can live in peace free from the scourge of
racism and apartheid.”
28. The challenge before the Council is immense. The
time has come to bring an end to apartheid. The Council
owes it to humanity to takr the necessary steps now to
ensure that South Africa gets out of Namibia, because that
is the first and vital step towards the freedom of all the
people of South Africa and the elimination of apartheid.
The Charter of the United Nations accords the Council full
powers to deal with situations that are a threat to international peace and security. South Africa has proved that it
is not only the aggressor in our region, but a destabilizing

force. The questions we pose to the Council are: for how
long will South Africa be allowed to defy the Council and
the world community regarding this question of Namibia
and how many people should South Africa kill, both in
South Africa and in the neighbouring countries, before the
Council acts?
29. We in southern Africa live in fear and terror and we
are worried that the chances of a peaceful solution to the
core of the problem are being missed.
30. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Malta. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
31. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): Mr. President, from the islands
of Malta and Gozo to the islands of Trinidad and Tobago,
I bring you warm and friendly Commonwealth greetings.
We are honoured by your distinguished presence here. I
personally am encouraged for many reasons, one of them
symbolic. I am reminded of one evening at your Mission
during my earliest years at the United Nations, way back
in 1967. From an intensive conversation in your Ambassador’s office, we obtained your country’s co-operation and
were thereby encouraged to launch the initiative of the
then socalled sea-bed item, 18 years ago. I have no doubt
that you share my regret that the resultant United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea is not yet fully universal, and that its final shape was not exactly what we had
both originally advocated. But by all accounts it is still a
monumental achievement. From a hesitant start, then, our
two countries were the very first pioneer investors of
thought, time and effort in that subsequent gigantic exercise, The 1967 vision of the common heritage of mankind
became a reality in 1984. I trust that, similarly, under your
guidance this month we shall be equally successful with
Namibia and that successwill soon be achieved, because
much effort has already been expended and the goal is not
beyond reach.
32. I have already had the pleasure of complimenting the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and the representative of
Thailand on the sterling service they rendered the Council
in the exercise of the presidency last month. I have pleasure in repeating those compliments today.
33. In his reports, the Secretary-General catalogues the
main events of the past seven years. We commend him for
his latest objective report [s/17242], and even more for his
indefatigable efforts to promote progress. His report provides the necessary focus for our attention, and in its concluding paragraph we have the nub of our present
predicament.
34. On going through our own records I find that, as a
member of the Council, I stated Malta’s view on this particular item twice in 1983-on 31 May and 27 October
[2449rh and 2480th meetings]. I do not wish to repeat
myself today.
35. Instead I have listened with deep sympathy to the
interventions of others, made at such a high level, and I

find in those statements an unmistakeable expression of
depth of feeling and conviction that no further obstacle
should stand in the way of early independence for Namibia.
36, With the exception of one single dissonant voice, from
the four quarters of the globe-with facts, eloquence and
conviction-the clarion call for progress in the unqualified
terms of resolution 435 (1978) has been reaffirmed.
37. It is therefore sufficient for me to repeat that we share
those convictions and to regret that independence is not yet
at hand. It is also clear where the difficulties lie and that only
one obstacle stands squarely in the way.
38. I am being deliberately restrained in my language.
This is not because I am not passionately for immediate
independence for Namibia, not because I do not abhor
apartheid,not because I do not share the feelings of outrage
at the violence in southern Africa, at the repressivepractices
of the South African authorities, at the delaying tactics
persistently being introduced in the delicate negotiating
process. I do so for other reasons. I do not wish to add fuel
to the fire, nor do I wish to give South Africa any pretext
conveniently to pretend that the Security Council is on one
of its periodic public exercises of pillorying South Africa’s
policies-a self-serving shield behind which, abetted by
some barons of the press, South Africa tries to seek shelter.
If the whole world is expressing dissatisfaction, then South
Africa should examine its own conscience and listen to its
eternal whisperings.
39. The South African authorities would in fact only be
deluding themselves and their people if they failed to heed
the widespread determination of countries to promote a
peaceful settlement of the Namibian issue and to bring
about racial equality and harmony inside South Africa
itself. This message is constantly gaining strength and conviction. To do less would be to fail in our duty to respect
and to promote fundamental human rights.
40. It is therefore, as I have said on previous occasions,
in South Africa’s own long-term interest to swim with the
tide. The front-line States have shown remarkable restraint. SWAP0 has been constantly receptive to constructive suggestions, and even neighbouring countries, whose
sovereignty has repeatedly been militarily violated by
South Africa, have remained dedicated to a peaceful settlement, the latest demonstrations of good faith once more
having been provided by Angola and, even more recently,
while this very debate was in progress, by Botswana. We
convey our deepest sympathy to these latest victims of
South African aggression and condemn the incidents.
41. In the present cycle of violence, in the midst of
gloom, even of despair, have we no source of hope? I still
believe we do, What are our assets?First, the tremendous
work already done and the tangible progress achieved;
secondly, the determination of influential countries to continue their daunting, and, if I may say so, somewhat thankless task of persuasion and reassurances against the
negative attitude of the South African authorities still ille-

least in bridging the gap between the parties on these
aspects. We are therefore prepared to offer the same facilities, the same expertise, the same zeal and dedication to
the Secretary-General, to the parties directly involved and to
the members of the contact group, at any time considered
useful, in whichever way may be considered most appropriate for quiet diplomacy, and for as long as necessary
until a breakthrough is achieved. In doing SO, we would be
furthering our own policy of promoting reconciliation, of
aiding the United Nations, and of upholding the. prestige
of the Security Council, thus responding in a modest but
practical way to the appeal of the Secretary-General. We
have no axes to grind; we have no vested interests to
defend, other than a dedication towards success. We hope
that the busy bustle of Valletta, and the “gentle temper” of
the surrounding summer sea will help to secure progress.

gaily occupying Namibia; thirdly, the dedicated efforts of
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative;
fourthly, the essential unity of the Council behind the settlement plan; fifthly, the common interest of all parties to
bring about a peaceful and early regional settlement; and
last, but certainly not least, the staunch determination of
Namibians to secure their independence, led by SWAPO.
42. As never before, an additional powerful factor is
coming into play. It was succinctly put by Anthony Lewis
in his article in The New York Times last Thursday. He
said: “The patience of most Americans for the official
racism, inhumanity and violence of South Africa has run
out.” It had already run out in many other countries long
ago. Influential citizens, corporations, religious institutions, trade unions and even state legislators are acting
independently, bypassing the indifference of their own
Governments to the deplorable present situation,

47. Given South Africa’s attitude, it is unfortunately
only too likely that-publicly
at least-it will continue to
ignore the urgings even of its best friends. We can be sure,
though, that it cannot forever ignore its own long-term
self-interest. If, as it claims, it is really anxious to attain the
best interests of the Namibian people, then surely there is
no better way than to give them the freedom of choice by
secret ballot under international supervision, Then the
beloved country will cry no more.

43. We in Malta have refrained from aiding, recognizing
or even establishing contact with South Africa in any way
in the past. This we will continue to do until Namibia
becomes independent and until apartheid in South Africa
is abolished. In the meantime, students from Namibia mix
happily with others in our university and technical colleges. We will also respect any new decisions to be taken by
the Security Council after the current debate. And we are
ready to do even more.

48. Concurrently but separately-even if only in the narrow interest of their own economic imperatives-the
South African authorities should attend to internal reform,
to abolish apartheid, to free the whites from shame, the
blacks from pain, and all its citizens from fear. Then, too,
the people of South Africa will cry no more. Then-and
only then-will
South Africa regain the esteem of its
friends, the respect and friendly co-operation of its neighbours and peace in its region. Then-and only then-will
it have earned its rightful place among the family of
nations. Perhaps-only
perhaps-the
minimalist social
changes recently introduced in South Africa portray a
delayed dawning of a new understanding of its national
and international responsibilities, It is our fervent hope, in
any case, that positive change is really on the way.

44. On the occasion of the fortieth anniversary of the
United Nations, we have asked ourselves some questions.
What can we do to help the United Nations secure its
objective in Namibia? Is there not something, no matter
how small, within our modest means, that may be considered constructive and practical, and that we can offer so as
to give a new momentum to the negotiating process that
still lies ahead and that is all the more urgently needed
now? We have found the answer, the objective and the
inspiration in the very first article of our modern Constitution, which states that Malta is a democratic republic
founded on work, on respect for the fundamental rights
and freedom of the individual.
45. Malta is at the centre of Europe and Africa. We have
benefited from the civilizations of both continents, as well
as from Asia. We were a geological land bridge between
the two continents in prehistoric times. We act as a political bridge to bring the two continents closer today. We
constantly search for the ways of peace, and we are determined to work actively for its attainment.

49. I thank you, Mr. President, and all the members of
the Council, for graciously having permitted me to speak
on this item today.
50. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

46. To strive peacefully for an early solution to the question of Namibia falls therefore naturally in line with our
foreign policy objectives, We derive some encouragement
from the fact that, only a few years ago, in a largely similar
situation of unilateral declaration of independence by Ian
Smith of Rhodesia, it was in Malta that the breakthrough
preceding Zimbabwe’s
independence was successfully
negotiated, quietly, in contacts between the parties concerned. We have also acquired special expertise in comparative constitutional law, in electoral and voting systems
and in human rights legislation, which could be useful at

51. Mr. RAJAIE KHORASSANI
(Islamic Republic of
Iran): Congratulations, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency. It so happened that, just when you undertook
the task, one of the heaviest of all international complications also worked its way to the Council. However, I am
glad that the problem, notwithstanding its impossible character, has fallen into capable hands,
5’2. Your predecessor, the representative of Thailand,
too, conducted the affairs of the Council ably and effi6

ciently. My delegation wishes to thank him for all the
sincerity and effort he devoted to the work of the Council.

What I have read out is a quotation from the statement of
the representative of the United States. It continues: “This
remains our goal” [ibid., para. 741. By that, the United
States Administration simply means that, if the people of
Namibia are to have a government of their own, it must be
some puppet regime which would still fulfil some of the
demands of the United States multinational corporations
and permit the substitution of colonialism by neocolonialism. And since some other countries have a modest share in those multinational corporations, we can
therefore appreciate why some other innocent-looking
people who have been hiding their faces behind the United
States have‘generously condoned a United States veto and
have agreed with it on the necessity of patience for finding
and creating some suitable conditions to allow implementation of the plan to proceed.

53. Council resolution 435 (1978) seems to enjoy universal support-universal
support because even the United
States, though in a lip-service manner, claims to agree with
it, That resolution is almost eight years old; yet it has not
been implemented. The question is: if everybody, including
the United States, is in full support of that resolution, why
has it remained absolutely devoid of any operational significance? What is the obstacle and who has been obstructing its implementation throughout those eight painfully
slow-moving years?
54. The Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples was adopted in 1960, that
is, 25 years ago. Its twenty-fifth anniversary was celebrated
in Tunisia last May. The United Nations is celebrating its
fortieth anniversary. However, colonial domination over
the people of Namibia is much older than even the United
Nations itself. They have been under direct colonial yoke
for a century; that is two and a half times longer than the
entire history of the United Nations. None the l&s, they
still have patiently to endure United States imperialism,
simply because as declared by the United States representative on 12 June 1985, “the United States remains dedicated
to this goal” and is “actively involved in negotiations to
create conditions to allow implementation of the United
Nations plan to proceed” [2587th meeting, paru. 691.

57. Why is it that when Americans are hijacked the
United States savagely threatens retaliation against third
countries, but that when the entire nation of Namibia has
been held hostage by the United States for 100 years the
provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations-the
only guarantee for the implementation of
resolution 435 (1978)-cannot
be implemented? It is for
that same reason that draft resolution S/17270 includes
operative paragraph 14, which is a face-saving device for
the Council.
58. The fact is that the claws of United States imperialism are squeezing the throat of the Middle East and the
southern region of Africa to death, and the two Zionist
regimes, one occupying Palestine and the other, the czpartheid regime of Pretoria, are evil instruments of that inhumane, deadly purpose. Those who have installed those two
regimes in those parts of the world are well equipped to
support their agents here.

55. Why after a century of suffering and of deprivation
of the basic rights to freedom, do the oppressed people of
Namibia have to wait for the “creative intelligence” of the
United States to remain involved in those negotiations to
create conditions to allow the implementation of the
United Nations plan to proceed? The answer is to be found
in the 350 American companies which are plundering the
property of the region and which wish to preserve the
status quo as long as possible in order to exploit those
resources as long as possible. The answer is to be found in
resources such as uranium, cobalt, manganese, platinum
and many other strategic metals, which lie dormant in the
land of Namibia.

59. The people of Namibia are probably therefore convinced that the Council is not the organ from which
authorization for the independence of Namibia can issue,
in spite of the enormous goodwill that the’present composition ofthe Council demonstrates. The present draft resolution is therefore as good as any-as good as resolution
435 (1978)-for neither one nor the other offer anything to
the people of Namibia.

56. The answer resides behind the fact that only last year
American and other companies, from the gold mines of
the region alone, benefited by more than $850 million, and
the apartheid regime too benefited by more than $1.1 billion in the form of taxes alone. The United States does
believe in the independence of Namibia, but it also maintains that all the Namibians

60. United States imperialism is a gigantic mountain, and
the diplomatic pressures exerted on it here are like soft,
beautiful spring rainfall. The diplomats of the United
Nations who want to break United States imperialism by
means of resolutions are like soft-hearted, innocent and
primitive people hoping for the total erosion of that mountain by the annual spring rain. How many years will we
have to wait? The answer is: for a complete geological
period to pass. We have gone through three of them since
the creation of the earth and the fourth is not yet completed. Some small soft hills and hilltops can be washed
away naturally through annual rainfall, but huge mountains cannot be destroyed by United States resolutions.
They may need dynamite.

“should have the right to be heard, to express their
views freely, to form political parties. They also have
the right, as provided in resolution 435 (1978), to stand
for election to represent their people. By the same
token, however, none can be permitted to take power
into their own hands, or to proclaim themselves the
leaders of the Namibian people or the government Of
Namibia, Rather, it is for the people of Namibia to
chose their own leaders in free and fair elections under
United Nations supervision and control.”

61. We, the oppressed people of the third world, must”’
therefore count on the armed struggle of the Namibian
7

68. Although South Africa has claimed willingness to
contribute to Namibia’s final accession to independence
and has seemed to recognize the need for this to take place
in an internationally acceptable framework, the United
Nations has ample reason to wonder about the sincerity of
these declared intentions. Events such as the installation of
an interim administration in Windhoe& raise significant
new obstacles to the achievement of that objective.
Moreover, Namibia’s territory continues to be used as a
base for operations on the sovereign territory of Angola.
The leaders and supporters of SWAPO, recognized by the
General Assembly as the sole, authentic representative of
the Namibian people, continue to be persecuted.

people and the oppressed non-white majority of South
Africa. The enemy must be fully convinced that it faces the
iron fist of those deprived, oppressed peoples, who have
nothing to lose anyway. And unless and until the militant
peoples of southern Africa and Namibia, as well as the
oppressed Moslems of Palestine in the Middle East, confront the enemy violently and forcefully, we here shall have
to be patient and keep the United States involved and
further involved in negotiations to create conditions to
allow for the implementation of the United Nations plan
to proceed.
62. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Argentina. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

69. South Africa, above all, is insisting on conditions
which have been repeatedly rejected by the United
Nations. The linkage of the independence of Namibia with
relations between South Africa and Angola is incompatible with the quest for regional harmony. The Namibian
people has the inalienable right to full self-determination
and independence, without preconditions or delays. It is
time for Pretoria to adopt a truly constructive approach
and make the express, formal commitment to implement
the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia.

63. Mr. MmIZ
(Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): It is indeed a great pleasure to see you, Sir, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Trinidad and Tobago, presiding
over these important meetings of the Council. Gradually,
Argentina and Trinidad and Tobago have been developing
bonds of friendship and co-operation. Those bonds are
based upon our belonging to the same region, where the
fate of each country is linked to the fate of every other, and
where we all support the same democratic and anticolonialist principles. Those bonds will surely produce
mutually beneficial results. My Government is convinced
that regional solidarity is vital to the economic and social
development of the Latin American countries and the
countries of the Caribbean, something all of our peoples
seek as a matter of priority.

70. Along with other non-aligned countries, Argentina
vigorously condemns the illegal colonial occupation of Namibia and reiterates its firm support for the right of the
Namibian people to self-determination and independence
and to the establishment of a just, democratic and egalitarian society in the Territory.
7 1. As we have said before, the present situation in Namibia is an outright challenge to the credibility and effectiveness of the United Nations, that is, to the credibility
and effectivenessof an international order based on justice
and aimed at ensuring the maintenance of international
peace and security and at making possible the development of harmonious relations and co-operation among
States. The policy of South Africa, with its colonialist and
racist overtones, is offensive to the rest of Africa and to the
conscience of all mankind, and is simply incompatible with
such an order, Therefore, the Council must react
appropriately.

64. I wish also to pay a tribute to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the representative of Thailand, who
guided the work of the Council so effectively during the
month of May.
65. The disturbing impasse in the process towards the
independence of Namibia fully justifies the convening of
this series of meetings. Despite the years that have passed
since the adoption of resolution 435 (1978), the sole acceptable basis for a peaceful, final solution of the question of
Namibia, there has been little reason to believe that we are
any closer to the end of this serious conflict-whose persistence poses a threat to international peace and
security--than we were seven years ago. On the contrary,
certain activities and positions of the South African
Goiernment appear to be aimed at perpetuating the colonial situation in Namibia or, at least, at permitting only a
partial and conditional independence.

72. The special responsibility of the United Nations with
respect to Namibia will be met, and the moral authority of
the Council and of the Organization preserved, only if the
Council takes measures which will help hasten the long
overdue independence of Namibia, in keeping with resolution 435 (1978). If it continues, the present state of affairs
will prove dangerous for the stability of southern Africa.
We cannot discount the possibility of further, more serious
confrontations.

66. It is logical, then, that, together with other nonaligned countries, we should state our frustration and reiterate our request that the Council adopt new decisions.

73. Argentina therefore joins in the appeal of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries that the Council should
take action beyond that which has been adopted in the
past, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations.

67. In this connection, it is appropriate to recall that two
years ago, when the Council reaffirmed the United Nations
plan for the independence of Namibia, it also agreed that if
South Africa continued to oppose the full implementation
of resolution 435 (1978), additional measures under the
Charter of the United Nations would have to be adopted.

74. Putting an end to the Namibian tragedy and eradicating totally and finally the odious system of apartheid must
8

be priorities for the international community. The persistence of these serious conflicts dangerously jeopardizes stability in international relations and generates tension to
which Council, with its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, must
respond quickly and effectively.

peoples of southern Africa. The Security Council, the General Assembly and international organizations have
adopted innumerable resolutions condemning and deploring the practices of the racist Government of South Africa
against the Namibian people and the rightful owners of
South Africa. These resolutions have also condemned the
acts of aggression carried out by the racist minority rt?gime
of Pretoria against the front-line States.
.

75. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the United Arab Emirates. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

83. These resolutions were supported by all countries
that cherish freedom, justice and peace. Nevertheless, some
major Powers shamelessly oppose them, What is strange is
that those who support the Government of South Africa in
international forums and oppose the imposition of global
sanctions against that Fascist, racist Government, in
accordance with the Charter, are those who claim to be the
custodians of the freedom, democracy and independence
of peoples.

76. Mr. AL-MOSFIR
(United Arab Emirates) (interpretation from Arabic): Permit me at the outset to convey to
you, Sir, the great pleasure of my delegation at seeing you
presiding over the deliberations this month. We are confident that your diplomatic skill and political experience will
enable you to lead the work of the Council to a successful
conclusion.
77. I wish also to convey my sincere appreciation to the
delegation of Thailand, led by its Minister for Foreign
Affairs, for the excellent and efficient way in which they
guided the work of the Council last month, during a time
of many developments in different parts of the world.

84. What is freedom from their point of view? It is the
freedom of the Fascist minority to manipulate the destini
of the majority tind forcefully to plunder the resources of
that majority without let or hindrance. What is democracy
to them? It is the power of that puppet minority to force
others into subjugation, even by murder, starvation and
displacement.

78. I take this opportunity to express our deep gratitude
to the Secretary-General for his tireless, dedicated efforts
towards the early independence of Namibia. We reaffirm
that we shall continue to give him support and cooperation in his work to promote the principles of the
United Nations.

85. True democracy is that which protects the human
being in any part of the world against exploitation. It is
that which upholds human rights and human dignity. It is
that which deters the development corporations from
plundering the riches of the nations.

79. While this Council was seized of this question last
week, the racist Government of South Africa launched an
armed attack against the independent State of Botswana.
That act of aggression took place after statements’ had
been made in the Council by the representatives of some
major Powers, in the light of which that racist Government
realized that it would be safe to defy the international will
and therefore carried out that act of aggression against the
friendly Republic of Botswana.

86. What is the concept of the independence of peoples
for those mighty Powers? It is simply the imposition of
hegemony over countries, the plunder of their riches and
the subjugation of their citizens to serve the invader.
87. To be true to history before the Council, we should
like to remind the mighty of today, who believe that their
might is invincible, and who believe that their racist allies
in South Africa and occupied Palestine-the so-called
Israel-will
continue to enjoy their unlimited support, that
their reading of the history of peoples is mistaken, that the
history they read is false.

80. The Council is called upon to react to this blatant
defiance of its authority and responsibility towards the
international community, that is to say, the maintenance
of security and stability throughout the world. We in the
United Arab Emirates condemn and deplore all forms of
aggression, We call upon the Council to adopt resolutions
commensurate with its grave responsibilities. Hence our
immediate request is for the Council to invoke Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations at the end of its
deliberations on the question entitled “The situation in
Namibia”.

88. All struggling peoples have achieved victory, in spite
of the weapons used to oppress them. The struggling
people of Viet Nam achieved its victory, in spite of all the
destructive weapons used against it. It did unify its territory and it did build its independent State.
89. As regards the great people of Algeria, France
claimed that it had the power to force it into subjugation.
It practised the first political air piracy operation in modern history againstits national leaders,.soas to dissuade
that peoplefrom the achievementof its objectivesof freedom and independence,But in the end France realized
that might wasnot the right path, but that to beresponsive
to the will of the Algerian people was the path to the
achievementof peaceand freedom.

81. At the end of this year, 1985, 100 years will have
elapsed since the Berlin Conference, at which the colonialist division of the African continent took place and the
colonial domination of Namibia started, The illegal occupation of that Territory by the racist South African rCgime
has Continued for 100 years.
82. Since 1978 the Council has held more than 130 meetings devoted to the consideration of crises afflicting the
9

90. The United Kingdom believed that, by detaining or
exiling Mahatma Gandhi and dispersing his supporters
away from India, it would be able to keep the most precious jewel in the British crown under control. But the
heroic people of India, under the leadership of Mahatma
Gandhi, managed to restore the independence of the
Indian sub-continent from the then strongest country in
the world.

cannot but categorically reject interference in the internal
affairs of any State from any quarter whatsoever. We
totally reject the attempt and wish of the South African
Government to establish a puppet “interim administration” that would carry out the wishes of that racist regime
and give a false image of autonomy.
98. Fourthly, we affirm that attempts to reach a solution
outside the United Nations are in contravention of the
wish of the Namibian people and their legitimate representative, SWAPO.

91. The same is true of the Hitler Nazi forces which fell
before the strikes of the European peoples and their allies
who aspired to rid themselves of oppression and
humiliation.

99. Fifthly, my country unreservedly supports the
national liberation movement, SWAPO, as the sole, legitimate representative of the Namibian people. We condemn
aggression or the threat of aggression against the front-line
States from any quarter whatsoever.

92, All peoples have learned a basic lesson: the forces of
liberation against invasion and occupation cannot be
defeated by any Power, however big. These are the lessons
of history we offer to those who have been intoxicated by
force, who have supported wrong against right, who have
supported the minority against the majority, who have
protected the new fascism in Pretoria and Palestine, supplying it with money, arms and political support, so as to
oppress the peoples of those regions. But peoples cannot
be oppressed forever. They may be knocked down but
never knocked out. They might fall down, but wounds
soon heal and they come back like an irresistible wind that
blows obstacles away.

100. In conclusion, I reaffirm the request that this
Council put an end to the behaviour and acts of the racists
of Pretoria, and respond positively to the genuine wishes
of the Namibian people. We express our great appreciation
for the valiant role played by hero Sam Nujoma, the President of SWAPO, and congratulate SWAPO’s leadership
and fighters on the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the struggle for freedom and independence, We are
confident that their struggle will be crowned with success.

93. The Council is meeting at the initiative of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries to affirm once again that
non-aligned countries and peace and freedom-loving countries totally and categorically reject the prevarication, procrastination and linkage theory of the racist Government
of South Africa and reject the continued obstruction by
that regime of the implementation of Council resolution
435 (1978), embodying a clear plan for the independence of
Namibia.

101. The PRESIDENT: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Trinidad and Tobago.
102. I address the Council in my capacity as Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Trinidad and Tobago and do so having
sat as President for several days and having heard representatives’ statements on this burning question of the continued occupation of Namibia by South Africa-the
question indeed of the continued defiance by South Africa
of the will of the Council and of the United Nations as a
whole.

94. The United Arab Emirates wishes to reaffirm as follows its position on this question.
95. First, we call upon the members of the Council, in
particular its permanent members, to work in an honest
and responsible manner for the implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) immediately and unconditionally, so as to enable the Namibian people to
determine their own future and to build their independent
State, including Walvis Bay, the Penguin Islands and all
the offshore islands.

103. This is Trinidad and Tobago’s first term as a
member of the Council. It is also the first time that we
preside over its deliberations. This is therefore a signal
honour for my country. We deem it particularly fitting
that the first debate under our presidency should be on the
question of Namibia, for. Trinidad and Tobago, itself a
former colony, has been unswerving in its support of the
inalienable right of all peoples to self-determination and
independence.

96. Secondly, we call for the immediate withdrawal of
the racist Pretoria forces from all Namibian territory and
the termination of its occupation of the country. We support the application of Chapter VII of the Charter against
the Government of South Africa for its non-compliance
with Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.

104. Trinidad and Tobago expresses its sincere appreciation to the Secretary-General for his deep personal commitment to the Namibian cause and his untiring and
undaunted efforts to bring about the implementation of
United Nations resolutions and decisions on Namibia.

97. Thirdly, the Government of South Africa and its
Western allies have chosen to inject a new condition into
the Namibian independence issue, that is, the withdrawal
of Cuban forces from Angola. That is interference in the
internal affairs of an independent, sovereign State, and we

105. We have noted the ardour, the commitment, the
depth of feeling, even the unmistakable impatience and
sense of frustration in the statements delivered in the
Council on this issue. These are inevitable reactions to any
consideration of the plight of the Namibian people and the
continued brutal denial of justice which they experience.
10

Our frustration is compounded by recent events in southern Africa, including today’s installation of an illegal
puppet administration
in Windhoek, the unwarranted
incursion into Angolan territory earlier this month, and
last week’s brutal attack on Botswana which took place
even while the Council was discussing a question of vital
importance to peace and stability in that region.

establishment of a United Nations Transition Assistance
Group (UNTAG) with a civilian and military component.
112. The Government of Trinidad and Tobago has consistently taken the position that the only acceptable plan of
action for achieving Namibian independence remains that
approved in resolution 435 (1978), amplifying as it does
the principles embodied in resolution 385 (1976). However, it is a matter of deep regret that, years after the
Council approved the detailed plan under which political
power would be transferred to the people of Namibia with
the assistance of the United Nations, the realization of the
independence of Namibia continues to elude us.

106. Yet we have heard a statement by South Africa
which makes bold to suggest that, if only the international
community would co-operate with it, be patient and trusting, then all the questions relating to Namibia would be
resolved. However, South Africa made no reference to its
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations and to
the Council and its several resolutions. The statement
implied that the horrors of apartheid in South Africa,
transferred to Namibia, are but simple aberrations for
which that racist rkgime could in any event find
justification.

113. It is universally recognized that one of the major
achievements of the United Nations has been in the area of
decolonization. Trinidad and Tobago has had the honour
of serving for many years on the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, including three years as its Chairman.
Since the inception of the Special Committee we have seen
many former colonies emerge from colonial status. For us,
for most members of the Council and for the United
Nations as a whole, the observance by the international
community of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples is marred by the continued subjugation
of the people of Namibia by the South African occupation
rtgime. The people of Namibia continue to be oppressed,
brutalized and exploited; their resources continue to be
plundered and despoiled.

107. A~~~rtheid, which is indistinguishable from slavery as
practised by earlier colonialists of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, has been repeatedly rejected by the international community. The General Assembly has denounced it as a crime against humanity, while the Security
Council has characterized it as being abhorrent to the conscience of mankind. Yet, South Africa persists in applying
this heinous system to a Territory over which it has absolutely no right of administration.
108. We have noted the references to the many resolutions adopted year after year by the Council. They are
resolutions which deal with the fundamental issues of freedom, liberty and justice-principles
which form the cornerstone of the constitutions of Member States.

114. It must now be manifest that South Africa does not
intend to relinquish its hold on Namibia, nor to respect the
authority of the United Nations. Two months ago the Pretoria rCgime announced its decision to establish a so-called
interim government in illegally occupied Namibia. The
Security Council responded with a presidential statement
on 3 May [S/I71JI], declaring the establishment of the
so-called interim government to be null and void. That
statement and international condemnation notwithstanding, South Africa has proceeded to install the so-calIed
interim government. That manoeuvre by South Africa
constitutes clear defiance of the decisions of the Council,
particularly resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978). It is
further evidence of South Africa’s total disregard of the
demands of the Namibian people for self-determination
and independence, That action by South Africa is an
attempt to perpetuate the system of apartheid, with all its
odious characteristics, in a territory for which the United
Nations is directly responsible.

109. Must we, then, in this fortieth year of the founding
of the United Nations and in the consideration of the question of Namibia by the international community, continue
to be thwarted in our efforts to bring freedom and independence to the people of Namibia? In 1966, in its detexmination to bring about a just settlement of the Namibian
question, the United Nations revoked South Africa’s Mandate over the Territory and assumed direct responsibility
for it, Notwithstanding
that and the adoption of some 21
Council resolutions, the Pretoria rCgime continues to defy
the authority of the United Nations and to maintain its
illegal occupation of Namibia.
110. Trinidad and Tobago believes that it is time for the
Council and the international community to take effective
and definitive action to bring this unhappy episode to an
end.

115. The full implementation of the provisions of resolution 435 (1978) is dependent upon the co-operation of
South Africa, but can we depend upon South Africa,
which has imposed a most brutal and dehumanizing
rbgime, inimical to the interests of black people, to COoperate in the introduction of a liberal, democratic system
in Namibia, whose population is predominantly black?
Should the United Nations, and the Council in particular,
stand by without taking any direct action?

111. In past deliberations the Council provided a framework for terminating South Africa’s illegal occupation and
effecting the independence of Namibia. Resolutions 385
(1976) and 435 (1978) contain the essential elements for
meeting these objectives: the withdrawal of South Africa
from Namibia; the transfer of power to the people of Namibia as one political entity, through free elections under
the supervision and control of the United Nations; and the
11

annex] adopted by the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting
of the Co-ordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries on
the question of Namibia, held at New Delhi last April, and
to be one of the six Council members, all States members
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, which are
sponsors of the draft resolution before us [S/17284]. It
provides a clear-cut, step-by-step approach for early implementation of the internationally agreed plan for Namibian
independence. We urge all members of the Council to support the draft and in so doing send a clear message to the
Pretoria regime that its machinations and prevarications
will be tolerated no longer.

116. It is clear that the policy of constructive engagement, propounded as a substitute for direct action, has
failed, and that policies of dialogue, political support and
economic co-operation have not produced their desired
effect. Even the unilateral action of certain Member States
to isolate South Africa, based on their perception and
assessment of the most effective way of combating the
regime’s defiance of international law and of responding to
the overwhelmingly censorious burden of international
opinion, as reflected in decisions of, inter alia, the Security
Council, the General Assembly, the International Court of
Justice, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the
Organization of African Unity, has failed to have any real
impact on South Africa’s recalcitrance.

120. History has shown that the realization of the rights
and aspirations of a people to freedom and independence
may be delayed, but can never be denied. The history of
Namibia is the history of a trust unceasingly betrayed. It is
the history of a people struggling against foreign occupation, oppression and exploitation to realize their inalienable right to self-determination and independence; of a
people waiting, so far in vain, for the realization of their
hopes and aspirations and the implementation of the will
of the international community. Let us act now, together,
to bring an end to this sad phase in world history and
usher in a new dawn of freedom for the people of Namibia, and in so doing assert the primary responsibility of
the Security Council for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

117. The determination of South Africa to maintain its
oppressive and illegal occupation of Namibia constitutes a
grave threat to international peace and security. For as long
as the illegality of that occupation continues, southern
Africa will not have peace, the dignity of Africa will continue to be outraged, the will of the international community to be affronted and disrespected and the integrity and
credibility of the Council to be subverted. The failure of the
United Nations to deal decisively with South Africa over the
question of Namibia forces the conclusion, which has been
adumbrated in the course of our debate, that options for
non-violent solutions may soon run out. The United
Nations must of necessity, therefore, institute more effective
measures to put an end to the intransigence of South Africa
and avoid confrontation, violence and bloodshed.

121. I now resume my function as PRESIDENT.

118. Trinidad and Tobago is of the view that it is imperative that the Security Council move with dispatch on this
matter and mandate the Secretary-General to initiate contact with South Africa with a view to finalizing the choice of
the electoral system to be used for elections for the Constituent Assembly, under United Nations supervision and control. The Secretary-General should also be mandated to
take appropriate steps for the introduction of UNTAG into
Namibia, as provided for in resolution 435 (1978).

122. I call on the representative of the United States, who
has asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
123. Mr. CLARK (United States of America): I should
just like to say that, particularly at this time, we find the
remarks about hostages made today in the Council by the
representative of Iran to be false, disturbing and tasteless.
29, meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.

119. Trinidad and Tobago is pleased to associate itself
with the Programme of Action [see S/l 7184 and Corr.1,

12
