United Nations

S/PV.6438

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6438th meeting
Wednesday, 8 December 2010, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Rice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Briens
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Sumi
Mr. Khachab
Mr. Heller
Mr. Onemola
Ms. Eloeva
Ms. Dinç
Mr. Rugunda
Ms. Hendrie

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central African
Republic and on the activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in that country (S/2010/584)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-68048 (E)

*1068048*

S/PV.6438

The meeting was called to order at 11.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Central African Republic
and on the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in that country
(S/2010/584)
The President: I have received a letter from the
representative of the Central African Republic,
requesting to participate in this meeting. I propose to
invite that representative to participate in this meeting
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The President: On behalf of the Security
Council, I extend an invitation under rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure to Ms. SahleWork Zewde, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic.
It is so decided.
On behalf of the Security Council, I also extend
an invitation under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure to His Excellency Mr. Jan Grauls,
Chair of the Central African Republic configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent
Representative of Belgium.
It is so decided.
Participants have before them document
S/2010/584, the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Central African Republic and on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in that country.
I now give the floor to Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde.
Ms. Zewde: Thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to brief the Council on the situation in
the Central African Republic and on the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
that country. Since the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2010/584) was finalized, there have been some

2

developments in the preparations for elections and in
the security situation in the country. I shall now update
the Council on these elements.
The Central African Republic is at a crossroads.
Presidential and legislative elections are due to take
place on 23 January. Those elections constitute another
window of opportunity for the people of the Central
African Republic to participate in the democratic
process and to further consolidate the country’s
democratic foundations and mark the start of a new
chapter of stability and greater economic prosperity for
all.
In order to achieve those goals, however, the
elections must be transparent, free and fair. I am
pleased to report that the United Nations and our
international partners have provided considerable
technical and financial support to the Independent
Electoral Commission, which is entrusted with the
implementation of the electoral process. As the
Secretary-General’s report indicates, there have been
hitches all along the way, but with a high degree of
commitment from the Government, working together
with the Independent Electoral Commission and the
opposition, solutions have been found and all major
political obstacles have been lifted.
On 15 November 2010, President Bozizé
convened a meeting of national stakeholders and
international partners to resolve an issue related to the
amendment of the dates for the nomination of
candidates. As a result of that meeting, the deadlock
was broken and two more opposition candidates were
able to submit their candidatures, so that there are now
six candidates running for the presidency. That positive
development has lent further credence to the integrity
and inclusiveness of the electoral process.
As a result of the decision to allow for additional
candidates after the revised date for submission, the
opposition parties were also able to submit their
nominations for the 105 seats in the National
Assembly. That has contributed to an easing of
tensions. On 5 December, the Independent Electoral
Commission published the names of the 833 candidates
standing for seats in the National Assembly. All
candidates in the elections should now have the
opportunity to campaign freely. I hope that the
electoral process will continue to take place in a calm
and positive atmosphere.

10-68048

S/PV.6438

I am pleased to add that, with the technical and
financial support of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
and the International Organization of la Francophonie,
the code of conduct for the elections will be revised
and signed by the candidates and relevant institutions
in the days ahead, and distributed prior to the start of
electoral campaigning.
On 20 November, a new Minister for Territorial
Administration and Decentralization — a key
Government minister in charge of electoral matters —
was appointed, demonstrating the Government’s
commitment to the success of the elections. The
appointment of the former President of the 2005
Electoral Commission to that important post is a
welcome development.
The United Nations Development Programme has
ably managed the basket fund for the elections. I would
like to reiterate the Secretary-General’s gratitude for
the support that has been received so far. I would
encourage donors to make good on outstanding pledges
and to provide the additional funds required to cover
the operational costs of the Electoral Commission at
this critical stage, so that the last elements can be put
in place to ensure that the elections are conducted
successfully.
The verification of ex-combatants in the northwest of the country has now been completed. In order
to allow the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) process to move forward, the
parties to the inclusive political dialogue need to
uphold all of their commitments so that disarmament
can take place. In spite of recent violence, I hope that
conditions in the north-east will improve sufficiently to
allow the verification process to start there. The
development of a national reintegration strategy for excombatants, which is a key element of the DDR
process, will serve as an important incentive for armed
groups to disarm and demobilize. In that regard, we
look forward to working together with the Government
in the development of such a strategy as the next
urgent step in the process.
The challenges in consolidating the current
relative stability and making further progress are
considerable. While security in the capital and the
south-west of the country is satisfactory, thanks to the
presence of the Forces armées centrafricaines, the
eastern part of the country remains exposed to

10-68048

continued acts of banditry, incursions by foreign armed
groups and attacks by politico-military groups that are
not part of the peace process.
The Lord’s Resistance Army is the most highprofile of the foreign groups active in the Central
African Republic. The atrocities that they commit are
well known. It is, however, just one of a number of
groups of militants, bandits and poachers that exploit
the absence of State security forces to operate freely in
the prevailing security vacuum. The start of the dry
season has led to a resurgence in attacks by armed
gangs — the “coupeurs de route” — that attack lines of
communication in the region and disrupt the free
movement of people and goods. The Central African
Republic cannot be allowed to become a haven for
criminality and armed groups in the subregion.
On 24 November, the Convention des patriotes
pour la justice et la paix (CPJP), a politico-military
group that is not part of the peace process, attacked
Birao, less than 10 days after the withdrawal of the
forces of the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad, which had previously
secured the town and the airstrip. The CPJP had
already attacked Birao on 18 July. The town was
re-secured a week later and, on 3 December,
international non-governmental organizations operating
in Birao confirmed that the airstrip appeared to remain
functional, although widespread looting had occurred
while the town’s population had been displaced. As a
result, the civilian population of Birao remains
extremely vulnerable and short of food and medical
supplies.
The lack of security is responsible for the
considerable and unnecessary loss of life, suffering and
displacement of people. The Government is not in a
position to address this state of affairs without
adequate means and resources. The Secretary-General’s
report highlights the need for increased capacity and
capability for the Central African armed forces, as well
as for the effective implementation of the stalled
security sector reform programme. The SecretaryGeneral reiterated that call to the international
community and to the Central African Republic’s
bilateral partners following the recent attack on Birao.
The Central African Government has made
serious efforts to extend its authority and its ability to
provide services to citizens throughout the country
through its facilitation of reconciliation efforts among

3

S/PV.6438

the various factions and ethnic groups, including in the
Vakaga region. An important part of the work to be
done in order to bring the country together lies in
ensuring that the Follow-up Committee on the
Inclusive Political Dialogue continues to make
progress in implementing the recommendations agreed
between national stakeholders. In the days ahead, the
Follow-up Committee is due to undertake a further tour
of the country to assess progress made in implementing
the recommendations of the dialogue and to report its
findings to the National Assembly.
Let me conclude by expressing my personal
gratitude to the Peacebuilding Commission’s Central
African Republic configuration and its Chair,
Ambassador Grauls, and to the Peacebuilding Fund for
their continued and committed support. My thanks go
to the United Nations country team and all in our
integrated mission for their invaluable contribution to
our shared goal of assisting the Government and people
of the Central African Republic in consolidating a
lasting peace and laying strong foundations for solid,
sustainable socio-economic development in a peaceful
and democratic environment.
The President: I thank Ms. Zewde for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jan Grauls.
Mr. Grauls (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madame President, for giving me the opportunity to
address the Security Council in my capacity of Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission’s country-specific
configuration for the Central African Republic. I would
like to highlight some of the issues related to the
implementation of the strategic framework for
peacebuilding in the Central African Republic since I
last updated the Council in June (see S/PV.6435).
First of all, however, allow me to express the
sincere appreciation of the Central African Republic
configuration to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde, for her
tireless and determined efforts under sometimes
difficult circumstances.
I am pleased that the integrated strategic
framework developed by the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
(BINUCA) for 2011 incorporates the peacebuilding
priorities identified by the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), furthering the convergence of and coherence

4

between the work of our Commission and that of the
United Nations system on the ground in support of the
Government’s priorities.
Such coherence would also be improved by
establishing an operational focal point within BINUCA
in order to ensure the continuity of our work on a daily
basis. The PBC also looks forward to the opportunity
to contribute in due time to formulating the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework for 20122016, another measure that will contribute to the
coherence of our efforts.
As the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral just pointed out, the presidential and
parliamentary elections are still scheduled to take place
on 23 January 2011, according to a consensual
timetable established by the Independent Electoral
Commission. The Peacebuilding Commission has
contributed considerably to bridging the $7.5 million
gap in the electoral budget. The successful completion
of the electoral process that we all expect should create
positive momentum for the Central African Republic
Government’s plans for the next stages of its
peacebuilding process. The Commission stands ready
to continue its support for the Government’s efforts in
this area.
In the past year, the Commission’s attention has
been focused mainly on the electoral preparations and
on the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process. The latter has been continually delayed. So
far, the good news is that the verification phase of the
process has been completed in the country’s northwest. Unfortunately, the volatile security situation and
the reluctance of several armed groups to join the
peace process have not allowed this phase to start in
the north-east, from which the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT) withdrew in November. As a result, the
disarmament and demobilization phases there cannot
be completed before the elections.
It is even more important, however, that the
Government of the Central African Republic establish
a complete strategy for the reintegration phase,
including the reinsertion of some former combatants
into the national security forces. The reintegration
phase should be financed with funds from States
members of Central African Economic and Monetary
Community and the Bank of Central African States. I
am therefore certain that a clear message from the

10-68048

S/PV.6438

Security Council to the recalcitrant rebel movements
and the Government about the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process would greatly
contribute to the achievement of our common goals.
On 20 September, the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the World Bank organized a high-level event here in
New York to address the peacebuilding and
development challenges facing the Central African
Republic. This took place in the presence of the
Secretary-General, President Bozizé of the Central
African Republic, the Vice-President for Africa of the
World Bank, the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, and high-level representatives of various
countries and regional and subregional organizations.
The purpose of the event was threefold: to showcase
the positive progress that has been made in the Central
African Republic in recent years; to generate attention
for the considerable challenges that remain; and to
serve as a stepping stone to a donors conference, to be
organized after the successful holding of the elections
in order to mobilize funding for other priorities.
Thanks to a collective effort, I believe that this
threefold goal was achieved.
One of the most important priority areas for the
months and years to come will be security sector
reform (SSR). As noted in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2010/584), the implementation of the SSR
agenda has been stalled, but the Government has
indicated its willingness to revive the process in
cooperation with its international partners. In the runup to the aforementioned donors conference, the list of
existing security sector reform projects should be
updated and prioritized in order to have a clear project
to submit to potential donors. I welcome in this regard
the establishment of a Security Institutions Unit within
BINUCA, which will undoubtedly give renewed
impetus to Government efforts in this area.
Good governance and the rule of law are also part
of the peacebuilding priorities for the coming year. The
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
already runs a multi-year programme that should be
complemented and refined. At our configuration’s
request, UNDP is working on a strategy paper on the
rule of law that will identify the key priorities in the
field, which should include impunity and human rights
violations. Our configuration will also continue to
monitor with particular attention the issues of women
and peace and security, child protection and the human

10-68048

rights of internally displaced persons in the Central
African Republic.
The year 2011 will also see the effective launch of
the development hubs project, piloted by the European
Union, which constitutes the third priority of the
strategic framework for peacebuilding. This ambitious
project, whose aim is to re-establish a Government
presence in nine secondary centres in the provinces,
starting with the provision of basic services, will require
substantially greater resources than the €40 million
allocated by the European Union so far.
Finally, I would like to address the question of
MINURCAT’s departure from north-eastern Central
African Republic. During the last briefing on BINUCA
and the interactive consultative dialogue of this
Council with the Foreign Minister of the Central
African Republic, I consistently pleaded for a
transitional phase, to include a presence of the Mission
for the Consolidation of Peace in the Central African
Republic in the Vakaga region, with international
support, to allow more time for the requested
reinforcement of the Central African security forces.
The recent rebel attack by the Convention of Patriots
for Justice and Peace on Birao once again illustrated
that the danger of instability remains real and
persistent in that part of the Central African Republic.
Regional spillover should be avoided at all cost. Once
again, a strong message from the Security Council in
this regard would be most welcome.
The President: I thank Ambassador Grauls for
his statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Central African Republic.
Mr. Poukré-Kono (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): Allow me on behalf of the
Government of the Central African Republic to
congratulate you, Madame President, on your
delegation’s assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. We are encouraged by your
country’s commitment to helping fragile States in their
struggle against insecurity and violence wherever it
occurs.
The Central African Republic has taken due note
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/584) on
the political, security and socio-economic situation and
on the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic

5

S/PV.6438

(BINUCA). We believe that the report is important and
timely in view of the national and international stakes.
We thank Her Excellency Ms. Sahle-Work
Zewde, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for her highly edifying briefing. We are aware
of her perspicacity, commitment and devotion to our
country’s cause, and once again we express our deep
respect for her.
The Central African Republic is on the path
towards the elections scheduled for 23 January 2011.
Clear assurances have been provided by President
Bozizé that the actions currently under way shall result
in the holding of free, equitable and transparent
elections. The list of six candidates has been made
known, the voter registration process has been carried
out and the final preparatory measures are concluding.
All dossiers have been deposited pursuant to the
presidential decree and to the provisions of the
Independent Electoral Commission. Finally, there is
consensus on a manual electoral roll.
The matter of redrawing of electoral districts
remains pending. We acknowledge that this has not
been an easy process, because it has often been
interrupted by destabilizing, worrisome actions.
Reason has finally prevailed and consensus will
continue even if discontent exists here and there, which
is the rule in democracies, as long as it does not
impede our objective of holding the elections by the
given deadlines.
However, in order to enable these elections,
stability in our national territory must be assured.
There are genuine concerns in a number of regions,
where insecurity remains rife and fuelled by rebel
groups that have still not signed the Libreville
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and do not feel
bound by their national duty, in spite of the hand that
has been extended by the Government. Furthermore,
unidentified armed groups are active in the principal
region in the north-east. We hope that a solution will be
found by then so that all Central Africans can
participate in elections that are so important for the
future of the country. One thing that is certain and
reassuring is the cooperation of the former rebel groups
with the Central African armed forces in areas that
have not been secured.
The alarm has often been raised about the northeastern section of the country in case of the withdrawal
of the United Nations Mission in the Central African

6

Republic (MINURCAT). Indeed, as soon as the United
Nations Mission left, the principal city in the north,
Birao, was invaded by the Convention of Patriots for
Justice and Peace and other rebel groups. That
confirmed the concerns that have been raised here in
this Chamber.
The presence of Central African forces is far too
limited in that area and they lack equipment and arms.
It is therefore easy to attack and to create confusion
among civilians who have fled to the bush. However,
voices have spoken out, even here, in favour of
preventing a vacuum from developing and of ensuring
a transitional period. The Central African Government
has also conveyed its equipment and training needs to
the Security Council. We have asked friendly countries
to provide assistance. Bureaucratic machinery has
finally begun to move as a result of those steps.
The Government must therefore take such
necessary steps. It has always called for our defence
and security forces to be properly equipped, trained
and deployed; this has been its main concern. We have
called for the return of MINURCAT equipment.
However, that request has had no effect. The Central
African position on the need to strengthen its armed
forces remains clear. We have consistently supported
the idea of strengthening regional peace forces in both
personnel and logistical terms, as has been proposed by
the international community.
An alliance of foreign and Central African rebel
groups, aligned with criminal groups, threaten further
destabilization and discord in the region. Major ills
require major responses. That is the way to respond to
these criminal groups. The Central African Republic is
not remaining idle in this situation, and that is why we
welcome the initiative adopted by the United States
Government to support the struggle of countries in the
region against the excesses of the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA), pursuant to the recommendations of the
Bangui conference on the LRA. The same should apply
to other armed groups through the implementation of
cross-border
agreements
among
neighbouring
countries.
A further important step remains the
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process, which is one of the
recommendations issued from the inclusive political
dialogue. To this we should add security sector reform
and the rule of law. Security and justice are constant

10-68048

S/PV.6438

concerns of ours, as they are essential to lasting
sociopolitical stabilization.
If disarmament and demobilization process has
made progress in the north-west, that is not the case in
the north-east, given not only the reticence of a number
of groups to adhere to the various peace agreements
that have been signed, but also the prevailing
insecurity caused by the presence of a number of
armed groups, including the LRA. However, we must
underscore that financing remains essential to any such
undertaking. We note that the majority of projects lack
adequate financing to begin; this is especially true of
projects addressing security sector reform, which has
been the subject of round tables and seminars in the
past. The reinsertion of ex-combatants is equally
essential to ensuring the implementation of the
development hubs.
Several years of conflict in the Central African
Republic have destroyed the economic fabric of the
country and its infrastructure, lowered our standard of
living and weakened our administration by driving
many functionaries to seek better lives elsewhere, and
led to a deterioration of basic social services. The
institutional dysfunction is visible. Corruption and
delays are rife. However, we must recognize that
following the patriotic events of 15 March 2003,
palpable change took place in the wake of the elections
that were held, the organization of political dialogue,
and the courageous reform launched by the
Government to help the country out of its deadlock.
One of the most pressing priorities remains the
implementation of the poverty reduction strategy paper.
In other words, the Central African Republic is getting
back on its feet, even while a great deal remains to be
done in terms of security, stability, respect for human
rights, and so on.
On 20 September, when the special high-level
meeting on the Central African Republic was held,
President Bozizé commented on the development of
the Central African Republic since it embarked on its
reconciliation process. That encounter allowed
participants to take stock of the efforts that had been
made and future prospects. It also demonstrated the
return of trust and confidence among our partners. I
wish here to sincerely thank the sponsors of that
initiative, the World Bank and the Central African
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, with
which the Central African Republic enjoys good
relations. Once again, we would like to express my the

10-68048

esteem of my Government and our partners for the
Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission in its
Central African Republic configuration, Ambassador
Grauls of Belgium.
The Central African Republic has celebrated its
fiftieth anniversary this year. Although our State is still
in its infant stage, we have been able to turn the page
on the past and to plan for the future. We therefore ask
the international community to understand our errors
and to help us to correct them. What is most important
is to listen to us before issuing demands. That is why
we have welcomed the presence of BINUCA and the
other partners we have agreed to host.
Like any other institution, BINUCA must evolve.
BINUCA, which replaced the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in the Central African
Republic a year ago, must adapt to the new
requirements in the Central African Republic. It is time
to take stock of its activities on the ground. Its
principle mandate is to align the actions of all United
Nations agencies and funds and to speak as one.
As that institution is still taking shape, the
Central African Government fully endorses the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to extend its
mandate for one year, until 31 December 2011. In
general terms, the Government is satisfied with the
assistance provided by BINUCA and recognizes the
commitment
and
devotion
of
the
Special
Representative to the Secretary-General in the Central
African Republic.
At the same time, the Government is of the view
that BINUCA should do more by prioritizing training
and the strengthening of national capacity in all areas.
Its proven international expertise should have an
impact on the people and the various sectors. That is
what we aspire to for the coming year.
The future withdrawal of BINUCA should not
leave a vacuum, as we have witnessed with the
withdrawal of MINURCAT. We hope that BINUCA
will fully discharge its mandate in good faith, and we
expect to see the dividends of the transfer of its
expertise. Furthermore, given that the two working
languages of the United Nations are English and
French, we dare to hope that the integrated mission
will also include Central African officials of proven
competence among its staff. Neither English nor
French should take priority when it comes to
recruitment. Furthermore, this category of staff should

7

S/PV.6438

enjoy the status of international officials, rather than
that of local staff.
At the same time, the presence of BINUCA in the
Central African Republic is all the more welcome
given that its scope of action has been expanded and is
to further expand in the North-East with a physical
presence requiring supplementary resources. BINUCA
should therefore be the focus of the full attention of
Mission Support to allow it to better discharge its
mandate. The members of the Security Council might
seriously envisage a rapid solution to the problems
described paragraphs 72 and 84 of the SecretaryGeneral’s report.

To conclude, the Central African Republic will
continue to cooperate with all its partners, without
exception. Ours is not a desperate case. Like other States,
it implements policies within its capacities to ensure the
survival of its people and the preservation of its
institutions. It has demonstrated this in many instances,
and calls for international aid to support its actions.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

8

10-68048
