106

General Assembly-Twenly-ninlh Session

(b) Sao Tome and Principe will accede to independence on 12 July 1975;62
( c) Provisional governments will be established in
Angola and Cape Verde with a view to the attainment
by these Territories during 1975 of the goals set forth
in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration;62
4. Strongly deplores the subversive aad criminal
activities of the fascist and reactionary groups in Angola, Cape Verde, Mozambique and Sao Tome and
Principe, which are attempting to obstruct the realization by the peoples of the Territories of their aspirations for freedom and independence, and requests the
Government of Portugal to continue and strengthen
its efforts to put an end to all such activities;
5. Reiterates its affirmation that the national unity
and territorial integrity of these Territories must be
preserved, taking note in this connexion of the statement delivered by the administering Power;53
6. Reaffirms its total support of, and constant solidarity with, the peoples of the Territories under Portuguese domination in their legitimate struggle to achieve
without further delay freedom and independence under
the leadership of their national liberation movementsthe Frente Nacional para a Liberta~ao de Angola, the
Movimento Popular de Liberta~ao de Angola, the
Partido Africano da Independencia da Guine e Cabo
Verde. the Frente de Liberta~ao de M~ambique and
the Movimento de Liberta~ao de Sao Tome e Principe
-which are authentic representatives of the peoples
concerned;
1. Calls upon the Government of Portugal to pursue the necessary steps to ensure the full implementation of the Declaration contained in resolution 1514
(XV) and all other resolutions of the United Nations
relating to the Territories concerned, as well as other
recent measures geared towards total decolonization,
namely, the agreements concluded in Algiers and in
Lusaka and the continuation of the negotiations with
the above-mentioned national liberation movements,
in their capacity of qualified counterparts, for the total
transfer of powers to representatives of the peoples
concerned, by adopting forthwith all necessary measures to remove any obstacle to the full and free exercise of their inalienable right to self-determination and
independence;
8. Requests the Government of Portugal to keep
the United Nations informed of the action taken or
envisaged in the implementation of paragraphs 4 and 7
above and of the related developments in these Territories;
9. Invites all Governments to increase their efforts
with a view to contributing to the acceleration of the
process of decolonization in the Territories concerned;
10. Appeals to all Governments and the specialized
agencies and other institutions associated with the
United Nations to render to the peoples of the Territories concerned all moral and material assistance towards the achievement of their national independence
and the reconstruction of their countries;
11. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declarali2A/988S.
G3 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyninth Session, Fourth Committee, 2080th meeting.

tion on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to keep the situation in these
Territories under continuous review, in particular
through the dispatch of visiting missions as appropriate, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at
its thirtieth session.
2318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974

3295 (XXIX). Question of Namibia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Namibia,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia 54 and the relevant chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, 55
Having heard the statement of the representatives
of the South West Africa People's Organization,68 who
have participated in an observer caracity in the work
of the United Nations Council for Namibia and the
Special Committee, as well as in the consideration of
the item by the Fourth Committee,
Having also heard the statements of the petitioners,17
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the G1anting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling, in particular, its resolutions 2145 (XXI)
of 27 October 1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967
and subsequent resolutions of both the General Assembly and the Security Council relating to the question
of Namibia, as well as the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of 21 June 1971,'18 delivered in response to the request addressed to it by the
Council in its resolution 284 ( 1970) of 29 July 1970,
Taking into consideration the resolutions on Namibia
adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its
eleventh ordinary session, held at Mogadiscio from
12 to 15 June 1974,
Reaffirming that the Territory and people of Namibia
are the direct responsibility of the United Nations and
that the Namibian people must be enabled to attain
self-determination and independence within a united
Namibia,
Strongly deploring South Africa's continued refusal
to comply with the resolutions and decisions of the
United Nations, its continued illegal occupation of
Namibia, its brutal repression of the Namibian people
and its persistent violation of their human rights, as
well as its efforts to destroy the national unity and
territorial integrity of Namibia,
H Ibid., Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/9624)
and Supplement 24A (A/9624/ Add. I).
55 lbid., Supplement No. 23 (A/9623/Rev.1), chaps. IV,
V and IX.
56 Ibid., Twenty-ninth Session, Fourth Committee 2100th
and 2103rd meetings.
'
:; 7 Ibid., 2092nd, 2101st, 2103rd, 2106th and 2110th meetinp.
58 Legal Conseque11ces for States of the Continued Presence
of South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding
Security Council Resolution 276 (1970), Advisory Opin'ion,
J.C./. Reports 1971, p. 16.

107

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Recognizing that this situation constitutes a threat
to international peace and security,
Strongly deploring the policies of those States which,
despite the relevant decisions of the United Nations
and the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice of 21 June 1971, continue to maintain diplomatic, economic, consular and other relations with
South Africa, purporting to act on behalf of or concerning Namibia, as well as military or strategic collaboration, all of which has the effect of supporting or
encouraging South Africa in its defiance of the United
Nations,
Noting with satisfaction the opposition of the Namibian people to South Africa's illegal presence in the
Territory and to its oppressive racist policies and, in
particular, the progress of their struggle in all its forms
for national liberation under the leadership of the
South West Africa People's Organization,
Noting with appreciation the efforts of the United
Nations Council for Namibia in the discharge of the
responsibilities entrusted to it by the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,

tained therein, and decides to make adequate financial
provision for their implementation;
2. Authorizes adequate financial provision in the
budget of the United Nations Council for Namibia to
finance an office for the South West Africa People's
Organization in New York, to ensure the due and
proper representation of the people of Namibia through
the South West Africa People's Organization at the
United Nations;
3. Decides to defray the expenses of a representative of the South West Africa People's Organization
when on any mission approved by the United Nati0ns
Cg.uncil for Namibia;
4. Agrees that provision should be made so that the
United Nations Council for Namibia may consider and
recommend additional staff, as well as consultants, for
the Office of the United Nations Commissioner for
Namibia, when the Council deems it necessary, to enable him to carry out any expanded operations of his
Office which may arise from decisions of the Council;

I

l. Calls once again upon those States which are
not yet complying with the relevant provisions of the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council concerning Namibia and the advisory opinion
of the International C::ourt of Justice of 2l June 1971
to discontinue all direct or indirect relations, economic
or otherwise, with South Africa when it purports to
act on behalf of or concerning Namibia;
2. Urges all States to take all possible economic
or other measures with a view to compelling South
Africa to withdraw immediately from Namibia in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 2145
(XXI) and 2248 (S-V) and subsequent resolutions;
3. Further calls upon those States which have consular representation, whether ordinary or honorary, in
Namibia to terminate such representation, and calls
upon those States which have consuls in South Africa
with consular jurisdiction in Namibia to withdraw such
accreditation;
4. Calls upon all States to refrain from supporting
and financing any racially segregated activity in
Namibia;
5. Calls upon all States to co-operate fully with the
United Nations Council for Namibia in the discharge
of its mandate;
6. Requests all States to render to the Namibian
people, in co-operation with the South West Africa
People's Organization, all moral and material assistance necessary for them to continue their struggle for
freedom and independence;
7. Requests all Member States to take all appropriate measures to ensure the full application of, and
compliance with, the provisions of the Decree on the
Natural Resources of Namibia enacted by the United
Nations Council for Namibia on 27 September 197459
and such other measures· as may be necessary to assist
in the protection of the national resources of Namibia;
8. Reaffirms the right of the Namibian people to
permanent sovereignty over their natural resources and
condemns the policies of those States which continue
to support foreign economic and other interests en-

I. Reaffirms the inalienable and imprescriptible
right of the people of Namibia to self-determination
and independence in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2621 (XXV) and subsequent resolutions;
2. Reiterates that the national liberation movement
of Namibia, the South West Africa People's Organization, is the authentic representative of the Namibian
people, and supports its efforts to strengthen national
unity;
3. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of the
Namibian people by all means at their disposal against
the illegal occupation of their country by South Africa;
4. Strongly condemns South Africa for its persistent
refusal to withdraw from Namibia and for itS, efforts
to consolidate its illegal occupation by intensified repression and by the imposition of its policies of apartheid and the fragmentation of the Territory into "bantustans", in total disregard of the wishes of the people
of Namibia, the decisions and resolutions of the United
Nations and the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice of 2 I June I 971 ;
5. Demands the immediate and unconditional withdrawal by South Africa of all its military and police
forces and its administration from Namibia so as to
enable the Namibian people to achieve freedom and
independence;

II
Urges the Security .Council to convene urgently in
order to take without delay effective measures, in accordance with the relevant Chapters of the Charter of
the United Nations and with the resolutions of the Security Council and of the General Assembly regarding
Namibia, to put an end to South Africa's illegal occupation of Namibia;

III
l. Approves the report of the United Nations Council for Namibia, ~4 including the conclusions, recommendations and proposed programme of work con-

IV

59 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 24A (A/9624/ Add.I), p,.ra. 84.

108

General Astembly-Twenty-ninth Session

gaged in exploiting the natural and human resources
of Namibia, in some ca5es to the point of foreseeing
the exhaustion of such natural resources;
9. Requests all Member States to commemorate
and publicize Namibia Day on 26 August 1975 and
to issue special postage stamps for the occasion;
V
l. Requests the Secretary-General to direct and
make adequate provision for the setting up in an
African State of a United Nations radio transmitter
which would have the function of transmitting radio programmes in the various languages spoken in Namibia,
informing the people of Namibia of United Nations
policies in regard to the liberation of Namibia, the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
the fight against racism and the steps being taken to
achieve decolonization throughout the world;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to direct the Office of Public Information of the Secretariat:
(a) To intensify its activities as regards dissemination of information in an effort to acquaint more fully
world public opinion and the mass media with the situation in Namibia and the struggle of its people for
independence;
( b) To provide for the expansion in scope and distribution of the Namibia Bulletin;
(c) To set up a photographic display in the public
areas of United Nations Headquarters, with a view to
keeping visitors informed of developments in Namibia:
(d) To acquire all television programmes produced
during the missions of the United Nations Council for
Namibia and to provide wide distribution to these
films as well as to the United Nations film, "Namibia:
A Trust Betrayed", and other appropriate films on
Namibia;
3. Requests all General Assembly committees and
sub-committees to invite a representative of the United
Nations Council for Namibia and the South West Africa
People's Organization to participate in their meetings
whenever the rights and interests of Namibia are discussed and to consult closely with the Council and with
that organization regarding any draft resolution which
may involve the rights and interests of Namibians;

VI
I. Requests all specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to take
such necessary steps as will enable the representation
and participation of Namibia in the work of such
agencies and organizations;
2. Requests all specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to ensure
that Namibians are eligible, on the same basis as citizens of member States, for scholarships offered by the
agencies and organizations, and that Namibians wherever possible are employed on the same basis as citizens of member States in the agencies concerned;
3. Requests all specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system, in consultation with the United Nations Council for Namibia
and the South West Africa People's Organization, to
render, within their resn:::ctive spheres of competence,
all pmsible nssistanc,.
:he people of Namibia and
to their liberation mm,·,,_ 1t in pa1ticular:

4. Requests the United Nations Development Programme, in consultation with the United Nations Commissioner for Namibia, to establish an indicative planning figure for Namibia;
5. Calls upon all specialized agencies and organizations in the United Nations system, especially the
International Monetary Fund and the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, to consult
with the United Nations Council for Namibia and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations _in ord~r _to
ensure that those organizations are observmg their international Ieoa] obligations in terms of the advisory
opinion of the° International Co~rt of Justic~ of ~ l June
1971 and relevant United Nat10ns resolut10ns m programmes and activities which may involve collaboration with South Africa;
6. Requests all intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, bodies and conferences to ensure
that the rights and interests of Namibia are protected;
in this connexion, the United Nations Council for
Namibia and the South West Africa People's Organization should participate, as appropriate, whenever
such rights and interests are involved;
7. Invites all intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, bodies and conferences interested
in the liberation of Namibia to co-operate with the
South West Africa People's Organization and the
United Nations Council for Namibia in the elaboration of programmes of assistance to Namibians and
programmes for the dissemination of information;
Vil

Requests the President of the General Assembly, on
the basis of consultations to be undertaken by the Secretary-General with the regional groups, to nominate
during the current se5sion of the General Assembly
additional members to the United Nations Council for
Namibia with a view to ensuring a broader representation in the Council.
2318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974

•

•

•

At its 2325th plenary meeting. on 18 December 1974, the
General Assembly, pursuant to :,·ection VII of the above resolution, confirmed the nomination by its President of ALGERIA,
AUSTRALIA, BANGLADESH, BOTSWANA, FINLAND, HAITI and
SENEG~L as members of the United Nations Council for
Namibia.
As a result, the Council is composed of the following Member States: ALGERIA, AUSTRALIA, BANGLADESH, BOTSWANA,
BURUNDI, CHILE, CHINA, COLOMBIA, EGYPT, FINLAND, GUYANA, HAITI, INDJA, INDONESIA, LIBERIA, MEXICO, NIGERIA,
PAKISTAN, POLAND, ROMANIA, SENEGAL, TURKEY, UNION OF
SoV!ET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, YUGOSLAVIA and ZAMBIA.

3296 (XXIX). United Nations Fund for Namibia
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2145 ( XXI) of 27 October
1966, by which the United Nations decided to terminate the Mandate of Sm.ah Africa over Namibia and
assume direct responsibility for the Territory until its
independence, and resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May
1967, by which it established the United Nations Council for Namibia,
