VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

to

eiaborate in consultation with the South West Africa
People's O;ganization, the guidelines and poli_cies for
such a programme, to be known as the Nat10n~ood
Programme for Namibia, and to direct and co-ordmate
the implementation of the Programme;
3. Invites all States to participate in the Nationhood Programme for Namibia by suppor!ing. measures
for assistance to Namibians and by contnbutmg to _the
United Nations Fund for Namibia and the Umted
Nations Institute for Namibia;
4. Calls upon the specialized age~cies a~d other
organizations and bodies within th_e Umt_ed Nations ~ystem to participate, in c?-?Pe~at10n with .the Um_ted
Nations Council for Namibia, m the planmng and implementation of the Nationhood Programme for Namibia;
5. Requests the Secretary-General_ to provid~ the
necessary assistance to the United N1:!-t10ns Council_ for
Namibia for the effective implementat10n of the Nationhood Programme for Namibia.
105th plenary meeting
20 December 1976
31/154.

Question of Southern Rhodesia
A

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Southern Rhodesia
(Zimbabwe),
Having examined the relevant c~apte!s of !he report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,102
Having heard the statement of the representative of
the administering Power, 103
Taking into account the report of the Ad Hoe Group
established by the Special Committee at its 1029th
meeting on 1 April 1976,104
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 Dece_mber 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970 containing the programme of action for the full implem~ntation ?f the
Declaration, as well as all other resolutions relatmg to
the question of Southern Rhodesia adopted by the General Assembly, the Security Council and the Special
Committee,
Bearing in mind that the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, has the primary responsibility for
putting an end to the critical situation in Southern
Rhodesia (Zimbabwe) which, as repeatedly affirmed by
the Security Council, constitutes a threat to international
peace and security,
Reaffirming that any attempt to negotiate the future
of Zimbabwe with the illegal regime on the basis of independence before majority rule would be in contraven102 Ibid., Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/Rev.1), chaps. I, II
and IV-VIII.
103 Jbid., Thirty-first Session, Fourth Committee, 41st meeting, paras. 9-37.
104 /bid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/
Rev .1 ) , chap. VII, annex I.

137

tion of the inalienable rights of the people of the Territory and contrary to the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations and of resolution 1514 (XV),
Taking note of the declared position of the administering Power that there shall be no independence before
majority rule in Zimbabwe, 105
Reaffirming also its endorsement of the relevant provisions of the Dar es Salaam Declaration on Southern
Africa, adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity at its ninth extraordinary
session, held from 7 to 10 April 1975, 106
Endorsing the relevant provisions of the Political
Declaration adopted by the Fifth Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held
at Colombo from 16 to 19 August 1976, relating to
southern Africa, 10 7
Taking note of the convening of the conference on
Zimbabwe at Geneva,
Condemning the illegal racist minority regime for its
intensified oppression of the people of Zimbabwe, the
arbitrary imprisonment and detention of political leaders
and others, the illegal execution of freedom fighters and
the continued denial of fundamental human rights, including in particular the wanton beating, torture and
murder of innocent villagers, arbitrary criminal measures of collective punishment and measures designed to
create an apartheid State in Zimbabwe,

Commending the firm determination of the people
of Zimbabwe, under the leadership of their national
liberation movement, to achieve freedom and independence,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Zimbabwe to self-determination, freedom and independence and the legitimacy of their struggle to secure
by all the means at their disposal the enjoyment of that
right as set forth in the Charter of the United Nations
and in conformity with the objectives of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Reaffirms the principle that there should be no
independence before majority rule in Zimbabwe and
that any settlement relating to the future of the Territory must be worked out with the full participation of
the people of Zimbabwe and in accordance with their
true aspirations;
3. Strongly condemns the illegal racist minority
regime for its continued brutal and repressive measures
perpetrated against the people of Zimbabwe and in
particular the wanton killings of Africans carried out by
the regime within and outside Zimbabwe;
4. Further strongly condemns the illegal racist
minority regime for its systematic acts of aggression
against neighbouring African States;
5. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, in the discharge of its primary responsibility as the administering
Power, to take all effective measures to enable Zimbabwe to accede to independence in accordance with
the aspirations of the majority of the population and not
under any circumstances to accord to the illegal regime
any of the powers or attributes of sovereignty;
chap. VIII, annex, para. 44.
Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/
Rev.1), chap. IX, annex, para. 99.
101 See A/31/197, annex I.
105 Ibid.,
106 Ibid.,

138

General Assembl,.--Thirty-6.rst Session

6. Commends to the administering Power for appropriate action the relevant sections of the report of
the Ad Hoe Group established by the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples at its 1029th meeting,
on 1 April 1976;10•
7. Firmly supports the people of Zimbabwe in their
struggle to achieve majority rule;
8. Demands:
(a) The termination forthwith of the executions of
freedom fighters being carried out by the illegal Smith
regime;
( b) The unconditional and immediate release of all
political prisoners, detainees and restrictees, the removal
of all restrictions on political activity and the establishment of full democratic freedom and equality of political rights, as well as the restoration to the population
of fundamental human rights;
( c) The discontinuance forthwith of all repressive
measures, in particular the brutality committed in the
"operational area", the arbitrary closure of African
areas, the eviction, transfer and resettlement of Africans
and the creation of so-called protected villages, and the
persecution of Christian missionaries supporting the
cause of the liberation of Zimbabwe;
(d) The cessation of the influx of foreign immigrants into the Territory and the immediate withdrawal
of all mercenaries therefrom;
9. Calls upon all States to take all necessary and
effective measures to prevent advertisement for, and
recruitment of, mercenaries for Southern Rhodesia;
10. Requests all States, directly and through their
action in the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system of which they
are members, as well as the non-governmental organizations concerned and the various programmes within the
United Nations system, to extend, in consultation and
co-operation with the Organization of African Unity,
to the people of Zimbabwe and their national liberation
movement all the moral, material, political and humanitarian assistance necessary in their struggle for the
restoration of their inalienable rights;
11. Invites all Governments, the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations
system, the United Nations bodies concerned and nongovernmental organizations having a special interest in
the field of decolonization, as well as the SecretaryGeneral, to take steps, as appropriate, to give widespread and continuous publicity through all the media
at their disposal to information on the situation in
Zimbabwe and on the relevant decisions and actions of
the United Nations, with particular reference to the
application of sanctions against the illegal regime;
12. Expresses the hope that the conference on
Zimbabwe at Geneva will succeed in establishinu the
conditions for early independence on the basis of
majority rule, in accordance with the relevant resolutions adopted by the United Nations;
13 .. Requ_ests t~e ~overnment of the United Kingdom, m keepmg with its express readiness to do so to
co-operate with the Special Committee in the disch~rge
of the mandate entrusted to the latter by the General
A~sembly, and to report there?n to the Special Committee and to the Assembly at its thirty-second session;

14. Requests the Special Committee to keep the
situation in the Territory under review as a matter of
priority and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its thirty-second session.
105th plenary meeting
20 December 1976

B
The General Assembly,
Having adopted resolution A above on the question
of Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe),
Strongly deploring the increasing collaboration, in
violation of Article 25 of the Charter of the United
Nations and of the relevant decisions of the United
Nations, which certain States, particularly South Africa,
maintain with the illegal racist minority regime, thereby
seriously impeding the effective application of sanctions
and other measures taken thus far against the illegal
regime,
Seriously concerned at the continued importation of
chrome and nickel into the United States of America
from Southern Rhodesia, in violation of the relevant
decisions of the Security Council and in disregard of
the related resolutions of the General Assembly,
Deeply disturbed at recent reports of widespread
violations of United Nations sanctions, including the
operation of Southern Rhodesian aircraft for international passenger and cargo traffic, as well as the continued functioning of information and airline offices of
the illegal regime outside Southern Rhodesia and the
resultant influx of foreign tourists into the Territory,
Considering that developments in the area call in
particular for positive, concerted international action
with a view to imposing maximum isolation on the
illegal regime,
Reaffirming its conviction that the sanctions will not
put an end to the illegal racist minority regime unless
they ~re comprehensive, mandatory and effectively
supervised, enforced and complied with, particularly
by South Africa,
Noting with appreciation the decision of the Government of Mozambique to close its borders with Southern Rhodesia and to impose sanctions against the illegal
racist minority regime in compliance with the relevant
decisions of the Security Council, 108
1. Strongly condemns those Governments, particularly the racist regime of South Africa, which, in
violation of the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations and in open contravention of their specific
obligations under Article 2, paragraph 5, and Article
25 of the Charter of the United Nations, continue
to collaborate with the illegal racist minority regime,
and calls upon those Governments to cease forthwith
all such collaboration:
2. Condemns all violations of the mandatory sanctions imposed by the Security Council, as well as the
continued failure of certain Member States to enforce
those sanctions strictly, as being contrary to the obligations assumed by them under Article 2, paragraph 5,
and Article 25 of the Charter;
108 See Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-first
Year, Supplement for January, February and March 1976,
documents S/ 12004 and Adel. I.

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

3. Condemns the continued importation of chrome
and nickel from Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe) into
the United States of America and calls upon the Government of the United States to repeal speedily all legislation permitting such importation;
4. Calls upon all Governments which thus far have
not done so:
(a) To take stringent enforcement measures to ensure strict compliance by all individuals, associations
and bodies corporate under their jurisdiction with the
sanctions imposed by the Security Council and to prohibit any form of collaboration by them with the illegal
regime;
(b) To take effective steps to prevent or discourage
the emigration to Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe) of
any individuals or groups of individuals under their
jurisdiction;
( c) To discontinue any action which might confer
a semblance of legitimacy on the illegal regime, inter
alia, by forbidding the operation and activities of Air
Rhodesia, the Rhodesia National Tourist Board and the
Rhodesian Information Office, or any other activities
which contravene the aims and purposes of the sanctions;
(d) To invalidate passports and other documents
for travel to the Territory;
5. Highly commends the action taken by the Government of Mozambique in closing its borders with
Southern Rhodesia and imposing total sanctions against
the Smith regime, and considers that that action constitutes an important contribution in support of the lib-

139

eration struggle in Zimbabwe and towards the maximum
isolation of the illegal regime;
6. Requests all States, directly and through their
action in the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system of which they
are members, and the various programmes within the
United Nations system to extend to the Government of
Mozambique all forms of financial, technical and material assistance in order to enable it to overcome any
economic difficulties in connexion with its application
of economic sanctions against the illegal regime;
7. Further requests the Security Council to undertake a periodic review of the question of economic
assistance to the Government of Mozambique as well
as to the Government of Zambia;
8. Reiterates its conviction that the scope of the
sanctions against the illegal regime must be widened to
include all the measures envisaged under Article 41 of
the Charter and requests the Security Council to consider taking the necessary measures in that regard as a
matter of urgency;
9. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples to follow the implementation of the present resolution and invites the Security Council Committee
established in pursuance of resolution 253 ( 1968)
concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia to continue to co-operate in the related work of the Special
Committee.
105 th plenary meeting
20 December 1976
