asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6921

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6921st meeting
Thursday, 14 February 2013, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kim Sook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Republic of Korea)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Musayev
Mr. Tian Lin
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2013/69)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-23358 (E)

*1323358*

S/PV.6921

30 January. He discussed with the Prime Minister of
Somalia and other leaders their priorities for the coming
year, particularly in the areas of security, judicial
reform and public financial management. We hope to
continue to work together to develop ways to support
Somalia in these key areas.

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda.
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2013/69)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Somalia to participate in this meeting. On behalf of
the Council, I welcome Her Excellency Ms. Fowsiyo
Yusuf Haji Adan, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Somalia.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/69, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on Somalia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zerihoun.
Mr. Zerihoun: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on recent developments in
Somalia and on the next stage of the United Nations
engagement in the country.
In the weeks since the finalization of the SecretaryGeneral’s report of 31 January 2013 (S/2013/69),
the Federal Government of Somalia has continued
implementing its six-pillar policy for stabilization and
peacebuilding in the country. President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud has reached out to Somalia’s international
partners, with high-profile visits including to the United
States, the United Kingdom and the European Union,
which have raised hopes for enhanced international
assistance on the basis of a new compact to be developed
over the course of this year.
The United Nations has continued high-level
dialogue with the new authorities in Somalia on
their emerging plans. The Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, met with
President Mohamud in Addis Ababa during the recent
African Union summit and visited Mogadishu on

2

The success achieved by the Government
internationally is matched by daunting challenges
at home. The growing expanse of territory liberated
from Al-Shabaab has created an opportunity for the
federal Government to extend its control over the
country and enhance its legitimacy among Somalis.
The Government is working to fill the vacuum
through an inclusive bottom-up approach, but the
process is naturally contentious. In Kismaayo, the
self-styled Governor, Sheikh Madobe, has yet to meet
with President Mohamud, despite promises to do so.
Meanwhile, in Baidoa tensions are escalating following
the appointment of a new interim Governor by the
Government on 6 February.
It is important that progress be made quickly to build
accepted administrations in the liberated areas and that
the complex political process be accompanied by other
critical stabilization deliverables — notably security,
law and order, and basic service delivery — without
which long-term peace and development will be
difficult to attain. In this regard, the commitment of the
Intergovernmental Authority for Development (IGAD)
on 23 January to support and ensure complementarity
with the approach of the federal Government of
Somalia, as well as the Government’s pledge to present
its detailed stabilization plan to IGAD, are welcome
developments.
Despite several attacks by Al-Shabaab, there is
now a tangible sense of security and optimism in
Mogadishu. Across the country, AMISOM is now
deployed at full mandated strength and has been
effective in degrading Al-Shabaab’s operational
capability. However, A1-Shabaab is not yet defeated,
and its presence continues to hamper the freedom of
movement of Somalis and those who would assist them.
The lack of sustainable and predictable funding
for AMISOM remains a concern. The international
community continues to recognize the sacrifices
being made by the Somali forces, AMISOM and
other partners, and strongly supports the appeals of
the African Union (AU) for resources and additional
capabilities to continue efforts against the insurgency.

13-23358

S/PV.6921

Meanwhile, Council members are aware of the
request of the Somali Government for a relaxation
of the arms embargo to facilitate the development of
the Somalia security sector. The Secretary-General
suggests in his report that it would be important to take
a calibrated approach based on all the factors at play,
including the pressing need to support the development
of the Somali forces while avoiding the proliferation
of uncontrolled weapons that could exacerbate the
security situation. We understand that the Somalia and
Eritrea Monitoring Group is ready to provide technical
advice in the development of options in this regard.
The development of the security sector in Somalia
must also be coupled with enhanced support for the
judiciary and respect for human rights. The SecretaryGeneral is particularly concerned by the ongoing threat
to journalists working in Somalia and by the number of
reported incidents of sexual violence. The case of an
alleged rape victim and a Somali journalist sentenced
to imprisonment on 5 February underscores the
considerable investment needed to develop a national
framework that promotes international human rights
norms.
This period of transformation, with its opportunities
and challenges, requires a step change in the United
Nations support to peacebuilding in Somalia. In his
report before the Council, the Secretary-General has
recommended a substantial realignment of the United
Nations presence in Somalia. The recommendations are
based on an integrated strategic assessment conducted
late last year, in which the Secretariat listened extensively
to the Somali authorities across the country, to civil
society organizations and to international partners in
Somalia and in Nairobi. Extensive consultations were
also held with the African Union.
The findings of the review emphasize that United
Nations support to Somalia must now be based on a
new partnership, with the Somalis in the lead and the
United Nations working with side by side with them,
not remotely from Nairobi. That is why United Nations
entities will be steadily relocating to Somalia over the
next 6 to 12 months.
The United Nations Political Office for Somalia
(UNPOS) has played a critical role in supporting the
Somalis to deliver the transition. The political successes
of last year were delivered in part through the hard work
of UNPOS, and especially the tireless efforts of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Augustine
Mahiga. But UNPOS is not configured to provide the
13-23358

support required by a new Government seeking to
consolidate its authority across the country. That will
require a new mission with the political and technical
expertise, resources and configuration to support the
Government and people of Somalia. The SecretaryGeneral therefore recommends to the Security Council
the liquidation of UNPOS and the establishment of a
broader peacebuilding mission based in Mogadishu.
The envisaged tasks of the new mission include
good offices, advice and assistance on security,
peacebuilding and State-building, the preparation
of elections, human rights and the rule of law,
and assistance to the coordination of international
assistance. The United Nations will bring unique
expertise to assist in these areas. At the same time,
there is need for innovative approaches to tackle the
particular challenges of operating in Somalia, and to
tailor our efforts to the Government’s requirements. For
this reason, and further to the guidance of the Council,
the Secretary-General intends to deploy a technical
design mission to develop detailed plans for the future
United Nations presence in Somalia. He will report on
the findings in his next report to the Security Council
in May this year.
We appreciate the advice of Member States and other
international partners on the types of structural models
to pursue with respect to the new United Nations presence
in Somalia. The Secretary-General’s recommendation
for a United Nations assistance mission — which
is option C in his report — reflects the best current
option for the Organization to simultaneously provide
enhanced support to peacebuilding and to meet other
development and humanitarian objectives. The option
recognizes the importance of maintaining the high
level of support provided by the United Nations Support
Office for AMISOM to the African Union Mission in
Somalia, while strengthening the strategic coherence of
the Mission, and tactical planning and cooperation with
United Nations agencies and the African Union.
The Secretary-General remains committed to full
structural integration as soon as conditions allow, and
to keeping the option of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation under review for the future. In view of the
dynamic situation in Somalia, the Secretary-General
intends to revisit the issue of structural integration next
year.
The partnership between the African Union and
United Nations in Somalia has been one of the success
stories in our relationship. We remain committed to
3

S/PV.6921

working with our African Union colleagues over the
coming months to ensure that our approaches are
coherent, supportive of each other and, most important,
provide the best support to the Somali Government
and people. The United Nations and African Union
have each conducted their own reviews of their
respective efforts and engagement in Somalia, and our
substantive conclusions are similar. At the meeting of
the AU-United Nations Joint Task Force, held in the
margins of the recent AU Summit in Addis Ababa, we
agreed to pursue a joint position on the outcome of our
respective reviews, as well as the next steps for our
future cooperation. We will keep the Security Council
informed of these efforts and their outcome.
Only the people of Somalia can realize the
transformation that we all hope for in their country, but
the United Nations can have a significant supporting
role to play. We look forward to receiving the guidance
of the Security Council on the future United Nations
presence and engagement in Somalia.
The President: I thank Mr. Zerihoun for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia.
Ms. Adan (Somalia): I wish to thank you, Sir, for
this opportunity to address this Council and to share
with you current events shaping the destiny of Somalia.
Allow me also to congratulate you on assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month.
First and foremost, the Somali people, for the first
time in more than two decades, are speaking of new
hopes, optimism, confidence and strong faith in the new
developments in our homeland. It is my ardent wish and
hope that my Government will prove the Somali people
right in their aspirations.
Let me say a few words about the current situation
in Somalia. The rise of a new dawn in Somalia started
with the successful end of the transition and the laying
of the foundations for credible and viable governance
structures. Today, we have a fully functioning and
lean Government, with a robust and lively legislature.
The well-known conflict and acrimony among Somali
leaders is something of the past and a cooperative
atmosphere prevails.
At the very outset beginning, my Government
adopted a six-pillar policy framework based on our
collective vision for the way forward. This vision is a

4

strategy for dealing with such urgent issues as security
and peacebuilding, law and good governance reform,
economic recovery and public finance management
reform, good and targeted service delivery, the
restructuring
of
international
relations,
and
safeguarding the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Somalia.
The Somali Government has adopted several
initiatives and programmes based on these pillars. In
the security sector, for example, Government troops,
in collaboration with the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), have succeeded in regaining
control of areas previously held by Al-Shabaab. Today,
Al-Shabaab is weakened and its leadership is in disarray
and on the run. We are committed to continuing the
fight against this scourge until the final victory is
achieved.
We are in the process of establishing local
administrations in the newly recovered areas of South
and Central Somalia. This is based on a bottomup approach — in other words, the empowerment of
local communities to select their own leaders and the
Somali Government as the sole legitimate facilitator,
as prescribed in the Constitution. This will promote
respect for Somalia’s sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence; the legitimacy of the federal
Government of the Somali Republic; and respect for the
wishes of the local populations in those areas.
The Somali Government has also initiated muchneeded steps in establishing a credible, transparent
and accountable public finance system. The collection
of taxes as a major source of Government income is
a priority in this regard. We are also working on a
programme for the voluntary repatriation of Somali
refugees in neighbouring countries, as well as the
resettlement of internally displaced persons in their
areas of original residence.
Despite the progress made in different areas and
the multiple tasks ahead, serious challenges remain. We
have no illusions about this. Getting rid of the remnants
of the Al-Shabaab is a top priority for us. That, however,
will require strengthening the military capacity of the
Somali defence forces by way of training, providing
enablers in a timely manner, and further restructuring
command and control structures.
Consolidating peace in the recovered areas
in southern Somalia and securing the necessary
military and financial resources in a timely manner

13-23358

S/PV.6921

is another priority. The lifting of the arms embargo
is a prerequisite for attaining this goal. The Somali
Government reiterates its request for the arms embargo
to be lifted. The Somali Government will put in place
the necessary mechanisms to ensure that armaments do
not fall into the wrong hands.
We have started strengthening the capacity of
State institutions by way of structural adjustments
and changes. Yet, further action is required, and this
is where the United Nations can step in by providing
the physical presence of the specialized agencies on the
ground in Somalia and teaming up with line ministries.
These and other programmes cannot succeed unless
there is the blessing, the political will and the longterm commitment of the international community to
stepping up to the plate and partnering with the new
Somalia, through the Somali Government, in providing
the necessary technical and financial resources.
My Government is pleased to report the continued
commitment of and the enormous sacrifices made
by the Somali National Security Forces, AMISOM,
the Ethiopian National Defence Forces and their
international partners for the successful consummation
of the transitional road map, and urges greater support
to be provided in this regard.
Security is a prerequisite for political, economic
and social stabilization and recovery. The gains made
by AMISOM and our national armed forces against
Al-Shabaab over the past year are impressive, and I
wish again to thank the nations that contributed their
forces to this courageous endeavour. The support
provided by the United Nations to AMISOM has to
be acknowledged. We would like to stress again the
importance for our forces to be better trained, equipped
and structured. The Council’s support is required, not
least in lifting the arms embargo to allow the Somali
national armed forces to assume full responsibility for
our own security. In this context, however, we would
like to voice and reiterate our strong opposition to the
authorization of a maritime force for AMISOM.
We discussed our concerns during the recent African
Union (AU) strategic review; our point was understood,
and that particular element has been removed from the
final report to the AU Peace and Security Council.
The naval capability of our forces must be the priority.
There is no compelling reason to take the campaign
against Al-Shabaab to sea. Piracy, human trafficking
and smuggling are important challenges, but they are

13-23358

not linked to the mandate of AMISOM. This is our
task, which needs the Council’s support.
With reference to paragraph 51 of the report, dated
17 September 2011, of the eleventh Ordinary Council
of Ministers of Defence and Security of the Eastern
African Region, held in Seychelles, the Council
Ministers of Defence and Security discussed the issue
of a maritime component for AMISOM, and Somalia
clearly stated its position that it does not need such a
component. In view of this, the Council of Ministers of
Defence and Security unanimously agreed to Somalia’s
objection to a maritime component for AMSIOM. A
copy of this report, signed by all members, is available
for easy reference in this Chamber.
Significant progress has been made against piracy,
and we thank the international community for the wellcoordinated and robust operations that have almost
defeted this negative industry. The gains need urgently
to be supplemented with programmes aiming at the
young people in those communities. This is closely
linked to the reintegration of disengaged combatants
and youth at risk throughout the country. We will need
to urgently invest in our youth in order not to lose the
dividend of the military and anti-piracy campaigns.
We also urge the esteemed Council to remove
paragraph 38 of the Secretary-General’s report
to the Security Council (S/2013/69) regarding the
implementation of the United Nations Human Rights
Due Diligence Policy. The Somali Government sees
this particular matter as applying only to our national
forces.
The humanitarian situation remains critical for
hundreds of thousands of our people. Many are at risk;
a million of our citizens remain displaced within the
country, and many more have sought refuge elsewhere.
We urge the international community to further
generously contribute through the United Nations
consolidated appeal or other means in order to alleviate
the suffering. The drought and the conflict have
disrupted the ability of our people to cope. So many
lives have been saved by the United Nations and the
many humanitarian agencies and friends of Somalia.
Let us build on this success and invest in the capacity
of our people to take care of themselves. We are strong
people and should not be dependent on aid.
The human rights situation needs further urgent
attention. We are aware of the shortcomings and the
prevailing abuses. Our Government is committed to

5

S/PV.6921

moving decisively to ensure that access to basic human
rights is guaranteed and that the culture of violence,
particularly against women and journalists, is brought
to an end.

a unified structure outweigh by far the concerns of
those seeking to maintain the status quo in order to
disassociate themselves from the political and military
components of the international effort.

I would like to reaffirm our support for resolution
2036 (2012) banning the trade in and export of charcoal,
and ask the Council to decide to punish the violators of
the ban.

Integration would facilitate a coherent approach
to peacebuilding, stabilization and support for
institutions, which is the strength of the United Nations
system. We accept that the integration of the military
component can be gradual and begin as soon as the
active military campaign is over — which we hope will
happen in the months to come. I believe that this is in
line with the discussions we held with both the United
Nations and the AU strategic review teams. We need
clear and lean structures with which we can engage,
cooperate and partner. A United Nations presence with
a unified structure will be stronger and more efficient
and deliver with more vigour. We sincerely hope that
our voice is listened to.

Today, and on behalf of the Somali people and the
federal Government of the Somali Republic, I stand
before the Council to state that the Somali people
and Government seek a permanent partnership with
the United Nations, its Member States and the entire
United Nations family — a partnership for peace, good
governance, and socioeconomic, political and cultural
cooperation — in a manner that suits both of us, from
this moment until the time when we are fully able to
stand on our own feet. This underscores the need for a
paradigm shift in the manner in which the international
community engaged with the former transitional
Somali administration.
Let me again thank the United Nations for its longstanding support for Somalia. We would have been
nowhere without the persistence of the United Nations
system, its agencies and their staff. The gradual return
of the United Nations system to Mogadishu has begun
over the past year. The regular presence of more and
more senior staff has made a difference. We understand
the difficulties of such a relocation in a security situation
that remains difficult but has now become manageable.
I would like to encourage the United Nations and our
friends to move decisively to come back. In line with
common practice, we will support the United Nations
and its Member States by providing security, land,
facilities and immunities, as required. United Nations
offices and embassies must be relocated to Mogadishu.
At this point, I would like to reiterate our strong
position that there must be an integrated United Nations
mission, which would help the system to deliver and
speak as one. We believe that the advantages of having

6

The President has made this point in his travels
to the region and when visiting the United States,
the United Kingdom and the European Union and in
meetings with their leaders. He has shared his views
in writing with the Secretary-General, with whom
he also discussed the matter during his recent visit
to Addis Abeba. Furthermore, during the forty-sixth
Extraordinary Session of the Council of Ministers
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), held in Addis Ababa on 23 January, it was
agreed that IGAD’s grand stabilization plan was to be
integrated into the six-pillar policy framework of the
Somali Government in the next six weeks.
To conclude, I would like to extend an invitation
to Security Council members to visit Somalia in
the near future to witness the dramatic changes and
opportunities.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

13-23358
