38

General Assembly-Eighth Session

if a participant has not made, or has revoked, a designation,
such sum shall be paid to the participant's estate.
6. A widow whose annual benefit under this article is less
than 120 dollars may, prior to the first payment of such benefit
and with the consent of the Joint Staff Pension Board, receive
in lieu thereof a lump sum which is the actuarial equivalent of
such benefit.
7. Should a married woman participant die and her widower
be found by the Joint Staff Pension Board on the basis of a
medical examination to be totally and permanently incapable
either physically or mentally of providing for his own support,
at the time of her death, he shall be entitled to the same benefits
as set forth in this article, as would a widow of a male participant.
REVISED ARTICLE

XVI

Contributions on account of participants
1. Seven per cent of the pensionable remuneration of each
participant shall be deducted from his remuneration and paid
each month to the Pension Fund.
2. During any period of sick leave on full or partial pay,
a participant shall continue to contribute to the Pension Fund
by deduction from such payments on the basis of his full pensionable remuneration, and any benefit under these regulations
to which he becomes entitled during such period shall be calculated on the basis of his full pensionable remuneration.
3. (a) A participant on leave without pay, granted for reasons other than the performance of military service, shall be
covered by the full benefits provided under these regulations if
full contributions on his account are received on the dates on
which they would normally become due.
( b) A participant on leave without pay, granted for reasons
other than the performance of military service, on whose account full contributions arc not so received, shall be covered by
the full benefits prm·ided under these regulations for a period
of four months, or for such longer period as the Board, upon
the application of the participant, may allow; thereafter he
shall be covered only by the benefits provided in paragraph 5
of this article.
4. A participant on leave without pay, granted for the performance of military service, shall be covered only by the benefits provided in paragraph 5 of th,s article, and the Joint Staff
Pension Board shall not accept contributions on his account
during the period of such leave.
5. (a) A participant on leave without pay who is not covered by the full benefits provided under these regulations, who
reaches the age of sixty and retires, shall be entitled to a retirement benefit as provided under article IV.
( b) Any such participant who before reaching the age of
sixty becomes disabled or withdraws from the Fund shall become entitled to a withdrawal benefit under article X.
( c) If such a participant dies, his designated recipient shall
become entitled to a benefit calculated in the same manner as
a withdrawal benefit under article X.
(d) If a participant on leave without pay, grantee\ for the
.performance of military service, becomes disabled or dies before reaching the age of sixty, the benefit payable under subparagraph (b) or (c) of this paragraph shall not be less than
the individual actuarial resene of such participant calculated at
the time disability or death occurred.
6. A period of leave without pay shall not be included in a
participant's contributory service unless full contributions are
received during the currency of such lea\'e or unless, within
a period of twelve months from the participant's return to
work, f nil contributions in respect of such period, with interest
at the rate of 2)/, per cent per annum, are received by the
Fund.
7. Payment of full contributions in accordance with the
provisions of this article on liehalf of a participant who is or
has been on leave without pay may be made either (a) in full
by the participant, or (b) in full by the member organization,
or ( c) by the participant and the member organization in such
shares as they may determine.

8. For the purpose of this article, "full contributions" means
the sum of the contributions payable by a participant under
paragraph 1 of this article, and the contributions payable by a
member organization under article XVII in respect of his
participation.
REVISED ARTICLE XXVII

Administrative expenses
Expenses incurred in the administration of these regulations by the Joint Staff Pension Board shall be met by the
Fund.
2. Estimates of the administrative expenses referred to in
paragraph 1 shall be submitted annually to the General Assembly of the United Nations for approval.
3. Expenses incurred in the administration of these regulations by the staff pension committee of a member organization
shall be met out of the general budget of that organization.
1.

773 (VIIl). Admission of staff members of the
Interim Commission for the International
Trade Organization to membership in the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report 19 of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board regarding the participation
of the staff of the Interim Commission for the International Trade Organization in the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund,
Taking note of the comments 20 of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions in its ninth report to the eighth session of the
General Assembly,
1. Decides that, upon request of the competent authority, the Interim Commission for the International
Trade Organization may be admitted to participation
in the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund but
without representation with voting rights on the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Board;
2. Requests that, upon the receipt of such a request
on behalf of the Interim Commission for the International Trade Organization, the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Board prepare amendments to the Regulations of the lT nited Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
which would give effect to this decision and report to
the General Assembly at its ninth session.
458th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.
774 (VITI). Assumption by organs of the United
Nations of functions and responsibilities assigned to them under the terms of the Protocol for Limiting and Regulating the Cultivation of the Poppy Plant, the Production of,
International and Wholesale Trade in, and
Use of Opium, 1953, and of the financial burdens resulting therefrom
The General Assembly,
Having regard to resolution 505 I (XVI) adopted
by the Economic and Social Council on 28 July 1953,
Decides:
1. To approve the assumption by organs of the
United ~ations of the functions and responsibilities
assigned to them by the Protocol, 21 adopted by the
19

20

21

See document A/2422, part II.
See document A/2524.
See United Nations Publication, Sales No.: 1953.XI.6.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

39

United Nations Opium Conference (1953), for Limiting and Regulating the Cultivation of the Poppy
Plant, the Production of, International and Wholesale
Trade in, and Use of Opium;
2. To include this Protocol among the multilateral
treaties relating to the control of narcotic drugs for the
purpose of assessing, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 455 (V) of 16 November 1950,
non-member States which are Parties to such treaties
for their fair share of the expenses borne by the United
Nations in connexion with the international control of
narcotic drugs.
458th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.

778 (VIII). Appointments to fill vacancies in
the membership of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal

775 (VIII). System of allowances to members
of commissions, committees and other sub•
sidiary bodies of the General Assembly or
other organs of the United Nations

779 (VIII). Administrative and budgetary coordination between the United Nations and
the specialized agencies

The General Assembly,
Noting resolution 505 F III (XVI), adopted by
the Economic and Social Council on 28 July 1953,
concerning the question of the remuneration of members of the Permanent Central Opium Board and the
Drug Supervisory Body,
Noting also the intention of the Secretary-General
to undertake, 22 during 1954, a comprehensive study of
the system of allowances to members of commissions,
committees and other subsidiary bodies of the General
Assembly or other organs of the United Nations, and
to submit proposals to the General Assembly at its
ninth session,
Requests the Secretary-General to circulate his proposals, together with the comments of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, to all Members four weeks before the opening
of the ninth session of the General Assembly.
458th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.

The General Assembly
l. Appoints the following persons as members of
the United Nations Administrative Tribunal:
The Right Honourable Lord Crook;
Mr. Jacob Mark Lashly;
2. Declares the Right Honourable Lord Crook and
Mr. Jacob Mark Lashly to be appointed for a threeyear term to commence on 1 January 1954.
471st plenary meeting,
9 December 1953.

The General Assembly
l. Takes note of the report 23 of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions dealing with the administrative budgets of the
specialized agencies for 1954 ;
2. Invites the attention of the specialized agencies
to the recommendations and suggestions made in the
Advisory Committee's report.
471st plenary meeting,
9 December 1953.
780 (VIII).

Headquarters of the United Nations

The General Assembly
Takes note of the report 24 of the Secretary-General on the Headquarters of the United Nations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its ninth session a final report on
the construction of the Headquarters.
471st plenary meeting,
9 December 1953.
1.

776 (VIII). Appointment to fill a vacancy in the
membership of the Board of Auditors

781 (VIII). Staff Regulations of the United
Nations: question of a probationary period

The General Assembly
Appoints the Auditor-General ( or officer holding
equivalent title) of Colombia as a member of the Board
of Auditors for a three-year term to commence on 1
July 1954.
471st plenary meeting,
9 December 1953.

The General Assembly
Adopts as an amendment to the Staff Regulations of
the United Nations the text annexed to the present
resolution. This amendment shall become effective from
1 January 1954.
471st plenary meeting,
9 December 1953.

777 (VIII). Confirmation of the appointment
made by the Secretary-General to the membership of the Investments Committee

ANNEX

The General Assembly
Confirms the reappointment by the Secretary-General of Mr. Jacques Rueff as a member of the Investments Committee for a three-year term to commence
on 1 January 1954.
471st plenary meeting,
9 December 1953.
2 2 See

d-:>cument A/2528.

Staff regulation 4.5 (additional paragraph to become
sub-paragraph ( b))
(b) The Secretary-General shall prescribe which staff members are eligible for permanent appointments. The probationary
period for granting or confirming a permanent appointment
shall normally not exceed two years, provided that in individual
cases the Secretary-General may extend the probationary
period for not more than one additional year.
2a See document A/2582.
24 See document A/2544.
