S/2008/782

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 December 2008
Original: English

Report of the Security Council mission to Afghanistan,
21 to 28 November 2008
I. Summary
1.
In a letter dated 21 July 2008, the President of the Security Council informed
the Secretary-General of the Council’s intention to send a mission to Afghanistan in
November 2008. The terms of reference were subsequently approved on 31 October
2008 and distributed to Members of the Security Council (see annex I to the present
report). The mission was led by Giulio Terzi di Sant’Agata (Italy). The other
members of the mission were Olivier Belle (Belgium), Paul Robert Tiendrébéogo
(Burkina Faso), Liu Zhenmin (China), Saúl Weisleder (Costa Rica), Toma Galli
(Croatia), Jean-Pierre Lacroix (France), R.M. Marty M. Natalegawa (Indonesia),
Ahmed Gebreel (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Alfredo Suescum (Panama), Konstantin
Dolgov (Russian Federation), Dumisani Kumalo (South Africa), John Sawers
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland), Zalmay Khalilzad (United
States of America) and Bui The Giang (Viet Nam).
2.
The mission left New York in two groups on 21 and 22 November and returned
on 28 November. The mission met with the President of Afghanistan, Hâmid Karzai,
and a number of his ministers; the Speakers of the upper and lower houses of
parliament, Sibghatullah Mojadeddi and Younus Qanooni, respectively; the
chairmen of parliamentary commissions and other members of parliament; the
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission and the Independent Election
Commission; the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) and its Senior Civilian Representative in Kabul and representatives of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF); members of the diplomatic
community, including the European Union troika and the head of the European
Union police mission; civil society organizations; national and international
non-governmental organizations; and senior staff of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the United Nations country team. The
mission also visited Herat, where it met with officials of the UNAMA regional
office, the provincial Governor and other Afghan officials, and the provincial
reconstruction team (see annex II for schedule of meetings). This was the Security
Council’s third visit to Afghanistan since 2002, missions having previously visited
in November 2003 and November 2006.
3.
The mission was grateful for the frankness of all of its interlocutors. It was
also grateful for the close coordination between the Secretariat and UNAMA in

08-64544 (E) 261208

*0864544*

S/2008/782

preparation for the visit, the flawless organization by UNAMA and the highly
professional logistical and security support provided by ISAF. The mission also
expresses its gratitude to the United Nations Department of Safety and Security, as
well as the Government of Afghanistan, for their effective efforts to safeguard the
mission while it was in Afghanistan.

II. Key issues
Overall security situation
4.
The Security Council has repeatedly expressed its serious concern about the
security situation in Afghanistan, in particular the increase in violent and terrorist
activities by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremist groups. The mission noted
three prominent features of the security situation described by the United Nations
Department of Safety and Security. The first is the enduring split between northern
and southern Afghanistan in terms of volatility and risk. The Department assessed
the western, northern, north-eastern and central highlands regions as calm (with the
western region showing some signs of deterioration), while describing the southern,
south-eastern and eastern regions as volatile. The central region, where Kabul is
located, was described as unstable. Both the Department of Safety and Security and
ISAF described the situation as one of increasing instability in some pockets in the
northern part of the country where Pashtuns predominate, as well as of deteriorating
security in the provinces of Logar and Wardak, adjacent to Kabul.
5.
The second feature is the striking year-on-year increase in the numbers of
security incidents since 2003. The Department of Safety and Security counts as
incidents armed clashes, abductions, improvised explosive devices and suicide
attacks. In 2003, it counted 508 incidents, compared with 6,792 as at the end of
October 2008. The monthly figures for security incidents since 2005, when the
Department considers the insurgency to have begun, were 428 for 2006, 573 for
2007 and 740 for the first 10 months of 2008. The Department estimates that,
contrary to the situation in previous years, when a decrease in the number of
incidents per month was observed in the fourth quarter as a result of weather
conditions, the tempo of the increase will not diminish noticeably during the winter,
owing to an influx of foreign fighters, the ongoing voter registration process, which
provides a vulnerable and attractive target of opportunity for anti-Government
elements, and the fact that all parties intend to sustain their activities during the
winter.
6.
The third feature of interest is the increase in the number of incidents targeting
the greater humanitarian and development community. These take the form of
attacks on convoys and aid facilities, as well as the intimidation, abduction and
killing of aid workers. The Department of Safety and Security considers that,
increasingly, the United Nations is a target.
7.
In the effort to understand what has driven the increase in violence over the
past several years, four main factors were repeatedly identified by various
interlocutors. The factors were (a) the influx of militants recruited from outside
Afghanistan (UNAMA estimated that 20 per cent of insurgents were from outside
the country, while the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Dâdfar Spantâ, estimated that
the actual percentage was higher; (b) insufficient — albeit improving — integration
and coordination of military, political, governance and development efforts, all of

2

08-64544

S/2008/782

which are necessary for stability; (c) lack of widespread reconstruction and
employment opportunities, combined with a large number of unemployed young
men; and (d) frustration with the tactics of the international forces, including
civilian casualties caused by combat operations of international forces. The Minister
for Foreign Affairs told the mission that it was important to understand that the
insurgency was not a homogenous movement. There were certainly political
motivations rooted in the fundamentalist attitudes of the Taliban, but the latter had
been joined by a conglomeration of dissatisfied tribal groups, as well as criminal
and drug gangs.
8.
Representatives from ISAF concurred with the United Nations analysis of
worsening trends in terms of the number of incidents, the sophistication of insurgent
tactics and the increase in the number of civilians killed. On the other hand, ISAF
stated that, despite public perceptions, security in Kabul was actually improving,
and that the main problem was criminality, rather than insurgency. Another positive
development was the increased capacity of the Afghan National Army, with ISAFonly operations now being an exception.
9.
The Government of Afghanistan (in particular the President and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs), UNAMA and ISAF all stressed the great improvement in
relations between Afghanistan and Pakistan following the election of the President
of Pakistan, Asif Ali Zardari, earlier in 2008. The improved relationship was centred
on a realization that the two Governments face a common threat.
International Security Assistance Force, the Afghan National Army and
civil-military coordination
10. The Secretary-General of NATO recalled that ISAF operated under a Security
Council mandate. He emphasized the central role of the United Nations in
operationalizing the comprehensive approach to stabilization. The need to improve
coordination between civilian and military operations in Afghanistan was raised by
both the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Kai Eide,
and NATO representatives. The Special Representative insisted that the lack of
capacity on the part of the international community or the Afghan National Security
Forces to “hold” areas that were “cleared” made it difficult to expect
non-governmental organizations or the United Nations to provide assistance in the
aftermath of counter-insurgency operations. The briefing by ISAF supported that
analysis, noting that, for the first time, its ongoing Operation Tolo, focusing on
16 districts, was designed to hold areas after they had been cleared. Success would
depend on the deployment of further international forces. ISAF said that it was fully
aware of its mandate to support UNAMA and consulted closely with it. Another area
of progress mentioned both by the Special Representative and NATO was the
adoption of civil-military guidelines for the provision of humanitarian assistance by
ISAF.
11. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General agreed that civil-military
coordination had improved, but noted that the military often underestimated the
in-depth understanding that UNAMA had of Afghan society, which was largely a
result of the presence of Afghan staff in the mission. That understanding was,
however, undermined by the frequent rotation of ISAF staff and troops. The
intelligence gathered by international military forces needed to be complemented by
a knowledge of Afghan society, which was particularly important in understanding

08-64544

3

S/2008/782

the frustrations that the Afghan people experienced as a result of international
military tactics, exacerbated by the lack of access to international military forces to
address their concerns.
12. The ongoing occurrence of civilian casualties caused by international military
forces has become a major political issue in Afghanistan. President Karzai stressed
that the problem involved not only civilian casualties, but a set of aggravating
tactics, such as house searches and the arrest of Afghans. He reiterated his overall
appreciation for the role of the international forces in fighting terrorism and the
insurgency. At the same time, he cautioned that, while there was “immense
legitimacy in the minds of the Afghan people [for] the presence of the international
community in Afghanistan”, it may not last forever. Among the changes required
were the building of the army and the police and an end to aerial bombardments and
the forced entry into Afghan homes.
13. ISAF was clearly focused on the question of civilian casualties and had issued
two new tactical directives to reduce the probability of civilian casualties. It
stressed, however, that the insurgency was responsible for the vast majority of
civilian casualties in Afghanistan, in particular through suicide bombings and
improvised explosive devices (almost 3,000 of such devices had been planted by the
insurgency, half of which had been discovered and dismantled by ISAF). Improvised
explosive devices and other terrorist attacks by the insurgents had killed
925 civilians to date in 2008, compared with 87 deaths caused by combat operations
between ISAF and anti-Government elements and 131 by combat operations
between Operation Enduring Freedom and terrorist forces. ISAF expressed
frustration that those facts were scarcely reported in the international press and that
the Government of Afghanistan frequently condemned civilian casualties caused
accidentally during counter-terrorism operations but ignored the vast majority
caused deliberately by the insurgency, which systematically targets civilians as part
of its strategy.
14. A positive development was the increased capacity of the Afghan National
Army. ISAF representatives reported that ISAF-only operations were now an
exception; the vast majority of operations were joint operations and many were
Afghan-led. Other interlocutors informed the mission that up to 60 per cent of
operations were Afghan-led. The strength of the army lay in its extremely capable
soldiers; its weakness lay in its institutional capacity, an area where ISAF believed it
could make a larger contribution. The army’s current strength is approximately
80,000. The Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board in October 2008 approved an
increased strength of 134,000, to be achieved by 2012. President Karzai urged that
that timetable for expansion be moved forward to 2010.
15. The provincial reconstruction teams were a key vehicle for civil-military
coordination. During its visit to Herat, the mission noted that the activities of the
teams had been well received by provincial leaders there. The Governor and
members of the Provincial Council underlined the importance of the quick-impact
assistance projects implemented by the Herat provincial reconstruction team. At the
same time, some concerns were expressed about the overall quantity of international
assistance. The mission was not able to gain a comprehensive view of the provincial
reconstruction teams, owing to the fact that each differs according to its national
sponsor and its location within Afghanistan. Nonetheless, a general concern was

4

08-64544

S/2008/782

voiced by Afghan civil society and international non-governmental organizations
that the teams were contributing to the “securitization of development”.
Governance
16. Although, as described to the mission, the overriding objective of the
insurgency is to undermine the Government’s capacity and legitimacy, it is also
evident that improved governance is indispensable to achieving stability in
Afghanistan.
17. The mission identified several factors that were impeding good governance.
President Karzai emphasized the lack of administrative capacity resulting from
decades of war, as well as the lack of a tradition of government authority.
18. It was apparent to the mission, that the most immediate impediment to
governance, raised by both governmental and non-governmental interlocutors, was
governmental corruption at both the national and subnational levels. The Governor
of Herat informed the mission that he had implemented a merit-based system to
select government officials. Nonetheless, civil society actors there complained that
patronage still affected most appointments.
19. Yasin Osmani, Director of the High Office for Oversight, which was
established three months ago with a mandate to address the issue of corruption,
briefed the mission on the activities of his Office. He asserted that prosecutorial
investigation was a function of the Office of the Attorney General and that the High
Office would not create constitutional confusion in that regard. The Office would,
however, monitor the implementation of anti-corruption plans in each ministry, as
well as receive complaints about corruption from the population at large and manage
the processing of such complaints. President Karzai assured the mission of his
determination to attack corruption, pointing to the recent dismissal of Cabinet
ministers for corruption, as well as to the prosecution of public officials.
20. A second major problem was the lack of effective governance at the local
level. The mission was informed that there were significant gaps between the central
Government and the provincial Governors, particularly regarding the delivery of
funding. Subnational administrative structures were underresourced and lacked the
capacity to effectively administer justice, provide security and deliver services. That
governance gap had created a vacuum that had been filled by ad hoc structures, such
as the provincial reconstruction teams, to provide services. President Karzai
emphasized the long-term dangers posed by such “parallel structures”.
21. The Government’s response to the weakness of local-level administration has
been led by the Independent Directorate of Local Governance, created in August
2007. The head of the Directorate, Jilani Popal, informed the mission of two main
initiatives created to address that fundamental issue. The first was the reform of the
policy development process, which will give significantly more responsibility to
subnational governmental units in the development of policies and the
implementation of programmes. The second and more immediate initiative was the
Afghan Social Outreach Programme, which will, through the creation of district
shuras, empower local communities to engage with development-related issues,
build social capital, channel the grievances of the people and assume greater
responsibility for local-level security, as exemplified by the Focused District
Development programme (see para. 24 below). He stressed that that did not mean

08-64544

5

S/2008/782

arming local militias to provide community-level security. The launch of the
programme in four or five provinces in the southern part of the country is imminent.
Afghan National Police
22. According to most of the mission’s interlocutors, the Afghan National Police is
seen as a major element to be reformed within the overall security and rule-of-law
structure. A number of interlocutors stated that the police force continues to be
affected by corruption, poor training and lack of equipment, although much more
attention has been paid recently by the international community to training and
equipping the police, as well as improving the management of the payroll. The
police have paid a high price for their perceived weakness, as they have become
frequent targets of the insurgency. According to the Minister of the Interior,
920 members of the Afghan National Police had been killed in 2008.
23. President Karzai informed the mission that he had appointed a new Minister of
the Interior in order to bring about needed reform of the Afghan National Police.
According to the new Minister, Hanif Atmar, community leadership and
intelligence-led policing was central to the reform programme. The Minister
identified four specific ways in which the international community could assist with
police reform: (a) increasing the number of mentors and trainers; (b) providing force
protection, through provincial reconstruction teams, for international trainers as they
deploy outside Kabul; (c) funding of the police through the Law and Order Trust
Fund for Afghanistan; and (d) acting with greater speed with regard to those issues.
Mr. Atmar said that the Government fully understood that it needed to send a signal
to change public perception of the police force and improve its accountability. He
stressed in particular his expectation of an increased contribution by the European
Union police mission.
24. The mission also met with the head of the European Union police mission,
among other key representatives of the European Union. He confirmed that the
Government was very much engaged in police reform and aware of the need to
generate visible changes. The police mission was committed to reaching its full
complement of 269 police trainers and 121 civilian experts (the current deployment
level is 121 trainers and 56 civilians). In the meantime, it was working with the
Minister of the Interior to “Afghanize” training. The project was coordinated with
the Focused District Development project, which was implemented by the
Combined Security Transition Command-Afghanistan, and was reforming districtlevel policing by removing district police units, training the police outside their
district and providing them with mentors when they returned.
National reconciliation
25. The perceived inability of Afghan and international forces to defeat the
insurgency has led to calls for talks with insurgent groups. President Karzai outlined
his vision of a national reconciliation process, while noting that he understood some
concerns voiced by international partners. Given the inability to conclusively defeat
the insurgency over the past seven years, the President suggested that the
international community provide a tentative timeline to finally bring about stability
and end violence in Afghanistan. If such a horizon could not be foreseen, then the
people would be encouraged to seek stabilization through further reconciliation
efforts. He reiterated his readiness to engage in talks with those who are ready to

6

08-64544

S/2008/782

renounce violence and accept the Afghan Constitution. The Special Representative
of the Secretary-General reiterated his view that the reconciliation process needed to
be led by Afghans, be based on the Constitution and be conducted from a position of
strength. ISAF concurred with the Special Representative that it was important to
conduct reconciliation activities from a position of strength.
26. Some members of the Afghan human rights community, while agreeing about
the importance of reconciliation at the grass-roots level, warned that many Afghans
feared that political reconciliation efforts were a “mask” for an alliance between the
Government and the more fundamentalist forces in Afghanistan. They feared that
such an alliance could undermine the gains in human rights achieved since 2002.
Elections
27. The upcoming elections, scheduled for 2009, were absorbing significant
political energy in Afghanistan; their exact date has become an issue of contention.
In April 2008, the Independent Election Commission had announced the consensus
decision, reached following consultations with the President, the Speakers of the
upper and lower houses of parliament and other key Afghan stakeholders, to hold
presidential and provincial council elections in the fall of 2009 and National
Assembly and district council elections in the late summer/fall of 2010. The Speaker
of the Wolesi Jirga (lower house), Younus Qanooni, was of the view that the
Constitution specified that the election had to be held within two months prior to the
constitutional expiration of the President’s term of office, on 21 May. Others noted
ambiguities in the Constitution. President Karzai told the mission that he had always
been against extending his term beyond its legal limit, but noted that his term,
specified in the Constitution as five years, had begun in November 2004, not May
2004, owing to delays in the first post-conflict election. He said that he would
accept any date set by the Commission, which was the only body legally competent
to take the decision.
28. The mission registered more practical concerns about the difficulty of holding
elections in the spring. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
example, said that the ongoing registration process, while proceeding well, would
not take place in the more insecure areas until early 2009. It was therefore not
certain that the revised voter register would be ready in time for a spring election.
Two other factors made an early election unrealistic: the need to improve security in
the southern part of the country, which in part depended on the deployment of
additional international forces, and the need to secure international donor funding
for the election.
29. Azizullah Lodin, Chairman of the Independent Election Commission, and
some members of his staff, including Daoud Najafi, the Chief Electoral Officer and
head of the Commission secretariat, informed the mission that a May election would
disenfranchise those voters who lived in areas that were inaccessible due to poor
weather conditions. The Commission also cited article 55 of the Electoral Law,
which authorizes the Commission to delay or postpone elections if there are
prevailing factors that might call into question their legitimacy. He said that he was
involved in ongoing consultations with the President, the National Assembly and
other political leaders with a view to finding a solution. He said that the
Commission would make a decision in the coming week or so, taking into account

08-64544

7

S/2008/782

both the provisions of the Afghan Constitution and the requirement to ensure free
and fair elections throughout the country.
Regional cooperation
30. The improvement in the relationship of Afghanistan with its neighbours,
especially Pakistan, as already noted, was among the positive developments noted
during the mission. President Karzai underlined that he had taken great efforts to
ensure that neighbouring countries did not see the presence of international troops in
Afghanistan as a threat to them. He stressed, as did the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
the constructive relationship with the Islamic Republic of Iran, as well as with India
and Pakistan. He also stressed that those relations were part of a regional approach
and that they were centred on Afghanistan as an economic bridge, not a political
rival to any country in the region. The mission was informed of initiatives fostering
regional cooperation, such as the International Conference on Return and
Reintegration, held in Kabul on 19 November under the co-chairmanship of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.
Aid coordination, effectiveness and economic development
31. The mission was informed that perceived inefficiencies in the delivery of
international assistance had undermined the confidence of the Afghan population in
its Government and in the international community. The Declaration of the Paris
Conference of 12 June 2008 included a number of provisions to reduce those
inefficiencies.
32. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General informed the mission of
efforts that he had made to increase the coordination capacity of UNAMA,
including the appointment of a special adviser on aid effectiveness. Those efforts
remained limited by the lack of a comprehensive picture of the aid being provided to
Afghanistan, as well as by the continued unwillingness of some donors to fully back
the existing coordination mechanisms, especially the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board. The Government of Afghanistan had taken a number of steps to
enhance its participation in the Board, but they had not always been reciprocated by
Board members. The Special Representative was also concerned about the
concentration of aid in conflict areas, which was to the detriment of more stable
regions where the returns on aid could be much higher. President Karzai strongly
supported the Special Representative coordination mandate and pledged that his
Government would provide anything that the Special Representative sought.
33. The Special Representative said that progress in implementing the Afghanistan
National Development Strategy was accelerating, but that the costing of projects
under the Strategy took time, especially given the weak bureaucracy of the Afghan
Government. The Minister of Finance, Anwar Ul-Haq Ahady, noted the ongoing
reluctance of donors to work through Afghan institutions, which was essential if the
Strategy was to be effective.
34. The United Nations country team highlighted its efforts to address
development challenges in light of the priorities identified at Paris. One of those
priorities was agriculture. According to the representative of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Afghanistan had the land,
soil and water resources to greatly improve its agricultural output. With a restoration

8

08-64544

S/2008/782

and expansion of the irrigation network and increased provision of improved seeds,
food yields in Afghanistan could rise by a third to 3.5 tons per hectare quite rapidly,
and eventually to as much as 8 tons.
35. Referring to the responsibility of Afghanistan for its own development, the
Minister of Finance said that Government revenues had risen from 3.2 per cent of
Gross Domestic Product a few years ago to 7 per cent currently, and that the goal
was to increase that figure to 10 per cent over the next few years, amounting to
$900 million. In 2002, total Government revenues were $113 million. Tariffs were
responsible for 42 per cent of all revenues, but a number of tax reforms were
expected to reduce the Government’s reliance on customs taxes. The export sector
was still relatively small, accounting for about $500 million to $600 million, mostly
in carpets and fruit. A major problem was that the country lacked the capacity to add
value to its exports — for example, it lacked industrial machinery to dry fruit for
export, which would allow it to be sent to more distant markets where it would fetch
higher prices. Foreign exchange reserves were approximately $3.4 billion, compared
with $180 million in 2002.
Humanitarian situation
36. UNAMA described a deteriorating humanitarian situation in Afghanistan,
resulting from a combination of natural disasters, lack of Government capacity to
prepare and respond, and insecurity. Almost 40 per cent of Afghanistan is either
permanently or temporarily inaccessible to governmental and non-governmental aid.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs will, in 2009, assume
responsibility for humanitarian coordination, and is establishing offices in five field
locations, in addition to the head office in Kabul.
37. The humanitarian situation has been aggravated by the deficit in food
production in 2008. The percentage of the population unable to meet its minimum
food requirements has risen by 5 per cent since 2005, to 35 per cent. As reported by
the representative of FAO, some 40,000 Afghans die every year as a result of hunger
and poverty, 25 times more than die as a result of violence. Since September 2007,
wheat prices have jumped by 150 per cent. That increase, combined with a 20 to
30 per cent drop in agricultural production due to drought, has led the World Food
Programme (WFP) to assess 8.8 million Afghans as being vulnerable to food
shortages. WFP plans to bring 300,000 tons of food to Afghanistan in 2009.
President Karzai, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and civil
society representatives referred to the importance of funding the recent food appeal
for Afghanistan, which had a subscription rate of less than 50 per cent.
38. In a briefing by the Agency Coordinating Body for Afghan Relief, the mission
was informed of the concerns of non-governmental organizations regarding
humanitarian access, particularly given the risks for workers (30 have been killed in
2008 to date, of whom 25 were Afghan). The Agency Coordinating Body welcomed
the opening of an office of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
in Afghanistan, but noted that resources had not followed the call for greater United
Nations coordination. Afghan non-governmental organizations indicated that more
attention should be dedicated by international non-governmental organizations to
building the capacities of their local partners.

08-64544

9

S/2008/782

Counter-narcotics
39. One of the positive trends of which the mission was informed was a 19 per
cent reduction in the area of poppy cultivated, a 6 per cent reduction in the opium
yield and an increase to 18 in the number of poppy-free provinces. At the same time,
the continued cultivation and production of narcotic drugs in Afghanistan remained
the subject of serious concern. The Minister of Counter-Narcotics, Khodaidad
Khodaidad, said that the approach to counter-narcotics had grown more
sophisticated and that he expected a reduction of 20 to 30 per cent in the area
cultivated in 2009. Efforts to prevent poppy planting had been conducted earlier and
had been more successful; cooperation with neighbours, in terms of both conducting
border checks and sharing intelligence, had improved. Further efforts needed to be
made, however, to attack the centres of refining and trafficking, as well as the
movement of precursors into Afghanistan from abroad. The mission was particularly
interested to learn about the expanded role of ISAF in combating illegal narcotics,
including by the targeting of narcotics markets and refining sites. The mission was
informed by ISAF that, as a follow-up to the summit held in Bucharest in 2008,
ministers of defence of the countries members of NATO had decided that
contributing countries could attack, at their discretion and upon request by the
Afghan authorities, illegal narcotics activities, as long as there was a clear link
between those activities and the insurgency.
Human rights and the rule of law
40. The mission was given a mixed picture of the human rights situation in
Afghanistan and informed that a number of improvements made since 2002 were
under threat. Some non-governmental organizations suggested that Afghan
politicians were resorting to measures that they considered to be popular but that
violated human rights. Overall, members of the Afghan human rights community
expressed the view that there was a narrowing of political space in the run-up to the
elections and that gains in freedom of expression, in particular, were under threat.
41. The threat to freedom of expression was particularly worrying given the
upcoming elections. According to human rights defenders, threats came not only
from the Government, which was able to put pressure on State media employees and
arrest journalists, but also from the private sector. It was also underlined that
international military forces did not allow reporters to travel to conflict areas. The
fundamental problem was that the Government did not respect its own media law
and the international community remained insufficiently concerned about defending
freedom of expression.
42. Another area of concern were the rights of women. On the one hand, the
Marriage Registration Act, which had been in force since March of 2008, should
help to prevent forced marriages, multiple marriages and the use of marriage as a
means of resolving disputes between communities. On the other hand, women
remained extremely vulnerable and were disproportionately affected by economic
and humanitarian crises. While there had been some improvements in maternal
health, the life expectancy of women was only 43 years. The role of women in
political life had actually worsened since 2004, when there had been at least four
female Cabinet ministers. Women who did accept public positions were intimidated
and some had been killed. The mission was also informed of the need to intensify

10

08-64544

S/2008/782

efforts to implement Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security.
43. A major human rights issue was the question of impunity and transitional
justice. In 2005, the Government had approved an action plan for transitional
justice. Implementation of the plan had been overshadowed, however, by the debate
in parliament over the amnesty law, whose status remained unclear.
44. Similarly, respect for human rights fundamentally depended on an effective
judiciary and a legal framework. The judiciary in Afghanistan was not trusted, in
large part because it was perceived to be corrupt or inefficient. According to the
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission, recent surveys suggested that only
25 per cent of Afghans trusted their judiciary. In response, President Karzai noted
that there had never been a fully trusted judiciary in Afghanistan, and establishing
one would take several decades. In the meantime, people would inevitably use
traditional mechanisms, which were both faster and more recognizable to them.

III. Observations
Overall situation
45. The mission noted important elements of progress, which give rise to a sense
of cautious optimism for the future: first, the marked improvement in the relations
with Pakistan; secondly, the recent Cabinet appointments, which are expected to
bring about increased energy and efficiency on the part of the Government, for
example, in the fight against corruption; thirdly, the significant reduction in the area
of opium cultivation (19 per cent), as reported by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime; fourthly, the commitment to improve subnational governance,
including through the launch of the Afghanistan Social Outreach Programme, which
aims to bridge the gap between Government authorities and local communities; and
fifthly, the registration of nearly 2 million Afghans without major security incident
in the first two phases of the voter registration project. Those gains must be built
upon, especially in the coming year.
Security situation
46. Afghanistan is faced with an increasingly complex security situation, but not,
as yet, a security crisis. The mission considered it to be important to differentiate the
politically driven insurgency from criminality, which is partly responsible for the
insecurity, while noting that both problems must be addressed and that it is not easy
to draw a clear line between those two elements in the case of Afghanistan. The
mission also noted that the insurgency is reportedly concentrated in specific regions
and that it does not offer any alternative model of government, even though it gives
the impression that it is omnipresent. In addressing those problems, it is important
to avoid any inclination towards disillusion, frustration, or, even worse, mutual
recrimination between Afghanistan and its friends. Afghans and the international
community must redouble their joint efforts in a spirit of partnership. The
empowerment of the Afghan security forces is essential if sustainable progress is to
be ensured, and the international community is committed to responding to Afghan
requests to accelerate progress in that regard. Civil-military coordination is
gradually improving and should be sustained further.

08-64544

11

S/2008/782

Governance and the fight against corruption
47. There is a clear understanding of the need to make robust progress in
uprooting corruption and improving governance at all levels, as recognized by many
Afghan interlocutors. The enhancement of the Afghan judiciary is a crucial
component of that process. There is also a strong expectation of greater
transparency and improved coordination of efforts on the part of the international
community, in accordance with the Paris Declaration. It was stressed that every
party to the Paris Conference should do its utmost to implement the commitments
made there as expeditiously as possible. The mission noted and appreciated the
Government’s strong support for the coordination role of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Kai Eide, as well as the enhanced capacity of UNAMA to
carry it out.
Elections
48. The mission was presented with a wide range of opinions on the constitutional
debate over when elections were required in 2009. It was also informed of the
significant financial, security and logistical challenges, which will also have an
effect on when elections can be held. The overall success of the two first phases of
voter registration is a positive sign, but it will be important to monitor closely voter
registration as it moves into more insecure areas in the final phases. The mission
considers that free and fair elections are necessary if the legitimacy of the Afghan
authorities is to be renewed and the greater confidence of the people gained. The
Independent Election Commission appeared fully committed to achieving that goal.
President Karzai stressed the importance of elections taking place in all parts of the
country.
National reconciliation
49. The mission noted the calls among Afghan political leaders and civil society
representatives for dialogue with those elements in opposition to the Government
who were ready to renounce violence and accept the Afghan Constitution. The
mission recalled that the Security Council had encouraged the implementation of
Afghan-led reconciliation programmes within the framework of the Afghan
Constitution and with full respect for the implementation of measures introduced by
the Council in its resolution 1267 (1999) and other relevant resolutions of the
Council. A number of interlocutors, including the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, reaffirmed that any dialogue with anti-Government elements must be
conducted by the Afghan authorities from a position of strength, and that the
renunciation of violence and respect for the Afghan Constitution must constitute the
red lines of any negotiation. Negotiations were a complement to the fight against
terrorism, not an alternative, and their endorsement by the international community
would be sought at some point. The process must lead to democratization. While, as
noted, many Afghans called for discussions to end the violence, none of the
mission’s interlocutors said that they wanted to see the return to power of the
Taliban.
Civilian casualties
50. The Security Council has repeatedly expressed its concern for all civilian
casualties in Afghanistan. According to the most recent data shared with the mission

12

08-64544

S/2008/782

by ISAF, the large majority of such casualties are caused by the insurgents, who
often deliberately target civilians as part of their strategy. The mission was informed
of the closer attention that ISAF pays to avoiding civilian casualties, recent steps
taken to reduce casualties and provide redress when they do occur and efforts to
harmonize statistical data with those of the United Nations.
Regional cooperation
51. The significant improvement in the relationships of Afghanistan with its
neighbours was welcomed by the mission. The Security Council has consistently
supported a regional approach to bringing about security that is also supportive of
regional economic development. The mission also welcomed cooperation between
the Government of Afghanistan and its neighbours on specific issues that promote
improved border control, such as counter-narcotics and the return of refugees.
Afghan interlocutors welcomed planned initiatives to foster regional cooperation,
such as those being organized by France and by the incoming Italian presidency of
the Group of Eight.
Food security
52. The mission was informed of unprecedented measures being adopted to ensure
food security during the winter season. It noted concerns that funding was not in
place to provide food aid after March. The mission encourages donors to channel
their contributions through the Government of Afghanistan or WFP.
Civil society and human rights
53. The mission considered its meetings with representatives of civil society to be
extremely beneficial. Adequate time should be allocated for such meetings in future
missions. The mission was extensively briefed on the overall progress made on
human rights since 2001, as well as concerns about reversing trends with respect to
human rights in some areas, in particular freedom of expression, intimidation of
human rights defenders and impunity. The mission encouraged the Afghan
authorities to reinvigorate their efforts to uphold human rights, in particular those of
women and children, and fight against impunity. It reiterated its full support for the
courageous activities of the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission and
urged the Government to fully fund the budget of the Commission.
United Nations role
54. The mission welcomed the strong support from international actors for the
coordination role of UNAMA. The mission also noted full support for that role from
the Afghan authorities. President Karzai expressed complete satisfaction with the
cooperation with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. The mission
urged the States Members of the United Nations to provide UNAMA with the
necessary financial and human resources so that it could live up to its mandate.

08-64544

13

S/2008/782

Annex I
Terms of reference of the Security Council mission
to Afghanistan
1.
To reaffirm the Security Council’s continued support for the Government and
people of Afghanistan as they rebuild their country, strengthen the foundations of
sustainable peace and constitutional democracy and assume their rightful place in
the community of nations;
2.
To review the progress made by the Afghan Government, with the assistance
of the international community and in accordance with the Afghanistan Compact, in
addressing the interconnected challenges in the areas of security, governance, rule of
law and human rights, economic and social development, as well as on the crosscutting issue of counter-narcotics;
3.
To assess the status of implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolutions 1806 (2008) and 1833 (2008), as well as of
mutual pledges and commitments made by the participants to the International
Conference in Support of Afghanistan, held in Paris on 12 June 2008;
4.
To underline, in this context, the central and impartial role that the United
Nations continues to play in promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan by leading
the civilian efforts of the international community and to express strong support for
the ongoing efforts of the Secretary-General, his Special Representative for
Afghanistan and the women and men of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA);
5.
To review the implementation of the enhanced coordinating role assigned to
UNAMA and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General by Security
Council resolution 1806 (2008), taking into account the need for an integrated
approach and the principle of reinforcing Afghan ownership and leadership;
6.
To review efforts by the Afghan Authorities, with the assistance of the
international community, to address the threat to the security and stability of
Afghanistan posed by the Taliban, Al-Qaida, illegal armed groups, criminals and
those involved in the narcotics trade and in the diversion of chemical precursors;
7.
To review the humanitarian situation in the country, including the food
security situation, and the implications for security and stability;
8.
To assess the cooperation, coordination and mutual support between UNAMA
and the International Security Assistance Force, including on humanitarian and
human rights issues and in supporting the electoral process, taking due account of
their respective designated responsibilities;
9.
To reaffirm the crucial importance of advancing regional cooperation as an
effective means to promote governance, security and development in Afghanistan.

14

08-64544

S/2008/782

Annex II
Schedule of meetings of the Security Council mission
to Afghanistan
Monday, 24 November
0830

Arrival in Kabul from Islamabad

1400-1430

Mission organization meeting

1430-1700

Meeting with the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Kai Eide, and situational security briefing

1730-1830

Meeting with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Dâdfar Spantâ

1830-2030

Dinner hosted by the Minister for Foreign Affairs

Tuesday, 25 November
0800-0900

Meeting with Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission

0930-1030

Meeting with the Deputy Commander and
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)

1100-1230

Meeting with President Hâmid Karzai

1430-1630

Meeting with key Government officialsa

1630-1730

Meeting with the Chairman and staff of the Independent
Election Commission

1830-2030

Reception hosted by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General

staff

of

Wednesday, 26 November

a

08-64544

0730-0900

Travel from Kabul to Herat

0930-1030

Meeting with staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan and United Nations agencies

1050-1145

Meeting with the Governor of Herat and other provincial
officials

1200-1330

Lunch hosted by the Governor

1420-1450

Meeting with ISAF Regional Command/West and provincial
reconstruction team (Italy)

1500-1630

Travel from Herat to Kabul

The following ministers or high-level officials attended: Hedayat Amin Arsala (co-Chair of the
Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board), Omar Zakhilwal (Minister of Transport), Jilani Popal
(Director of Independent Directorate of Local Governance), Hanif Atmar (Minister of the
Interior), Anwar Ul-Haq Ahady (Minister of Finance), Khodaidad Khodaidad (Minister of
Counter-Narcotics), Jalil Shams (Minister of the Economy), Mohammad Ehsan Zia (Minister of
Rural Rehabilitation and Development), Yasin Osmani (Head, High Office for Oversight),
Mohammad Amin Farhang (Minister of Commerce and Industry), Amrullah Saleh (National
Directorate for Security) and Asif Rahimi (Minister of Agriculture).

15

S/2008/782

1830-1930

Meeting with European Union troika (Ambassadors of France
and the Czech Republic, European Union Special
Representative and the head of the European Commission
delegation in Kabul) and the Commander of the European
Union police mission

2000-2200

Dinner hosted by the Ambassador of Italy

Thursday, 27 November

16

0745-0840

Meeting with the United Nations country team

0900-1000

Meeting with the Secretary-General of NATO, Jaap de Hoop
Scheffer

1000-1200

Meeting with representatives of Afghan civil society

1200-1300

Meeting with the Speaker of the Meshrano Jirga, Sibghatullah
Mojadeddi

1315-1430

Official lunch hosted by the Speaker of the Wolesi Jirga,
Younus Qanooni, with members of parliament

1500-1545

Press conference

1700

Departure for Islamabad

08-64544
