UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL

’
_.-_....1--

RECORDS
JAN 2 2 19g3

THIRTY-NINTH

2524”

YEAR

MEETING:

30 MARCH-

1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2524/Rev.l)

... ... .... ... ... ... ... ... ... . ... 1

Adoption of the agenda.. . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*...............

. .. . 1

The situation between Iran and Iraq:
Report of the specialists appointed by the Secretary-General to investigate
allegations by the Islamic Republic of Iran concerning the use of chemical
weapons(S/16433).................................................

1

S/PV .2524

i

‘_

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2524th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 30 March
President:

Mr. Javier ARIAS

STELLA

(Peru).

the conflict which endangers international peace and
security in the region, have taken note of the report
of the specialists appointed by the Secretary-General
to investigate allegations by the Islamic Republic
of Iran concerning the use of chemical weapons
[S/16433].

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

“They note with particular concern the unanimous
conclusions of the specialists that chemical weapons
have been used. Furthermore,
they express their
grave concern about all reported violations in the
conflict of the rules of international
law and of
the principles and rules of international
conduct
accepted by the world community to prevent or alleviate the human suffering of warfare and affirm
strongly the conclusion of the Secretary-General that
these humanitarian concerns can only be fully satistied by putting an end to the tragic conflict that continues to deplete the precious human resources of
Iran and Iraq.

agenda (S/Agenda/2524/Rev.l)

of the agenda

The situation between Iran and Iraq:
Report of the specialists appointed by the Secretary-General to investigate allegations by the
Islamic Republic of Iran concerning the use of
chemical weapons (S/16433)
The meeting

was called to order at 12.45 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

“The members of the Council:

The agenda was adopted.

“-Strongly
condemn the use of chemical
ons reported by the mission of specialists;

The situation between Iran and Iraq:
Report of the specialists appointed by the Secretary-General to investigate allegations by the Islamic Repuhlit of Iran concerning the use of chemical weapons
(S/16433)

weap-

“-Reaffirm
the need to abide strictly by the provisions of the Protocol for the prohibition of the use in
war of asphyxiating, poisonous or other gases, and of
bacteriological methods of warfare, signed at Geneva
on 17 June 1925;’

1. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Spanish]:
Members of the Council have before them document
S/16433, which contains the text of the report of the
specialists appointed by the Secretary-General
to
investigate allegations by the Islamic Republic of Iran
concerning the use of chemical weapons.

“-Call
on the States concerned scrupulously to
adhere to the obligations flowing from their accession
to the Geneva Protocol of 1925;
“-Condemn
all violations of international humanitarian law and urge both parties to observe the generally recognized principles and rules of international
humanitarian law which are applicable to armed conflicts and their obligations under international conventions designed to prevent or alleviate the human
suffering of warfare;

2. I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to the following documents: S/16438, containing a letter dated 27 March 1984 from the representative of Iraq to the Secretary-General;
and S/16446 and
S/16447, each containing a letter dated 27 March 1984
from the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran
to the Secretary-General.
3. On behalf of the members of the Council,
authorized to make the following declaration:

1984, at 12.40 p.m.

“-Recall
relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, renew urgently their calls for the strict
observance of a cease-fire and for a peaceful solution
of the conflict and call upon all Governments concerned to co-operate fully with the Council in its efforts
to bring about conditions leading to a peaceful settlement of the conflict in conformity with the principles of justice and international law;

1 am

“The members of the Security Council, having
considered again the question entitled ‘The situation
between Iran and Iraq’, and greatly concerned about
1

“-Appreciate
the mediation efforts of the Secretary-General and request him to continue his efforts
with the parties concerned, with a view to achieving
a comprehensive, just and honourable settlement acceptable to both sides; and

4. The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Council will remain seized of the matter.
The meeting

NOTE

“-Decide
to keep the situation between Iran and
Iraq under close review.”

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

rose at 12.55 p.m.

’ League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV (1929). No. 2138.

00300

90-61313-January

1993-2.050
