A /72/PV.24

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

24th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 27 September 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 107
Crime prevention and criminal justice
High-level meeting of the General Assembly on
the appraisal of the United Nations Global Plan
of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons
Draft resolution (A/72/L.1)
The President: This meeting is held in accordance
with resolutions 70/179, of 17 December 2015, and
71/287, of 4 May 2017.
I warmly welcome everyone to this high-level
meeting, which will appraise the progress achieved
in the implementation of the Global Plan of Action
to Combat Trafficking in Persons, in order to assess
achievements, gaps and challenges, including in the
implementation of the relevant legal instruments.
The General Assembly has before it a draft
resolution issued as document A/72/L.1, entitled
“Political declaration on the implementation of the
United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons”.
Before proceeding further, I would like to inform
members that action on the draft political declaration
will be taken following the statement by the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime.

Statement by the President
The President: I would like to welcome and thank
everyone for their presence and engagement.
This weekend I was deeply moved by my
conversation with Ms. Shireen Ibrahim, a Yazidi
woman and advocate who survived human trafficking
at the hands of terrorists. Her dignity, human rights and
person were violated. Her story shows the horrors and
complexity of this scourge. But most important, it is a
sombre reminder that we are talking about people here.
We are not holding this meeting to cross it off our
checklist. We are here to track the progress that we have
made so far and to see how much further we have to go
in order to eliminate human trafficking forever. Today
we recommit to the fight against all forms of human
trafficking. We pledge, once again, our respect for
the human rights and dignity of our people. The draft
declaration to be adopted today shows our political
will to end human trafficking. But that will must be
manifested in actions. Only then will it be meaningful
for the people affected. In that regard, I would like to
highlight three main points.
First, a focus on people in this context means an
approach centred on victims and survivors. It also
means upholding the human rights and dignity of people
like Shireen Ibrahim, Grizelda Grootboom and many
others. I pause to pay special tribute to the victims and
survivors, some of whom are with us here today. Their
presence reminds us of the reason that we are here — so
that people can live freely and peacefully and free from
the threat of human trafficking. For those victims and

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-30134 (E)

*1730134*

A/72/PV.24

survivors who do not have a platform, we have a duty to
be their voice. That is why the United Nations is here.
Secondly, we must strengthen our prevention
efforts. Today’s global peace and security challenges
amplify the risk of human trafficking. We need to
address the root causes. Shireen Ibrahim’s story
underscores what we already know: conflict prevention
helps to prevent human trafficking. The chasm between
peace and war has many perils, and human trafficking is
one of them. Conflicts and humanitarian disasters force
millions to flee their homes. With human trafficking
and migration following similar geographical patterns,
some get caught at the ever-shifting intersection of the
two. Furthermore, we are confronted by terrorists and
criminals who have no regard for human suffering.
They thrive on the instability created by conflicts and
humanitarian crises. A lack of strong institutions and
the absence of the rule of law allow human trafficking
to continue with impunity. We also know that those
groups derive financing from this criminal enterprise.
Those are but a few aspects of human trafficking.
The full picture is complex and many-sided, but what is
common across the whole spectrum is that prevention is
better than the cure. Poverty, human rights violations,
food insecurity and other vulnerabilities fuel the flames
of human trafficking. The financial benefits provide the
oxygen. We must starve traffickers of benefits while
addressing both the demand and supply side of the
problem. For that, we need all hands on deck for what we
in the United Nations call a multi-stakeholder approach.
Thirdly, those most at risk among us require
our special attention. Women, children, internally
displaced persons and refugees are among the most
vulnerable to human trafficking. Approximately 79 per
cent of all detected victims are women and children.
Human trafficking’s focus on women and children
threatens to unravel the fabric of our society. It rolls
back the progress that we have made. Therefore, we
must put the spotlight on those who are most vulnerable
to trafficking.
Lastly and importantly, we have many plans and
instruments at hand. We must take further concerted
action to achieve a world free of human trafficking.
Our plans include, first, the Global Plan of Action;
secondly, the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children; the Sustainable
2/31

27/09/2017

Development Goals — Goals 5, 8 and 16 call on us to
end human trafficking, with particular emphasis on
women, children and decent work; and, fourthly, the
New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants,
adopted at the 2016 United Nations Summit for
Refugees and Migrants.
Another important instrument is the draft political
declaration to be adopted today. I thank the Permanent
Representatives of Qatar and Belgium for their
invaluable efforts, which have led us to this consensual
outcome. I urge States to continue their contributions to
the United Nations voluntary trust fund for victims of
trafficking in persons, especially women and children.
The fund is an important part of our commitment to help
victims and survivors recover from this crime, reclaim
their dignity and minimize the risk of revictimization
and retrafficking. Resources must match the scale of the
challenges that we face in fighting human trafficking.
Human trafficking knows no borders. It affects
people in the North and the South, and has many faces.
We have made progress, but we have much further to go.
Our goal is zero trafficking. Let us commit to stronger
cooperation for decisive global action and leave the
abhorrent trade in human beings in the past forever.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: I thank the General
Assembly for convening this important meeting on
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons, and I congratulate members of
the Assembly on their successful deliberations on the
draft political declaration to be adopted this morning.
According to the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime’s Global Report on Trafficking in Persons,
tens of millions of people are victims of forced labour,
sexual servitude, recruitment as child soldiers or other
forms of exploitation and abuse. Human trafficking is
all around us, in every region of the world. It grips the
weakest and most vulnerable. Women and girls, but
also boys, are cruelly exploited for sex and vital organs.
Children are forced into endless begging, and men
into brutal labour. Countless businesses, in the global
North and South alike, benefit from the misery. From
construction to food production, to consumer goods, a
great many enterprises are tainted by this stain. Often,
trafficking is intertwined with racial, gender and other
forms of discrimination.
17-30134

27/09/2017

In recent years, increasing conflict, insecurity and
economic uncertainty have brought about new tests. As
millions of children, women and men spill out of their
countries towards safety, they find themselves at the
mercy of merciless people. Thousands of people have
died at sea, in deserts or detention centres and at the
hands of wretched traffickers. Criminal networks have
used the disorder and despair in the world to expand
their brutality and reach. Terrorist groups such as
Da’esh and Boko Haram continue to seek the capture
and enslavement of women, girls and boys. Others use
their victims for forced labour.
Those gangs and groups are global, well organized,
technologically savvy and highly proficient at taking
advantage of gaps in governance and weaknesses
in institutions. We must be equally determined in
countering this menace. Too often, human traffickers
operate with impunity and receive much less attention
than, for example, drug traffickers. That must change. I
have seen many drug lords in jail, and rightly so. I have
never seen a human-trafficking lord in jail.
Fighting human trafficking requires us to make
greater use of the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, to which the President
just referred, as well as the United Nations Convention
against Corruption, and other relevant instruments. It
also requires much stronger cooperation among Member
States, making use of the full range of their instruments.
Because traffickers prey on vulnerable and
marginalized people, the problem can seem remote
from those members of society who are more fortunate,
including political decision-makers. By contrast,
the threat of illicit drugs typically feels very close,
and therefore receives attention and resources from
all Governments.
I remember that when I was Prime Minister of
Portugal, almost 20 years ago, I always thought that one
day my children could fall victim to illicit drugs. I never
thought they could fall victim to human trafficking.
That is probably why, with a great deal of commitment,
my Government introduced a drug policy that even
today is considered by many to be a reference point. But
we did not do enough with regard to human trafficking.
It is clear to me that it is our responsibility as
leaders to make human trafficking a real priority for
international cooperation. The New York Declaration

A/72/PV.24

for Refugees and Migrants, adopted last year, was a
welcome step. Next year’s General Assembly conference
aimed at adopting a global compact for safe, orderly and
regular migration will be a further potential milestone.
Refugees and migrants are especially vulnerable,
and their plight is only compounded when they are
treated as criminals by their host Governments and
communities. The international community must create
legal and safe migration channels, and, in combating
trafficking, we must simultaneously uphold the right
of refugees to asylum. International cooperation is
essential, including for information-sharing, law
enforcement and legal assistance. The Security Council
has adopted important resolutions targeting the
financing of both terrorists and traffickers.
We must strengthen support to victims, particularly
through the United Nations voluntary trust fund for
victims of trafficking in persons, which provides
crucial assistance to survivors. No one should have
to confront the trauma of their experiences alone. A
survivor-centred approach is critical.
Yet another tool is the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, which addresses some of the root causes
that make people vulnerable to trafficking. Often,
trafficking is abetted by poverty and inequality.
Fighting trafficking and advancing sustainable,
inclusive development go hand in hand.
Our efforts should also involve awareness
campaigns. The more people know about the dangers
of trafficking, the better equipped they can be to avoid
its horrors.
As long as this crime exists we cannot tell young
people that the future will be better than the past. We
cannot deliver on a world of hope and opportunity for
all, and we dare not look at ourselves without a sense
of abiding shame. Now is the time to stand together and
stamp out this abominable practice.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
In accordance with General Assembly resolution
71/287, I now give the floor to Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.
Mr. Fedotov (United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime): The Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons remains a keystone of our

17-301343/31

A/72/PV.24

collective action. This appraisal and the draft political
declaration we are about to adopt can help to take that
commitment forward and to sharpen responses to an
odious crime that continues to exploit and victimize the
most vulnerable persons in all parts of the world.
Since the General Assembly adopted the landmark
Global Plan of Action, in 2010, we have strengthened
efforts to prevent and stop this crime, most of all
through the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children
supplementing the Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime. To date, 171 Member States have
acceded to the Protocol, and most of them align their
domestic laws with its provisions.
In the Global Plan of Action, the Assembly
entrusted the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) with preparing biennial global reports on
trafficking in persons. Our research has made it clear
that aligning legislation with the Protocol is helpful in
improving criminal justice responses. Nevertheless,
enforcement gaps remain. I completely agree with the
Secretary-General about the low conviction rates of the
real trafficking lords and our need to do more. That is
fully confirmed in the UNODC biennial reports.
New technologies are being abused to facilitate
human trafficking, thereby further straining capacities
to detect and investigate this crime. The Security
Council has highlighted the threat posed by human
trafficking to international peace and security, and the
Council remains engaged in addressing this crime in
the context of armed conflict. Going forward, we need
to do more to translate that high level of awareness
into more effective action and to make better use of the
established international legal framework to protect
victims and ensure justice.
I am honoured by the Assembly’s recognition of
the institutional role of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime in the global fight against human
trafficking. UNODC remains fully engaged in working
with our United Nations partners and other partners
to support Member States in preventing trafficking in
persons and in implementing victim-centred criminal
justice responses.
We need to strengthen data collection in order
to build a robust evidence base. We must also
work together towards a common framework for
defining and assessing progress, taking into account
the anti-trafficking targets under the Sustainable
4/31

27/09/2017

Development Goals, namely, Goals 5.2, on trafficking
in women and girls; 8.7, on forced labour; and 16.2, on
trafficking and all forms of violence against children.
To support that, UNODC is currently working with
the academic community to develop innovative
methodologies to measure and understand the
dimensions and scope of the trafficking problem. At the
same time, we must coordinate support so as to be as
coherent, efficient and effective as possible, including
through the Inter-Agency Coordination Group against
Trafficking in Persons.
We need Governments to develop the necessary
research to put laws into practice, support victims,
train practitioners and enable inter-agency and crossborder cooperation. In line with the Protocol, we
must help States parties address challenges that make
people — especially women and children — vulnerable
to trafficking, including poverty, underemployment
and the lack of equal opportunity.
Finally, I urge members to pledge support to the
United Nations voluntary trust fund for victims of
trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
established by the Global Plan of Action. The fund is
providing meaningful direct assistance, but its impact
will fall short of its potential if it does not receive the
necessary resources. I have heard that some Member
States will announce generous new pledges to the trust
fund. I would like to take this opportunity to thank
them in advance for their generous offers. Please help
us to amplify the support to enable more trafficking
victims to become survivors.
The President: The Assembly will now turn to
draft resolution A/72/L.1, entitled “Political declaration
on the implementation of the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons”. We
shall now proceed to consider the draft resolution.
In connection with this draft resolution, I give the
floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Abelian (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The present statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly and has been
distributed desk-to-desk and made available on the
PaperSmart portal.
Under the terms of paragraph 12 of draft resolution
A/72/L.1, the General Assembly would stress the
need to ensure overall organization and coherence in
17-30134

27/09/2017

the efforts of the United Nations system to respond to
trafficking in persons, especially in ensuring support
to Member States. In that regard, while recalling
that the Inter-Agency Coordination Group against
Trafficking in Persons (ICAT) was established to
foster coordination and cooperation among the relevant
United Nations system entities and other international
organizations involved in combating trafficking in
persons, with the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) as its coordinator, the Assembly
would urge the Secretary-General to continue efforts
to strengthen coordination within the United Nations
system and to inform Member States thereof through
existing reporting channels.
Under the terms of paragraph 13 of the draft
resolution, the General Assembly would recognize the
important role played in the United Nations system by the
Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking
in Persons, and invite it to continue to increase its
activities related to the implementation of the Global
Plan of Action and, to that end, to incorporate aspects of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development relevant
to preventing and combating trafficking in persons and
to consider how future activities will be coordinated
and how the duplication of efforts will be avoided. The
Assembly would encourage the Coordination Group
to expand its working group to include entities of the
United Nations system that are not currently active in
the working group but that have a role in addressing
trafficking in persons.
With regard to paragraphs 12 and 13, it should be
noted that currently there are two Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice Officers at the P-4 level allocated
to the implementation of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime core mandates relating to the Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, and the Global Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons.
Those staff resources were approved in the context
of the programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013
pursuant to resolution 64/293, adopting the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons, to perform the following activities. One Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice Officer is dedicated
to all technical assistance for the implementation of
both the Human Trafficking and Migrant Smuggling
Protocols, as well as the Global Plan of Action, and

A/72/PV.24

one Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Officer
is dedicated to the preparation of the Global Report
on Trafficking in Persons. Those regular budget staff
resources are fully devoted to already mandated
programme activities. Therefore, there are no staff
resources available that could be redeployed to perform
additional tasks or activities.
Also with regard to paragraphs 12 and 13, UNODC
would need to continue its coordination of the expanded
network of agencies involved in the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons.
That includes substantive support and facilitation in
many areas — joint policy development, information
sharing, involvement in the advocacy, outreach and
coordination activities of ICAT member agencies
and developing annual ICAT work plans; preparing,
servicing and coordinating meetings and calls,
including the drafting of documentation and meeting
records related thereto; coordinating briefing events,
advocacy and reporting; compiling, disseminating and
storing relevant information among member agencies;
engaging and supervising consultants; and recordkeeping and day-to-day communication with ICAT
members and ICAT external stakeholders.
In 2012, an extrabudgetary contribution of
$600,000 allowed UNODC to undertake a series of
technical assistance and advocacy activities related
to the implementation of ICAT and the Global Plan of
Action. Those included holding regular teleconferences
and working group meetings to exchange information
among the various agencies; the organization of expert
group meetings to review relevant issues; the launch
of three ICAT thematic papers; the finalization of two
additional papers setting out the joint positions of the
agencies involved on key issues relating to the Protocol
and the Global Plan of Action; and advocacy events in
Geneva, New York and Vienna on the work of ICAT.
Extrabudgetary resources in the amount of $180,900
would be required to hire one Programme Officer at the
P-3 level in the Anti-Human Trafficking and Migrant
Smuggling Section to enable the continuation of
UNODC coordination and support the implementation
of the draft resolution. The position would provide
the substantive support required for the continuation
of the technical-assistance activities related to the
implementation of the Global Plan of Action and the
enhanced coordination of ICAT.

17-301345/31

A/72/PV.24

Those activities would be carried out, provided that
additional extrabudgetary resources are made available.
Should such extrabudgetary resources not be made
available, in accordance with paragraph 26 of the draft
resolution, consultations would need to be undertaken
to determine the necessary programmatic changes and
resource requirements needed for their implementation.
Hence, the adoption of draft resolution A/72/L.1 would
not entail any additional appropriation under the
programme budget for the biennium 2016-2017 or the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 20182019.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/72/L.1, entitled “Political
declaration on the implementation of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons”.
May I take it that the General Assembly decides to
adopt draft resolution A/72/L.1?
Draft resolution A/72/L.1 was adopted (resolution
72/1).
The President: I wish to express my sincere thanks
to His Excellency Mr. Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve,
Permanent Representative of Belgium to the United
Nations, and to Her Excellency Ms. Alya Ahmed Saif
Al-Thani, Permanent Representative of Qater to the
United Nations, who so ably and patiently conducted the
discussions and complex negotiations in the informal
consultations to bring them to a successful conclusion.
I am sure that the members of the Assembly join me in
extending our sincere appreciation to them.
We shall now continue with the statements in the
opening segment of the high-level meeting.
In accordance with General Assembly resolution
71/287, I now give the floor to Ms. Mira Sorvino,
Goodwill Ambassador for the Global Fight against
Human Trafficking.
Ms. Sorvino: I thank you, Mr. President, for inviting
me to address the General Assembly. Since 2009, I have
had the enormous honour to serve the United Nation as
the Goodwill Ambassador for the Global Fight against
Human Trafficking of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC).
I have travelled the world with the UNODC
Blue Heart Campaign against Human Trafficking to
encourage action and awareness. I have interviewed
6/31

27/09/2017

scores of survivors, who have broken my heart with
the inhuman brutality they have endured, but who
inspired me with their heroism and insights. I have
also interviewed innovative Government actors and
tirelessly altruistic non-governmental organization
(NGO) workers — and even a trafficker, who spoke
of his victims as if they were simply mercantile goods
whose suffering meant nothing.
I had the privilege of being witness to and a minor
participant in the drafting session for the Global Plan
of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons. Some may
remember my non-protocol, but heartfelt, outbursts
about the fact that the victims and survivors I had met
urgently needed the help of the Global Plan of Action
and the voluntary trust fund, and that they could not
wait another minute.
I spoke at the first assessment of the Global Plan
of Action, in 2013 (see A/67/PV.77). Now, here at the
second, I am very heartened to see the adoption of
resolution 72/1. However, I feel compelled to urge
everyone in this Hall not to rest on that proclamation,
and to actually turn words into meaningful and robust
action, which is long overdue for those millions still
waiting in torment.
The political declaration on the implementation of
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons (resolution 72/1) notes that the
scale of global resourcing to fight trafficking in persons
does not match that of the challenge. A just-released
report from the International Labour Organization and
International Organization for Migration estimates that,
in 2016, 40.3 million people were victims of modern
slavery. Women and girls accounted for 71 per cent, and
a quarter of the victims were children.
What was the global response? The United States
Government Trafficking in Persons Report indicates
that in 2016 there were fewer than 10,000 convictions
of human traffickers worldwide. That colossal failure
to rescue and protect the world’s most vulnerable is
absolutely untenable.
At a time where it may seem out of fashion to side
with the marginalized and the oppressed, members of
the Assembly — the gathered guardians of the highest
standards of moral governance — must not look away
from the victims of human trafficking. That the fruit
we enjoy on our table of plenty may be picked by slave
hands, or that the young girls and boys we pass huddling
17-30134

27/09/2017

on a shadowy side street may be sexually trafficked, is
something to which we must no longer turn a blind eye.
What is the modern definition of humankind’s
purpose if not to strive harder to uplift all members
of the global community so that they can enjoy basic
standards of human rights, freedom from exploitation
and the promise of the pursuit of education and
possibility? All of those aspirations lead to a freer,
more stable, prosperous and peaceful world — and all
are goals that Member States champion.
The current conditions of conflict and natural
disaster are creating humanitarian crises and refugee
migrations on what may be an unprecedented scale, with
60 million displaced persons and 20 million refugees.
Human trafficking is their direct consequence, not just
a side effect.
I applaud the Secretary-General’s long-standing
support of migrants and refugees. We must all look for
ways to create immediate countermeasures to this direct
pipeline to victimhood for those vulnerable people, and
not just attempt damage control after the fact.
I applaud the fact that the declaration recognizes
that the Global Plan of Action and the 2030 Agenda,
including the three Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) pertaining to combating human trafficking, are
mutually reinforcing, and its promotion of that fact. I
urge all Member States, along with civil society and
the private sector, to vigorously employ the excellent
recommendations of the Global Plan of Action. We
have the means and the knowledge of best practices to
fight and end human trafficking, but only if we deploy
the moral urgency, enormous political will and robust
financial resources that this dire situation calls for.
First, survivor leaders must be involved in all apects
of policy development. There must be cooperation and
shared information among Governments, and a firm
commitment to root out corruption, which hampers
efforts to fight trafficking and sometimes foments it. We
need a trauma-, gender- and child-sensitive approach to
all law-and-order responses; victim services that utilize
the most advanced testimony-gathering technology, so
as not to re-traumatize; and evidence-led investigations,
including a capacity for undercover authority, so that
witness testimony is not a case’s only hope.
Other measures include ensuring that civil redress is
included in, but does not replace, criminal proceedings
for victims; Governments prioritizing the prosecution of

A/72/PV.24

trafficking and having it tried by specialist prosecutors
who seek punishments commensurate with other severe
crimes, not just easily paid fines; and the expungement
of crimes that the victims were forced to commit while
in bondage.
Society-wide training in identifying humantrafficking situations and victims is crucial, as are
preventive curriculums for middle- and high schoolage children, awareness campaigns for migrants and
refugees, programmes targeting the demand side of
sexual exploitation, partnerships with the private sector
to root out slavery in corporate supply chains, in-depth
Internet investigations to stop child sex trafficking, and
actions to prevent debt bondage and penalize recruiters.
The list goes on, and we must see a parallel,
vigorous attack on the root causes of vulnerability,
such as gender inequality, cultural discrimination,
poverty, access to clean water, education and economic
opportunity.
If those of us here look at the table before them,
they will find a Blue Heart pin representing the
sadness of the victims and the cold-heartedness of
their traffickers. The blue United Nations colour also
demonstrates our commitment to combating this crime.
We hope members will wear the Blue Heart to raise
awareness of human trafficking and galvanize their
commitment to fight it.
I would ask everyone to donate generously to
the United Nations voluntary trust fund for victims
of trafficking in persons, which is a direct way for
lifesaving and life-changing services to be delivered to
victims and survivors globally through extremely wellvetted on-the-ground NGOs. As an Italo-American, I
am proud to announce that Italy is donating $1 million
to that vital fund today. I recently learned that I have
DNA from many other regions, including Scandinavia,
Great Britain, Germany, Spain, Eastern Europe, North
Africa, the Middle East and even sub-Saharan Africa.
I am a true melting pot, and I specialized in East Asian
studies in college. I will therefore happily acclaim and
applaud all Member States that match or add to that gift.
We are all one community, and it is high time for
us to do all that we can to protect and uplift the most
vulnerable among us.
The President: In accordance with resolution
71/287, I now give the floor to Ms. Grizelda Grootboom
from South Africa, as a representative of civil society.

17-301347/31

A/72/PV.24

Ms. Grootboom: My name is Grizelda Grootboom.
I am from the Western Cape township of Khayelitsha.
Being a street kid in Cape Town was to be a seeker after
the journey that Nelson Mandela was also looking for.
At the age of eight, we were all walking through the
streets in District 6. When he screamed “Freedom!”,
we knew that we would get more freedom in the form of
shelters and people finally giving us blankets and food.
But that freedom was still a journey and a long walk for
all street kids.
My journey ended in the hands of somebody who
knew that I was desperate for hope and freedom. She
was a friend. She decided to take my hope and turn
it into a nightmare. She trafficked me all the way to
Johannesburg. The first thing that I knew was that,
as friends, we definitely shared the same dreams and
hopes as black children. Walking into the house, which
smelled so fresh and hopeful, I knew that that change
was going to be the best change of my whole life. Taking
a nap in an empty room with very fresh-smelling
wooden floors, I knew that I was in safe hands.
The thing that woke me up was a punch and kick
in the stomach. I thought that I was in the wrong house
and tried to scream, but they began wrapping duct tape
around my eyes and mouth, undressing me and injecting
my legs with crystal meth behind my knees. The drug
made my blood so thin that my eyes became foggy,
and I could not hear the sounds of anything happening
around my body. The only thing I felt was my heartbeat
and the little spirit that I had inside me, hoping that she
would come back. I realized that she was not going to
come back only when the first client walked in, and
they told him, “Fresh meat on the market”.
That went on for at least two weeks. I began to
count the seconds and the times my heart beat by the
people — by the men who came in and the way they
smelled. It is morning: he is coming from home. It is the
afternoon: he probably just came from a business deal.
The evening continued until the morning next day. I
got kicked out of the house in the middle of the night
and was replaced by a younger girl. I could smell her
freshness and heard her trying to kick and bite hands
over her mouth.
It was in the middle of the night, and I knew that
my animal survival instincts needed to kick in. I did
not know the Johannesburg streets. I did know that the
first thing to do was to count the number of MercedesBenzes to know which map I was on. I first made it to
8/31

27/09/2017

the truck-stop area. There, we knew that a lot of clients
were waiting. There, I looked for the first master, and
he said, ”Welcome to my city”.
Between the ages of 18 to 26, I worked all around
South Africa, in brothels, strip clubs and high- and lowend gentlemen’s clubs. At the age of 26, I was working
in Port Elizabeth. We were holding the greatest sports
events in Africa. Everybody was at our brothel, all types
of men, black, white, rich and poor. That year I got very
used to the industry. I knew that if you pleased the
madam, if you pleased the pimp, everybody was happy.
I became pregnant with Summer, my baby girl.
I called her Summer because following every shift
in the morning she would continue to kick. After six
months, my madam said that that kind of breed was
not welcome in that sick slave industry. Immediately,
an in-house abortion took place. Three hours later, I
was asked to return to work. I had to use a lot of cotton
to prevent the blood from flowing into the client.
That same minute was when I knew that the life that I
thought I was going to have was taken from me and that
I did not deserve health or life. Immediately, I said no,
and because I refused my madam’s next client, I was
taken downstairs, beaten and driven all the way back to
Johannesburg. I woke up in the hospital a month later,
and my year of rehabilitation began.
That was the journey of my exit. It was really
tough, because everybody thought that I wanted to be
a sex slave. I did not have any identity, but everybody
knew my nakedness. Consequently, at every door that I
knocked on at the age of 27, I was made to know that it
was my fault for being a sex slave. Well, the rest of my
sisters knew that I was not going to make it out of society
being a sex-slave statistic. Without wasting any time, I
went back to the pimps. I became their drug trafficker
from one city to another, until I got the opportunity to
drop drugs in Cape Town — my hometown — and that
was when the next journey of exit took place.
Today I stand here with the images of girls whom
I have lost throughout the 18 years. I am blessed to be
alive. I am blessed to feel healthy. But I am not blessed
to see the headlines every time another young girl has
been trafficked.
The sex-slave industry makes so much money in an
hour that sometimes we used to think that by the age
of 18 or 21 we were not going to be alive. My health
reminds me every day that I was a sex slave, through
17-30134

27/09/2017

the boils, through HIV — and through the headaches,
of course.
Sex slavery is a new thing that holds a new kind
of oppression over women and girls all over the world.
The people who run it are men, of course. In every
brothel, in every pimp, you will find a man. The buyers
are not interested in the slave’s colour or age, as long as
she is a woman or a girl. Apparently, right now in our
society, sex slavery is the only thing that can sustain us
economically, but every girl and woman loses the soul
of dignity in her life through it.
The States Members of the United Nations are
gathered here today to commit to implementing
the Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons. Approximately 96 per cent of sex-trafficked
human beings are women and girls. I was one of them.
I often use the term “sex slavery” to describe what
traffickers — every pimp and every madam — used to
tell me. But most important, if anyone here had to see
me on the corner, he or she would never say that I was
a slave.
Sex slavery is just another form of oppression,
especially for the black child. In South Africa we come
from apartheid. We used to call it slavery. While I was a
sex slave, people would suggest that I leave. I tried it so
many times, but the conversation would always end up
with the words “It is voluntary. You want to be there.”
I am so grateful to the Secretary-General, to the
President of the General Assembly and to the United
Nations for the invitation to come here to speak.
A survivor’s voice is so important, not for just this
gathering, but for young girls who are stuck in sex
slavery, so that they may hear the hope that the United
Nations can give them. I do not speak because I want to
be a speaker or an activist. I do so because I understand
every single aspect of the pain and bondage of being a
sex slave.
I really hope that the Global Plan will not be just
the action of putting pen to paper, but that it will
inspire action in every rural township and city and
country — but most of all for the human dignity of
every young girl and woman.
The President: We have heard the last speaker for
the opening segment of the high-level meeting.
Before proceeding further, I would like to remind
members that the first interactive panel discussion,
entitled “The Global Plan of Action and effective

A/72/PV.24

partnerships for the prevention and prosecution
of trafficking in persons: achievements, gaps and
challenges, also taking into consideration the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals”,
will take place this afternoon from 3 to 4 p.m. The second
interactive panel discussion, entitled “The Global Plan
of Action and effective partnerships for the protection
of and assistance to victims, including through the
United Nations voluntary trust fund for victims of
trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
also taking into consideration the implementation of
the Sustainable Development Goals”, will take place
from 4 to 6 p.m. The interactive panel discussions will
be held in the Trusteeship Council Chamber. I would
also like to remind members that the Chairs of the panel
discussions will present summaries of the deliberations
to the General Assembly at the closing plenary meeting,
to be held in the afternoon of Thursday, 28 September.
Before we begin with the list of speakers, I would
like to turn to some organizational matters pertaining
to the conduct of the plenary meetings. I would like
to explain to all speakers that, in order to enable
the maximum participation within the limited time
available, speakers making statements in plenary
meetings should be limited to three minutes when
speaking in their national capacity, and to five minutes
when speaking on behalf of a group of States, as
stipulated in resolution 71/287. As members will recall,
in its resolution 71/323, of 8 September 2017, the General
Assembly called for strict adherence by speakers to the
time limits in the Assembly, particularly during highlevel meetings.
Also in accordance with resolution 71/323, the
“all protocols observed” principle is recommended,
whereby participants are encouraged to refrain from
listing standard protocol expressions during their
statements. In the light of the given time frame, I would
like to appeal to speakers to deliver their statements at
a normal speed so that interpretation may be provided
properly. To assist speakers in managing their time, a
light system has been installed at the speaker’s rostrum.
I would appeal to all speakers for their cooperation in
observing the time limit of their statements so that all
those inscribed will be heard in a timely manner.
I now give the floor to the Minister of Justice of
Luxembourg.
Mr. Braz (Luxembourg): I would first like to
commend you, Mr. President, for convening today’s

17-301349/31

A/72/PV.24

meeting. The fight against human trafficking must be
fought on a global scale if we want it to be efficient.
But all of us, every Member State of the international
community, have to take on our share in that endeavour.
Human trafficking is a very serious crime, and
a gross violation of fundamental rights. It denies its
victims their very humanity. Luxembourg combats
human trafficking through a multidisciplinary
approach, as recommended by international and
regional organizations such as the United Nations, the
European Union, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Council of Europe, in the
framework of normative texts, projects and awarenessraising campaigns. At the national level, Luxembourg’s
policy on human trafficking focuses on three main
areas — prevention, the protection and promotion of
victims’ rights and the prosecution of perpetrators and
co-perpetrators. We have undertaken the following
actions.
In December 2016, the Government launched a
national media campaign to enhance the fight against
human trafficking and to inform the public at large of
its various forms and of the fact that trafficking exists
in Luxembourg. The campaign included spots shown in
theatres, radio messages and posters in public spaces.
The Government of Luxembourg also organized an
international conference in Luxembourg in December
2016, during Luxembourg’s Benelux presidency, which
brought together many actors around the topic of
human trafficking. The Benelux countries — Belgium,
the Netherlands and Luxembourg — signed a joint
declaration on strengthening cooperation in this area.
This issue will again be on the agenda in 2017. Our
main concern is adequate and sufficient training of our
law-enforcement authorities.
In 2017, the National Institute of Public
Administration organized four different kinds of
training for public officials, including police, customs
agents and labour inspectors, members of civil society,
immigration agents, representatives of municipalities
and diplomatic personnel. We are also making special
efforts to raise awareness among judges. Members
of the judiciary have undergone a special training
course for judges and attorneys organized by France’s
École nationale de la magistrature. As a result, the
number of cases taken to court in recent years has
increased steadily.
10/31

27/09/2017

Our inter-ministerial trafficking coordinating
committee brings together representatives from
law enforcement, Government ministries and
non-governmental organizations in charge of victim
protection and meets at least bimonthly. The fight,
which is an ongoing and continuous process, will remain
a national priority for years to come. No one has done
enough on this matter. We can all do more and do better.
We will continue our efforts to address this challenge
globally through European and global institutions and
through our funding and implementation of development
cooperation in some of the most vulnerable regions. In
that context, the role of the United Nations, in particular
its Vienna headquarters, is irreplaceable.
The President: I now give the floor to Her Excellency
Mrs. Retno Lestari Priansari Marsudi, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia.
Mrs. Marsudi (Indonesia): Much has changed
since the adoption and review of the United Nations
Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons. Indonesia calls for enhancing global efforts
to curb trafficking in persons, which is contrary to
global efforts to achieve a decent life and is an obstacle
in our quest for a global ecosystem of peace, stability
and prosperity.
Some 21 million people are victims of forced labour
and trafficking globally, and therefore we cannot stay
silent but must redouble our collective efforts. Through
partnership and cooperation, countries of origin and
transit and destination countries must work together
more closely. For its part, Indonesia fully adheres to
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children. Indonesia’s national task force to combat
trafficking in persons continues to prevent crimes,
prosecute perpetrators and protect victims. We apply
effective measures, including increasing the capacity
of consular officers as first responders, creating an
e-protection platform to strengthen and integrate data
collection, implementing a follow-the-money method to
help the prosecution process and provide compensation
to victims, and establishing safe houses for victims.
Indonesia takes a leading role in promoting
bilateral, regional and international cooperation,
among other things, through promoting the Treaty
on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations Convention
17-30134

27/09/2017

against Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, and the Bali Process on People Smuggling,
Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational
Crime. The Bali Process has proved its effectiveness in
addressing the illegal movement of persons in the Bay
of Bengal and the Andaman Sea in 2015.
The Government alone cannot solve the problem.
Engaging with the private sector is a necessity.
Accordingly, the Bali Process successfully conducted
a Government business forum in August as an avenue
for engagement between Government and business in
curbing trafficking. During the meeting, participants
agreed on an action-oriented work plan. Indonesia is
also looking forward to progress in the negotiation
on the United Nations global compact on safe,
orderly and regular migration and will contribute to
its implementation.
Finally, let me touch upon the humanitarian
situation in Rakhine state and its impact on Bangladesh.
As the number of refugees increases, we must prepare
anticipatory measures to ensure the welfare and safety
of the refugees in order to prevent their exploitation
by traffickers. We cannot let that crisis lead to
another disaster.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Dato Sri Anifah Aman, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Malaysia.
Mr. Aman (Malaysia): I would like to commend
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
Malaysia joins the international community in
addressing the scourge of human trafficking. Malaysia
condemns these heinous crimes and accords the highest
priority in combating trafficking in persons. Malaysia
is not only a transit and destination country for the
victims of trafficking in persons; its citizens have also
become targets.
That is why Malaysia has instituted appropriate
national laws, particularly regarding the penal
code, through its promulgation in 2007 of acts on
combating trafficking in persons and smuggling
migrants. As a result, the number of convictions has
substantially increased. In 2007 we also established an
inter-ministerial council for anti-trafficking in persons
and anti-smuggling of migrants, chaired by our Deputy
Prime Minister. Malaysia’s efforts have also been
guided by a national action plan on anti-trafficking
in persons for the period from 2016 to 2020, which is
consistent with the 2010 Global Plan of Action.

A/72/PV.24

Our records show that the majority of human
trafficking victims come from neighbouring countries.
In that regard, Malaysia places a high premium on
the centrality of bilateral and regional cooperation
in combating this transnational crime. Indeed,
on 7 September 2017, Malaysia ratified the 2015
Association of Southeast Asian Nations Convention
Against Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and
Children. Malaysia is also an active member of the Bali
Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons
and Related Transnational Crime, a mechanism aimed
at combating this scourge.
Based on the measures it has put in place,
Malaysia is determined to prosecute perpetrators
and provide protections to the victims. We believe
in a comprehensive approach, with greater emphasis
on prevention and with a particular focus on the root
causes endemic to source countries.
Given the unspeakable developments in Rakhine
state, Malaysia is concerned that the more than 400,000
Rohingya currently seeking refuge in Bangladesh
could become victims of human trafficking. The
transnational crime syndicates are already exploiting
the human misery stemming from this sordid situation.
Malaysia therefore strongly urges Myanmar to heed the
repeated calls of the international community to end
the violence against the Rohingya.
The solution to the complex issue of trafficking
in persons requires collective efforts by both State
and non-State actors. In this regard, my delegation is
of the view that the measures outlined in the political
declaration on the implementation of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons (resolution 72/1) serve as an excellent basis
for navigating the way forward. Malaysia pledges its
unwavering commitment to decisive action in our
common and urgent quest to rid ourselves of the scourge
of trafficking in persons. For the sake of humankind,
we have no choice but to prevail.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Osman Mohammed Saleh, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the State of Eritrea.
Mr. Saleh (Eritrea): It is a great honour for me
to address the General Assembly on behalf of the
Government and the people of Eritrea, who, for the
past half a century, have been resolutely fighting for
human dignity and regional stability. We have been at

17-3013411/31

A/72/PV.24

the forefront of the struggle to combat and eradicate
human trafficking in all its manifestations.
Eritrea welcomes the convening of this high-level
meeting to appraise the implementation of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons. Periodic reviews could provide Member States
with the opportunity to evaluate the progress made and
deliberate on the challenges of the implementation of
the Global Plan of Action. However, without focused
international cooperation to eradicate the causes of
human trafficking — extreme poverty, global inequality,
the vulnerability of irregular migrants, conflicts and
wars of aggression, sexual exploitation, cheap labour
and organ harvesting — our next appraisal could be a
discussion of gaps and not progress.
The interrelated crimes of human trafficking and
the smuggling of migrants are posing grave challenges
to the security and development of the Horn of Africa.
Many people, especially younger members of the
population, continue to fall victim to criminal groups
as they attempt to migrate to Europe and the Gulf
countries. They face abduction, extortion, genderrelated violence, torture and death. The dearth of
regional understanding and robust cooperation among
countries of origin and countries of destination has,
until recently, meant impunity for traffickers and
smugglers. Moreover, in the case of Eritrean victims,
overwhelming evidence exists regarding the complicity
of some Governments and organizations in the region
and beyond. These Governments and organizations
involved in the smuggling of Eritreans are exploiting
them as part of their sensationalist propaganda
campaign to demonize our nation and encourage our
young people to flee and thereby weaken the country.
The Eritrean Government has for years called
for an independent international body to investigate
human trafficking in the Horn of Africa with the aim of
bringing those responsible to justice. Eritrea’s repeated
requests for the Secretary-General and the Security
Council to initiate such an investigation have gone
unheeded. Many of those responsible for the trafficking
of Eritreans continue to live in European countries
and conduct their criminal activities with money they
raise in the guise of supporting victims. The recent
declaration by Italian authorities on the collusion
between human traffickers and individuals ostensibly
dedicated to rescuing migrants in the Mediterranean
Sea is a testament to this fact. The Italian authorities
are investigating a person whose involvement in the
12/31

27/09/2017

smuggling of Eritrean migrants and his relationship
with human traffickers in East and North Africa has
been known by the Eritrean Government for years.
More international effort is needed to ensure that
no case of human trafficking ever goes unprosecuted.
Every individual involved in the heinous crime of
human trafficking must be held accountable under the
law and face punishment.
I would like to assure the Assembly that the people
and the Government of Eritrea will steadfastly continue
their fight against human trafficking and smuggling
and expose sponsors of these activities. Eritrea will
continue to work with the countries of the region
bilaterally and as part of the African Union-Horn of
Africa Initiative on human trafficking and migrant
smuggling, as well as with European countries, in order
to eliminate this crime.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Michael Masutha, Minister of Justice
and Correctional Services of South Africa.
Mr. Masutha (South Africa): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this high-level meeting,
which is an important milestone in assessing the
progress of our efforts to fight the crime of trafficking
in persons, pursuant to the obligations we undertook
to that end under the Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Person.
We also wish to congratulate Member States on
adopting the political declaration on the implementation
of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons (resolution 72/1). We feel that this
important document strongly reaffirms our collective
will to eradicate the crime of trafficking in persons.
Trafficking in persons has rapidly spiralled into a
global crisis, affecting each and every country, whether
they are countries of origin, transit or destination for
victims. South Africa is no exception in this regard, and
our law enforcement and criminal justice system are
engaged in an ongoing fight against this terrible crime.
I am pleased to inform the General Assembly
that we have recorded numerous successes in this
fight, having disrupted several significant syndicates
and successfully arrested, convicted and imprisoned
perpetrators of this crime. We also continue to
provide assistance and support to victims, in line with
international best practices in this regard.
17-30134

27/09/2017

Since the advent of democracy, South Africa
has made significant strides in the development of
legislation to protect the rights of vulnerable persons,
including the victims of trafficking in persons. Whereas
offences linked to the trafficking in persons were
previously dealt with by various pieces of legislation,
such as the Sexual Offences Act of 2007 and the
Children’s Act of 2005, they have now been harmonized
and brought together under a single, comprehensive
statute, the Prevention and Combating of Trafficking in
Persons Act. This important legal framework provides
a comprehensive and integrated instrument to combat
trafficking in persons in all its forms.
The Act ensures that in South Africa, the offence
of trafficking in persons is broadly defined to
include different forms of the crime, including labour
trafficking. It also provides for the imposition of
appropriate sentences for these crimes and for various
measures to protect and assist victims of trafficking
in persons. The Act, which is centred on prevention,
protection and prosecution, is also closely aligned
with South Africa’s international obligations and
commitments, particularly with respect to the Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime.
In ensuring nationwide implementation of our
policies on trafficking in persons, the South African
Government has established a national inter-sectoral
committee on the prevention and combating of
trafficking in persons, consisting of national
representatives of all relevant stakeholders, including
civil society, faith-based organizations, traditional
leaders and others. These coordinating structures,
known as trafficking-in-persons provincial task teams,
are replicated throughout all of our nine provinces and
work closely with relevant international organizations.
We recognize that the achievement of our objectives
in eradicating trafficking in persons can be realized
only through close cooperation and collaboration with
our international partners. The transnational nature
of trafficking necessitates cooperation and mutual
assistance with other countries and international
organizations, whose expertise on such matters
is invaluable.
We would like to acknowledge the support and
cooperation of the United Nations Office on Drugs

A/72/PV.24

and Crime (UNODC), the International Organization
for Migration (IOM) and UNICEF, in particular, in
assisting us to implement our strategies to combat
this crime. With their cooperation, the South African
Government has developed a joint implementation plan
within the framework of the Global Action to Prevent
and Address Trafficking in Persons and the Smuggling
of Migrants, which is a four-year joint initiative by the
European Union and UNODC that is being implemented
in partnership with the IOM and UNICEF.
In conclusion, on behalf of the Government of
South Africa, I would like to reaffirm our unwavering
commitment to continuing the fight against trafficking
in persons in all of its manifestations, working hand in
hand with the international community.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Issa bin Saad Al-Jafali Al-Nuaimi,
Minister of Administrative Development, Labour and
Social Affairs of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Nuaimi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic; English
text provided by the delegation): On behalf of my
delegation, I am pleased and honoured, Mr. President, to
address you and the General Assembly on the occasion
of this high-level meeting on the appraisal of the Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons.
We are pleased today to witness the official adoption
of the political declaration on the implementation of
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons (resolution 72/1), to which
Qatar, in partnership with Belgium, has contributed by
facilitating the negotiations on it. The Declaration was
agreed upon thanks to the Member States’ political will
to take concerted and decisive action to implement the
Plan of Action and put an end to the heinous crime of
trafficking in persons, wherever it is committed.
Combating the phenomenon of trafficking in human
beings requires addressing the real causes leading
to it, whether social, economic, cultural, political or
ideological, or because of the absence of the rule of
law or any other reason. The international community’s
inability to bring decisive and just settlements to
conflicts and the resulting terrorism and emergence of
armed organizations operating outside the framework
of the international law are unquestionably major
contributors to the growing phenomenon of trafficking
in human beings, which violates the fundamental
rights of individuals and entire peoples alike. In fact,

17-3013413/31

A/72/PV.24

crises and conflicts create a propitious environment for
traffickers to commit crimes of human trafficking.
At the national level, the State of Qatar has taken
many legislative measures, including the enactment of
Law No. 15 of 2011 on combating human trafficking,
which criminalizes trafficking in persons in all its
forms and types, Law No. 21 of 2015, which abolished
the kafala or labour sponsorship system, and Law No.
15 of 2017, on domestic workers.
At the institutional level, the Government
established the National Committee on Combating
Human Trafficking to consolidate the efforts of the
State institutions and civil society aimed at addressing
the problem of trafficking in human beings. To that
end, the Committee aims to develop a national plan
to combat human trafficking and follow up on its
implementation, as well as programmes that provide
care and rehabilitation for victims of trafficking and
assist in their rapid integration into society. In addition,
the National Committee on Combating Human
Trafficking, together with INTERPOL, is coordinating
the convening of the annual conference on combating
human trafficking and smuggling of persons, to be held
in Doha in December.
At the regional level, the State of Qatar has been
sponsoring the Arab Initiative to Build National
Capacities to Combat Human Trafficking in the Arab
Countries, in cooperation with the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the League
of Arab States. It aims to build and rehabilitate national
capacities in various areas of combating human
trafficking in the Arab region, using scientific and
professional methods.

27/09/2017

Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice, which adopted a comprehensive approach to
addressing the crime of trafficking in human beings, as
set forth in the Doha Declaration. The State of Qatar is
also a major supporter of UNODC, which is the leading
international authority on combating human trafficking.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that the State
of Qatar attaches great importance to the fight against
human trafficking at the legislative, institutional,
public awareness and international cooperation levels.
We will spare no effort in contributing actively in
support of regional and international efforts to combat
human trafficking.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Priscah Mupfumira, Minister of Public
Service, Labour and Social Welfare of Zimbabwe.
Ms. Mupfumira (Zimbabwe): Trafficking in
persons is a heinous crime that has been described
as a modern-day form of slavery affecting millions
of men, women and children worldwide. It is good to
note that issues of human trafficking have become
global concerns requiring global solutions. Like other
countries in sub-Saharan Africa, Zimbabwe is a source,
transit and destination country for men, women and
children who are being subjected to various forms of
abuse, including sexual abuse, domestic servitude and
forced labour.

At the international level, as part of its firm belief
in the importance of preserving human dignity and
fulfilling our moral and legal obligations, and as an
active member of the Group of Friends United against
Human Trafficking and the Group of Friends to End
Modern Slavery, the State of Qatar has spared no effort
to support the efforts of the international community
to combat trafficking in human beings and the related
issues of forced labour, modern slavery and child labour.

In 2007, Zimbabwe ratified the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
acceded to the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children.
In 2014, Zimbabwe enacted a trafficking-in-persons law,
which criminalized human trafficking in our country. To
demonstrate its commitment to countering trafficking
in persons, Zimbabwe enacted a statutory instrument
establishing an anti-trafficking inter-ministerial
committee. In 2016, we launched our first national plan
of action, for the period from 2016 to 2018, which is
the implementation tool and national response strategy
for the trafficking-in-persons act. The plan of action is
anchored on four pillars of intervention — prevention,
protection, prosecution and partnership coordination.

My country has supported the Global Plan of Action
to Combat Trafficking in Persons since its adoption.
The State of Qatar has been a major donor to the United
Nations voluntary trust fund for victims of trafficking
in persons, especially women and children, since its
inception. In 2005, the State hosted the thirteenth United

The prevention of trafficking in persons falls within
the mandate of the Ministry of Media, Information and
Broadcasting Services, in partnership with the Ministry
of Home Affairs. These ministries are responsible for
raising public awareness and building the capacity of
relevant stakeholders. The protection pillar falls under

14/31

17-30134

27/09/2017

my ministry, the Ministry of Public Service, Labour
and Social Welfare, which is charged with providing
protection services to survivors of human trafficking
by offering appropriate shelter for safety, counselling,
rehabilitation and reintegration support. The
prosecution pillar is the responsibility of the Ministry
of Home Affairs and the Ministry of Justice, which
investigate and prosecute cases of human trafficking,
respectively.
Partnership and coordination are important for
pulling efforts and resources together in order to
prevent trafficking. The issue of human trafficking has
attracted considerable national attention in Zimbabwe,
and efforts are being channelled in order to combat it.
The country has held two successful commemorations
of the World Day against Trafficking in Persons.
Since April 2016, under the protection pillar, the
Government of Zimbabwe has repatriated 138 victims
of human trafficking. Special arrangements were
made to receive and move victims upon their arrival to
places of safety without unnecessary media attention,
in order to protect their privacy. At reception centres,
medical, psychosocial and other support services are
provided to the victims. The Government continues to
support the returnees through ongoing social protection
programmes, including access to free education,
medical assistance, cash transfers and other publicassistance programmes.
Under the partnership pillar, the Government
is working with the International Organization for
Migration to establish income-generating projects
for victims. Zimbabwe is ready and willing to share
and learn from others with greater experience than
ours in dealing with the challenges associated with
human trafficking.
Migration is a reality that we all have to face, which
is why global solutions and collective commitments are
needed. Hopefully, the Global Compact on Migration
will deliver us from the scourge of human trafficking.
The international community can count on Zimbabwe’s
continued support in efforts aimed at combating human
trafficking and its associated evils.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Alexis Bethancourt Yau, Minister for
Public Security of Panama.
Mr. Bethancourt Yau (Panama): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the members of the Human

A/72/PV.24

Security Network, a cross-regional network consisting
of Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan,
Mali, Norway, Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand, South
Africa as an observer, and my own country, Panama.
The Human Security Network is an informal group of
States that advocates a people-centred, holistic approach
to security, complementing the more traditional
understanding of national and international security.
Human trafficking violates and impairs the
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms
and constitutes a crime that exploits persons, enslaving
them in forced labour, domestic servitude or sexual
exploitation, among other things. In our interconnected
world, this serious challenge to humankind is ongoing,
and we must address its impact on all persons, especially
women and children.
The Network recognizes the importance that
States Members of the United Nations attach to
developing policies, programmes and strategies to
prevent and combat trafficking in persons, including
its incorporation of fighting this threat into the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the concerted
implementation of the Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons. We therefore welcome the
convening of today’s high-level meeting, as well
as the adoption of the political declaration on the
implementation of the United Nations Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons (resolution
72/1), which will serve as a foundation for our common
action to end this crime wherever it may occur. In
this regard, the Network underlines the importance
of the universal ratification and implementation of
international legally binding instruments to address
this crime, including the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress, and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children.
We also want to highlight the value-added
contribution of the Human Security approach in
combating trafficking in persons. The holistic and
contextual nature of the Human Security approach
is well placed to address the disproportionate impact
of trafficking in persons on vulnerable groups,
particularly women and children. This approach, which
places humans at the centre of all considerations, is also
conducive to promoting partnership, coordination and
coherence in the efforts we undertake. Accordingly, we
welcome the work of the Inter-Agency Coordination
Group against Trafficking in Persons, which has the

17-3013415/31

A/72/PV.24

United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
as its coordinator.
Given the meagre global resources available to
fight trafficking in persons, we also support and
urge other Member States to contribute to the United
Nations voluntary trust fund for victims of trafficking
in persons, especially women and children, established
under the Global Plan of Action and the United Nations
Trust Fund for Human Security, which could provide
support for projects that combat trafficking in persons.
We remain deeply concerned by the threat posed by this
serious crime, which is affecting international security
and constitutes a global challenge.
(spoke in Spanish)
I would now like to address the topic of my
country’s national capacities in this area.
On behalf of the Government of the Republic of
Panama, over which His Excellency Mr. Juan Carlos
Varela Rodríguez presides, it is my pleasure to take
this opportunity to share a few words in my capacity as
Minister of Security, Chair of the National Commission
against Trafficking in Persons in Panama, member of
the regional coalition against trafficking in persons and
member of the Board of Trustees of the voluntary trust
fund for victims of trafficking in persons.
For President Juan Carlos Varela Rodríguez’s
Administration, preventing and combating trafficking
in persons is a priority within our citizen-security
strategy, which is aimed at ensuring human rights and
protecting Panama’s platform of world-class services
and connectivity from organized crime, with a view to
ensuring that it is not used for illegal activities. Based
on our awareness of the great responsibility we had
undertaken as the State of Panama and our compliance,
since the first month of its implementation, with
the Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons, adopted in 2010, we have made some important
achievements, including dismantling 15 networks
used in trafficking in persons, prosecuting traffickers
by opening more than 10 cases and completing three
of them, yielding three guilty verdicts, and rescuing
more than 150 victims from the scourge between
2015 and 2017. Those operational results are the fruit
of an array of concrete actions aimed at preventing
trafficking,
prosecuting
traffickers,
protecting
victims and the establishing alliances to mobilize
cooperative resources.
16/31

27/09/2017

At the institutional, technical and legal levels, we
have established a national anti-trafficking commission
made up of 16 public-sector entities and representatives
of the private sector and international organizations. In
addition, we are enforcing our Law No. 79 of 2011 against
trafficking in persons and other related activities.
In October, we will hold a meeting of our National
Commission in order to adopt the matrix of intervention
modalities set forth in the national plan against
trafficking in persons for the five-year period from
2017 to 2022, which includes five strategic approaches
and courses of action, as well as goals, management
guidelines and the creation of an entity responsible
for their implementation. The Commission has been a
major driving force in a nationwide awareness-raising
campaign mirroring the United Nations Blue Heart
Campaign against Human Trafficking, including such
activities as the recent large-scale anti-trafficking
campaign that brought together more than 2,000 people
in one of the main streets of the country so that the
scourge could be known to all for the crime that it is.
During the past several months, in order to strengthen
national prevention efforts, we have organized official
academic activities and events at the national level as
well as radio and television spots designed to raise
public awareness and to promote participation and
awareness of civil servants and civil society with a
view to preventing and combating trafficking. We have
carried out these activities with the support of two
international organizations that I would like to take this
opportunity to thank, the International Organization
for Migration and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime. We hope to continue working together with
those entities and with all other relevant organizations
that wish to join in this effort.
Through its activities as Chair of the regional
coalition against trafficking in persons and as
Vice-Chair of the Board of Trustees of the United
Nations voluntary trust fund for victims of trafficking
in persons, Panama remains very active, together with
the Chair of the Board, Ms. Benita Ferrero-Waldner,
and its other members, in combating human trafficking
at the regional and international levels. I take this
opportunity to call on all representatives to share with
their respective Governments the need to contribute to
the trust fund, the goals of which include carrying out
activities in tandem with UNODC aimed at supporting
the victims of trafficking.
17-30134

27/09/2017

Accordingly, as Vice-Chair of the trust fund,
Panama wants to set an example, so I am proud to say that
we have already approved a transfer of funds. Further,
working closely with UNODC, we are currently in the
process of building a shelter for trafficking victims that
will be the first of its kind in the region.
On behalf of the Ministry of Security and the
Government of Panama, we urgently call on Member
States to participate actively in the panel discussions
we have planned so that together we can find the best
tools to help us combat and eradicate trafficking in
persons and fight transnational crime.
The President: Before giving the floor to the next
speaker, may I once again appeal to all speakers for
their cooperation in observing the time limit of their
statements so that all those inscribed on the list will be
heard in a timely manner.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Emmanuel
Ngoie Kasongo Ilunga, Minister in Charge of Congolese
Nationals Abroad of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Mr. Ilunga (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): At a time when Africa and the rest
of the world are facing an acute migrant crisis that
denies humankind the right to peace, I would like to
thank Secretary-General António Guterres for the very
timely initiative of including this agenda item on the
sidelines of the opening of the seventy-second session
of the General Assembly.
It is a topic of great interest to my country, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. My participation in
the work here reaffirms the firm commitment of the
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, His
Excellency Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange, to contributing
to international peace and security, without which the
world is at risk of unravelling at the societal level. As
everyone knows, slavery and trafficking in persons
are cross-cutting social issues that lead to transborder
violations that systematically infringe on international
human rights agreements and put us in situations that
often force States and international organizations to
expend tremendous efforts to eradicate them.
Like the countries of North Africa and the Middle
East, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is becoming
a destination and transit country for men, women and
children who are victims of trafficking in persons and
the smuggling of migrants. According to the report

A/72/PV.24

presented by the National Assembly at its ordinary
session in 2013, more than 400 young Congolese girls
had been sold as sex slaves. This is relevant to the mission
in the Middle East in August that I personally carried
out with the support of the International Organization
for Migration upon instructions from my Head of State,
which was aimed at repatriating seven Congolese girls
who had been subjected to forced domestic labour and
other inhumane practices, as well as being abused as
sex slaves.
In that regard, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo joined the fight to eradicate trafficking in all
its forms by using the legal system to punish all acts
involving the forced labour of children and women
as well as all forms of sexual abuse. The Government
was called on to consider these scourges thoroughly
by organizing a conference, to be held in Kinshasa on
12 and 13 October, on trafficking in persons and the
smuggling of migrants, with the goal of establishing a
permanent mechanism to combat these two scourges.
Sexual violence is yet another scourge. In that
regard, a collection of military justice decisions dating
from 2010 to 2015 has been compiled in the Journal of
Decisions of the Military High Court, which has shown
that cases of sexual violence in our country decreased
by 85 per cent in this period, during which a framework
for providing victims with reparations was created.
Preventive measures and ways of providing assistance
to victims have also been recommended. It is clear that
the work of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to restore peace and tranquillity in the
eastern part of our country is in line with efforts being
made by international organizations to end the cycle of
wars and the presence of armed groups in that part of
our national territory, resulting from the exploitation of
resources that has fuelled the misdeeds condemned by
the international community.
In conclusion, my Government requests expertise
and support from all parties committed to combating
the scourge of human trafficking, with a view to
helping us implement the recommendations adopted at
today’s meeting, as well as the provisions of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Naela Gabr Mohamed Gabr, State
Minister, President of the National Coordination
Committee on Migration and Combating Human

17-3013417/31

A/72/PV.24

27/09/2017

Trafficking of Egypt, who will speak on behalf of the
Group of Friends United Against Human Trafficking.

efforts to tackle these root causes in order to put an end
to this heinous crime.

Ms. Gabr (Egypt): I have the honour to speak
today on behalf of the Group of Friends United
against Human Trafficking, which comprises Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Bolivia, Ecuador, Eritrea, India,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Libya, Nicaragua, Nigeria, the Philippines,
Qatar, the Russian Federation, Singapore, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan, the United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela and my own country, Egypt.

Needless to say, the international community
must come up with a better, more just, more equitable
and more comprehensive response if it is to defeat
this scourge. We must ensure that the issue of
human trafficking continues to be the subject of the
international community’s acute focus and engagement.
For its part, the Group of Friends is committed to
working with each other and with partners around the
world. We recognize the important role played by the
Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking
in Persons, together with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, in this process, and support an
expansion of its activities related, among other things,
to the implementation of the Global Plan of Action.
We invite all stakeholders to take an active part in the
forthcoming appraisal of the Global Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons and make contributions
to the United Nations voluntary trust fund for victims of
trafficking in persons, especially women and children.

We welcome the convening of this high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on the review of
the achievements made in implementing the Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons. The
Group also commends today’s adoption of the political
declaration on the topic (resolution 72/1). In this
regard, we would like to express our appreciation to the
facilitators, His Excellency the Ambassador of Belgium
and Her Excellency the Ambassador of Qatar, who
demonstrated great political acumen in their conduct of
the complex discussions in the negotiations. We thank
them for their efforts and leadership throughout the
drafting process. We also thank all Member States for
their valuable contributions to reaching an agreement
on the text of the political declaration. It is worthwhile
mentioning in this context that the Declaration appears
to be the first comprehensive political document on
human trafficking to be adopted by the United Nations
since the Global Plan of Action.
The Group would like to reiterate its support for the
political declaration, which it considers a crucial element
in our collective response to the multidimensional issue
of trafficking in persons. We also welcome the fact
that the Declaration is a meaningful supplement to the
Global Plan of Action in that it outlines ways of further
bringing together international efforts aimed at curbing
human trafficking.
There is, however, no room for complacency.
Poverty and inequality within and among countries
are the root causes that make people vulnerable
to trafficking. Combating poverty and reducing
inequality are the essence of development efforts. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development — which
gave rise, among other things, to the three Sustainable
Development Goals on human trafficking, 5.2, 8.7 and
16.2 — is a clear reminder of the need to scale up our
18/31

The Group of Friends believes that the political
declaration and today’s high-level meeting of the
General Assembly will be an important step forward
in addressing the global challenge of trafficking
in persons.
(spoke in Arabic)
I shall now speak in my national capacity as the
representative of Egypt.
In 2007, Egypt was among the first countries to
adopt a national mechanism to coordinate actions
among various entities established to combat the crime
of human trafficking. This step was followed by field
research on the most common forms of trafficking
in Egypt. Later, in 2010, we enacted Law No. 64, on
prosecuting traffickers and protecting victims. Since
then, we have adopted a national strategy based on
four pillars — prevention, protection, prosecution and
partnership — and we remain eager to implement the
United Nations Global Plan of Action. To that end, we
have set up a national action plan based on the following
lines of action.
The first is the effective enforcement of Law No.
64 of 2010 through the training of officials in the
justice system, whether arresting officers, investigators
or members of the judiciary, by organizing intensive
courses for them.
17-30134

27/09/2017

The second is raising the awareness of relevant
stakeholders,
especially
non-governmental
organizations, social workers, teachers, among others,
in prevention and protection processes.
The third is sponsoring a national media campaign
addressed to the most vulnerable sectors, focusing
on the areas in the different governorates, especially
villages, where human trafficking is active.
The fourth is promoting a victim-protection
mechanism, establishing foster homes for women and
children and taking regulated measures to establish a
fund for the protection of victims and witnesses.
The fifth is accelerating the implementation of
development programmes and plans in slums and other
low-income areas.
The sixth is stressing the interconnections between
combating human trafficking and fighting illegal
migration. The relationship between combating human
trafficking and illegal migration is worth highlighting
because illegal migrants are prone to abuse.
The seventh is activating regional cooperation as a
foundation for information exchange and discovering the
practices that work best in the Arab or African context.
The eighth is respecting the human rights
dimension, which must be stressed at all stages and in
all activities undertaken to counter human trafficking.
The rights of victims and witnesses are respected
through activities coordinated with the United Nations
Human Rights Council, the Egyptian National Council
for Women and the Egyptian National Council for
Childhood and Motherhood.
The ninth involves facilitating international
cooperation with United Nations organs and agencies
to make the best use of the technical and practical
lessons learned.
The tenth is cooperating with non-governmental
organizations, especially those working to raise
awareness of the danger of human trafficking in our
governorates while underlining the importance of
reporting criminals and highlighting the mechanisms
designed to protect witnesses.
I will briefly touch on some of the achievements
made from 2013 to the present. In October 2016, we
launched a national strategy to prevent and combat
human trafficking, which included a five-year plan
of action drafted with the assistance of many national

A/72/PV.24

institutions and non-governmental organizations. These
entities also have also helped in the implementation
process through activities that raise awareness and
provide assistance, for example, to households headed by
women. We have established three specialized criminal
chambers within appeals courts in three Egyptian
governorates in order to ensure rapid judicial process
in the handling of cases. We have also established a
unit to counter human trafficking and have worked
with various entities, non-governmental organizations
and the media.
Mr. Danon (Israel), Vice-President, took the Chair.
Also in 2016, we enacted Law No. 82 on combating
illegal migration and trafficking, which addresses a
number of very important points: it is the first law of its
kind in the Middle East to define the term “smuggling
of migrants”. It also promotes deterrence by strictly
punishing perpetrators and combines into a single
committee two national committees, one on countering
human trafficking and the other on illegal migration. I
am honoured to preside over this combined committee,
which is part of the Cabinet. We have also adopted
a national strategy and a related media campaign
designed to deter the merchants of death and provide
protection to those at risk of being abused.
Egypt has joined the Aware Migrants campaign
organized by the Italian Ministry of Interior together
with the International Organization for Migration.
This campaign is being conducted in three
languages — English, French and Arabic — in line
with our efforts to protect migrants, especially those
coming from Southern Africa. In cooperation with the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs, we have also organized
a number of training courses on human trafficking
for African diplomats, peacekeepers and borderprotection personnel.
In all regional and international forums, Egypt has
declared its readiness to cooperate with all regional and
international bodies in combating this crime by any and
all means, in order to protect society while respecting
the rights of the individual.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Carl Greenidge, Vice-President and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Guyana.
Mr. Greenidge (Guyana): The convening of this
high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the
appraisal of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to

17-3013419/31

A/72/PV.24

Combat Trafficking in Persons comes at an important
juncture in our work. It takes place at a time when human
trafficking is the world’s most profitable criminal
enterprise, a status it shares with arms trafficking. The
Government of Guyana expresses its solidarity with
victims and survivors of such crimes while committing
to ensuring that all measures are taken nationally in the
global fight against the trafficking in persons.
I wish to highlight Guyana’s recent elevation from
a Tier 2 to a Tier 1 country, as reflected in the United
States Department of State Trafficking in Persons
Report 2017. We believe that this achievement is justified
recognition of the tireless efforts of the Government of
Guyana and its partners aimed at eliminating trafficking
in persons in our country. While this elevation to a Tier
1 country is a welcome achievement for Guyana, we
remain cognizant of the many challenges that remain
in addressing human trafficking, especially with regard
to training and awareness, more efficient prosecutions
and support for and referral of victims.
An extremely important aspect of any Government’s
fight against human trafficking is its effort to prevent
the crime from occurring in the first place. In Guyana
we have embarked on a number of different initiatives
through the pillars of prevention, protection and
prosecution in an effort to dissuade prospective
offenders from committing this crime. The Government
of Guyana has established a ministerial task force on
trafficking in persons that promotes the implementation
of a number of measures and initiatives to combat
human trafficking.
The ministerial task force has so far conducted
awareness-training for police prosecutors, immigration
officials and media practitioners, especially those who
report on crimes involving children. In addition, the
task force’s action sub-committee has also been active
in 2017, as teams led by the Guyana Police Force and
the Ministry of Social Protection conducted a number
of enforcement sweeps in areas where the crime of
trafficking in persons was suspected to be taking
place. In 2017, the task force also noted an increase in
reports from Guyana’s citizens, which suggests that
the awareness campaign is showing some measure of
success. The people’s increased awareness of their civic
roles and responsibilities has been pivotal to the success
achieved by the Government of Guyana in its efforts to
eliminate this scourge.
20/31

27/09/2017

Guyana’s difficult terrain presents an acute
challenge for those who monitor and enforce our
porous borders. With limited capacity to effectively
police the country’s more remote regions, the Guyana
Police Force regularly engages in enforcement sweeps
that include surveillance, surprise inspections and
establishment raids, and in raising awareness using
various communication media in these remote
communities, through schools and youth groups, both
general and faith-based.
We would like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge the important collaboration we have
with our many non-governmental organizations
and civil-society partners in the areas of victim care
and assistance, including ensuring that identified
victims are not penalized or revictimized for having
been trafficked.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the Government
of Guyana’s commitment to collaborating with
stakeholders, both local and foreign, to combat the
crime of human trafficking in Guyana through the
pillars of prevention, protection and prosecution.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Erastus Uutoni, Vice-Minister for Home
Affairs and Immigration of the Republic of Namibia.
Mr. Uutoni (Namibia): In September 2016, at
the high-level summit to address large movements
of refugees and migrants, we agreed on and made a
declaration that contained provisions for the drafting of
global compacts on safe, orderly and regular migration
and on refugees.
This high-level meeting on the appraisal of the
United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons provides us with an opportunity
to continue our exchange of views on the Plan of Action
on how we should work together to fight the scourge
of human trafficking, which has become a worldwide
problem tantamount to modern-day slavery.
One of the reasons that trafficking in persons
has continued to grow is the difficulty of combating
it, due in large part to the fact that it is a concealed
crime in which victims are promised better lives in
their destination countries. As a result, even cases
where law enforcement officials suspect the presence
of trafficking are rarely prosecuted because the victims
often side with the perpetrators.
17-30134

27/09/2017

The unfortunate imbalance in the world’s
economies means that some countries are targeted
as destinations for trafficked persons and others as
sources for victims. It goes without saying that as
long as there is a rich global North and a poor global
South, traffickers will continue to take advantage of the
need for labour in rich countries where the provisions
of labour migration laws favour highly skilled labour
over semi-skilled personnel. This makes it difficult
for people in the latter category to migrate, making
it possible for some of them to be lured into modernday slavery. Furthermore, the strengthening of border
controls by many nations, aided by the closure of some
formal channels of migration, provides the perfect
motive for greater use of irregular migration channels
in which traffickers exploit vulnerable migrants.
The continued political unrest worldwide continues
to drive millions of people from their homes to
unknown worlds across international boundaries.
Some undertake dangerous journeys, crossing deserts
or braving the Mediterranean Sea in inadequate boats.
We in Namibia are also challenged by the scourge
of trafficking in persons, with some suspects being
acquitted due to lack of evidence. So far, we have
secured one conviction, in 2016, while other cases
remain under investigation. Although trafficking in
persons is currently criminalized under our Prevention
of Organized Crime Act, efforts are under way to enact
a law that deals specifically with trafficking in persons.
In addition, manuals on the identification and treatment
of suspected victims and victims of trafficking have
been provided to immigration officers and other law
enforcement officers. Joint training of border officials
continues. and both police and immigration training
curriculums are now geared to tackling that problem.
It is our belief that now is the time for the world to
agree on workable strategies. The time has come for
us to strengthen border controls in order to punish the
offenders and protect the victims. The time has come
for us to make lawful migration easy and prevent the
creation of a market for traffickers. The time has come
for world leaders to realize that if States create a better
environment, they will reduce people’s need to seek
livelihoods elsewhere, and hence reduce the number of
trafficking victims.
In conclusion, the time has come for us to build
the capacity of officials dealing with migration,
provide shelter for the victims of trafficking, enhance

A/72/PV.24

cooperation between North and South, build bridges to
facilitate migration instead of barriers and respect the
human rights of migrants.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Andrei Dapkiunas, Vice-Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Belarus.
Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): I
would like to know how the United Nations Global Plan
of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons and today’s
meeting help to combat trafficking in persons. That is
a particularly timely question. Imagine for a moment
that the people who are the victims of this modern slave
trade are asking themselves that question and happen to
have found out about today’s meeting here in New York.
Would those people, trapped in the bonds of slavery,
be inspired by the fact that the States Members of the
United Nations have agreed on the text for a political
declaration? Would it spark hope in their souls to know
how much thought has gone into our recent work?
Would they rejoice in the fact that the participants in
our high-level meeting have once again unanimously
labelled trafficking in persons as a phenomenon that
shames humankind?
Those are rhetorical questions, because we all
know the answers to them very well. The Global Plan
of Action is not a convention, it is only an invitation
to act. It is a declaration of intent. The real value and
significance of those intentions are attained only
when they take the form of practical action. Which
practical actions will generate the hope that humankind
can find the determination and will to put an end to
human trafficking?
The first is unity of action. Only by really uniting
the efforts of all countries and organizations and
placing them above any considerations of political
gain, convenience or expedience can we achieve a new
dynamic in the struggle against modern slavery. Any
attempt to use the issue of the fight against human
trafficking for self-promotion, selecting preferential
partners or finding aspects of the issue to criticize will
create, if not the actuality, at least the impression of a
lack of focus and chaos in our efforts. Until every State,
every secretariat of an international organization and
every non-governmental partner works singlemindedly
to achieve the mindset of a group of friends and of open
and honest partners against a mindset of competition,
human traffickers will sleep soundly.

17-3013421/31

A/72/PV.24

Secondly, we need to take small, practical steps
so that we all contribute what we can to the common
effort. It is long past time for us to recognize that
participation in the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its complementary
Palermo Protocol is a matter of moral choice as well
as a political and legal issue. If traffickers can see that
the participation of States in such key documents is not
universal, they will have strong evidence that we are
still divided as a global community.
In addition, much greater support is required for
the work of the voluntary trust fund for the protection
of victims of human trafficking. As a representative of
Belarus, I am proud to say that my country has made
its third voluntary contribution to the fund. I would like
to appeal to the high-level representatives of Member
States to consider the possibility of supporting the fund
as an acute and urgent necessity. Allocating the means
to support the fund represents direct action providing
practical support for victims of human trafficking.
Thirdly, our most important work is the action we
take at the national level. The main drivers of those
efforts are our active major State stakeholders, elites
that are clearly aware of their moral responsibility
for more resolute and uncompromising action to
combat human trafficking. They are elites open to
partnership-based cooperation to achieve those goals
with like-minded people in their own countries and at
the international level.
Let us each ask ourselves if are we among those
like-minded thinkers. Protecting people from slavery,
violence and exploitation is possible. The time for
discussions and navel-gazing has passed. Now is the
time to act.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Marjorie Espinosa, Vice-Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic.
Ms. Espinosa (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation is grateful for the convening of
this high-level meeting on the evaluation of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons, which is an appeal by the international
community for a concerted response in fighting and
eliminating all forms of that transnational crime.
The Global Plan of Action demonstrates the
willingness of States to shoulder their commitments,
with concrete decisions on preventing human
22/31

27/09/2017

trafficking, protecting and assisting victims and
prosecuting human traffickers, all underpinned by the
international legal framework and adherence to the
domestic regulations of States.
Following the Dominican Republic’s ratification of
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocols, as well as the
adoption of the Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons, the Dominican Government
has taken substantial steps at the domestic level to
strengthen its institutional structures, improve the
capacities of its principal actors and adapt its specific
laws. A national action mechanism was created by
the executive branch through decree 575-07, the
inter-institutional commission to combat trafficking
in persons and illegal trafficking of migrants. The
commission is composed of 14 State institutions and is
led by the Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
Under the legal protection of the commission,
the Ministry for Foreign Affairs carried out a series
of meetings for formulating and implementing our
national plan of action against trafficking in persons
and illicit trafficking of migrants for the period from
2009 to 2014. During those meetings, we incorporated
effective public policies to ensure a comprehensive
and holistic approach in the fight against trafficking
in persons. In concert with that national strategy, the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs is currently designing a
second national plan of action for the period from 2017
to 2020, through an inter-institutional and intersectoral
consensus, in order to reaffirm and strengthen our
national policy against such crimes against humanity.
The objective of our national plan to combat
trafficking in persons remains the promotion of policies
that are integrated and coordinated among the various
institutions of the State, civil society and international
organizations related to the subject, within the
framework of its three axes — prevention, assistance to
victims and witnesses and the restitution of their rights,
and investigation and prosecution.
With regard to prevention, a number of actions
have been taken, including publicity campaigns aimed
at raising awareness about trafficking in persons and
the modalities, days of reflection, informative panels
and publications on the subject and, in particular,
targeted campaigns on the prevention of the sexual and
commercial exploitation of children and adolescents,
with the technical and financial support of United
17-30134

27/09/2017

A/72/PV.24

Nations agencies such as UNICEF and the International
Organization for Migration.

aimed at increasing the effectiveness of national actors
and focusing due attention on the migration phenomenon.

Where victim assistance is concerned, the
Dominican Government has taken specific actions
for protecting and caring for victims of trafficking
in persons, restoring their rights and preventing their
revictimization. In 2016, the first specialized home
to help adult victims of trafficking was established,
and a victim assistance unit was created under the
Attorney General’s Office. More recently, we signed
an inter-institutional agreement on the creation of a
pilot programme for the protection and reintegration of
Dominican deportees and returnees, including victims
of trafficking, as a vulnerable migrant population. That
was made possible by the support of the Organization
of American States and the International Organization
for Migration.

My Government reaffirms its commitment to the
implementation of all of the international instruments
against trafficking in human beings, and we also
commit to further strengthening our internal structures
to assist victims and foster an institutional culture with
human, financial and technical resources that enable a
more comprehensive approach to the phenomenon.

Regarding investigation and prosecution, among
the most significant initiatives and advances has been
our establishment in 2013 of an office of a specialized
prosecutor for the illegal trafficking of migrants and
trafficking in persons, thereby creating a designated
space and specialized personnel dedicated to working
specifically on trafficking in persons, in close
coordination with other governmental investigation
authorities. Since its inception, the special prosecutor’s
office has investigated, prosecuted and convicted
sex and labour traffickers and migrant traffickers,
and significant progress has been made in the
judicial system.

Lastly, we recognize and greatly value the
importance of having a forum at the multilateral level,
such as that of the United Nations, which promotes
synergies among States, the exchange of good
practices and information on progress, as well as the
identification of new challenges in attaining goals that
are of global interest.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Natalia Fedorovych, Vice-Minister for
Social Policy of Ukraine.
Ms. Fedorovych (Ukraine): We commend the
convening of this high-level meeting to assess the
achievements, gaps and challenges in the implementation
of the Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons. Trafficking remains a real threat to peace,
human rights, democratic governance and the rule of
law, as well as to socioeconomic development. Ukraine
reiterates its support for and full adherence to the
implementation of the Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons.

All those public polices harmonize, in a crosscutting manner, with our National Development Strategy
2030, which includes objectives and lines of action for
managing migratory flows, strengthening mechanisms
for preventing and punishing trafficking in persons and
establishing comprehensive systems to care for victims,
all in connection to Sustainable Development Goal 8 of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

In recent years, we have observed a significant
evolution in the forms that trafficking in persons takes,
especially in conflict and post-conflict situations.
In various parts of the world, conflicts encompass a
wide range of forms of exploitation, including sexual
violence, forced labour, slavery and the unlawful
recruitment of children by force into armed service in
conflict situations.

The Dominican Republic believes firmly that an
effective approach to combating trafficking in persons
must have lines of action directed at a cooperative
approach among countries of origin, transit, destination
and return, prioritizing a necessary and timely
intervention in favour of the identified victims, creating
and strengthening bilateral work commissions and
encouraging regional and multilateral cooperation for
the design of technological platforms for information
exchange. Those platforms would generate indicators

Another aspect of the issue is that people displaced
by conflict, including refugees, can be especially
vulnerable to all kinds of exploitation. In that regard,
Ukraine fully supports the commitments in the New
York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants on
combating human trafficking, including through
targeted measures to identify, protect and assist victims,
as well as on preventing human trafficking among
those affected by displacement, taking into account the
particular vulnerabilities of women and children. We

17-3013423/31

A/72/PV.24

also lend our support to the Inter-Agency Coordination
Group against Trafficking in Persons, which must be an
efficient tool for the coordination of joint efforts.
I would like to mention another issue, of great
importance for all of us, which is that of accountability
and prosecution for perpetrators of trafficking in
persons and of crimes of sexual violence in conflicts.
Widespread impunity for such crimes is unacceptable,
because their repetition creates a vicious circle of
delinquency. Along with the provision of psychological,
social and medical support to victims, we see the fight
against impunity as a key priority area.
Ukraine supports international efforts to combat all
forms of human rights abuses and violations in conflict
and post-conflict situations. We remain strongly
committed to eradicating trafficking. Unfortunately,
my country has not been immune to this problem. The
fight against this horrendous phenomenon is at the top
of the Ukrainian Government’s agenda for its activities
in the area of human rights. Over the past decade,
Ukraine has taken a number of important steps towards
establishing a viable nationwide counter-trafficking
response and setting up a Government-owned national
referral mechanism to identify, assist and protect
victims of trafficking.
Ukraine’s ratification of key international
instruments in the area of combating human
trafficking — including the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
especially Women and Children, and the Council of
Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in
Human Beings — and its adoption in 2011 of a national
law on combating human trafficking and of a national
counter-trafficking action plan for the period from 2016
to 2020 are just a few concrete examples of the steps
undertaken in our fight against this dreadful problem.
With regard to protecting children from exploitation
and abuse, Ukraine is a party to the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocol and to the Council of Europe Convention on
the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation
and Sexual Abuse.
Let me note, however, that not all of the documents
I mentioned can currently be properly implemented
in areas of Ukraine that are not under Government
control. Three years of Russian aggression against
Ukraine has led to increased risks of human trafficking
24/31

27/09/2017

in my country. We have seen numerous cases of human
trafficking and forced labour, even slavery, in certain
areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, which are
outside the Government’s control. But those cases
remain largely unaddressed, due to a lack of safe access
for, and proper attention by, the monitoring missions.
The situation is complicated by the 400-kilometre
section of the State border with the Russian Federation
that is not under Ukraine’s control and is widely used to
move weapons, ammunition and fighters into the zone of
conflict. The victims and perpetrators of trafficking in
persons are also moving across that uncontrolled section
of the border. In that regard, it should be understood that
Russia does not have comprehensive mechanisms for
the effective investigation, prosecution and punishment
of perpetrators in accordance with the Convention on
Action against Trafficking in Human Beings. Among
all the Council of Europe member States, today only
Russia has not joined that Convention.
Trafficking is a blatant violation of human rights
and an offence against the dignity and integrity of a
person. Success in our common fight against this
scourge requires the efforts of all concerned. A longterm solution can emerge only from consistent political
commitments and joint action by the international
community to eradicate human trafficking, promote
justice and accountability and protect victims.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. Abd El-Ghani Awad El-Karim,
Under-Secretary of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of
the Sudan.
Mr. El-Karim (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf of my country, I would like to warmly thank the
President of the General Assembly for convening this
important meeting, and to reaffirm that we are ready
to cooperate with him with regard to our commitments
based on the United Nations Global Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons, in order to end this
abominable crime.
Furthermore, my delegation welcomes the adoption
of the political declaration on the implementation of
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons (resolution 72/1), which
reaffirms the New York Declaration for Refugees and
Migrants, of September 2016. In September 2015, we
adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
which also reinforces these efforts through those of its
Goals and targets that combat trafficking in persons.
17-30134

27/09/2017

Sudan supports all international efforts to
prevent and reduce human trafficking. We affirm that
transnational organized crime in all its forms is a threat,
and that fighting those crimes requires strengthening
international, regional and bilateral cooperation in the
relevant areas, including exchanging information and
monitoring suspect financial flows. We also need to
take into account the economic and social aspects of
the underlying causes of this phenomenon, for poverty
is the most dangerous source driving this crime. We
call for a holistic approach that includes partnerships
and measures to prevent trafficking and ensure that
traffickers are prosecuted and victims are protected.
Large flows of migrants and refugees from
neighbouring countries have led to major challenges
for my country. The flow of migrants is exacerbated by
illegal migration and by refugees fleeing camps in order
to reach towns and cities. All of those demographic
movements are characterized by trafficking in persons,
particularly women and children.
The Sudan is a transit country. It is big and covered
with desert. My country has been making tireless
efforts to fight organized crime consistent with our
international and regional commitments. In that regard,
I would like to share with the General Assembly certain
successes that we have achieved in the area.
First, in October 2014, we adopted a law on
combating human trafficking and set up a national
committee to fight it. After the law came into force, our
police were able to free more than 861 victims, most of
them women and children being sent to Libya and on
to Europe. They were also able to liberate 560 victims
from our northern province, where they were on the
way to Sinai.
Secondly, we have amended our asylum regulation
acts of 1974 and 2014 so that they are now consistent
with changes at the regional and international levels.
Thirdly, we have made amendments to our
customs regulations to bring them into line with
recent developments.
Fourthly, in October 2014, Khartoum hosted a
Conference on Human Trafficking and Smuggling in
the Horn of Africa, held in cooperation with the African
Union and the European Union, with the participation
of the neighbouring States of Eritrea, Ethiopia, Egypt
and South Sudan. The Conference resulted in what
became known as the Khartoum process, with another

A/72/PV.24

conference held on the same issue in Rome in November
2014. We call on the international community to meet
its commitments under the Khartoum process.
Fifthly, my country’s Government has signed a
number of agreements with neighbouring countries in
order to monitor our borders. We have an agreement with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the International Organization for
Migration to combat the problem of porous borders,
particularly in eastern Sudan, where the majority of
victims are refugees and asylum seekers.
Once again, my country is determined to continue
its cooperation with the international community and
the United Nations and its specialized agencies to
combat human trafficking. We call for this issue to
be dealt with in an integrated fashion by taking the
necessary measures to halt it. We must also reinforce
our efforts to raise awareness on human trafficking and
the suffering of victims and to strengthen protection for
them and for their rights.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Jean Kalilani, Minister for Gender,
Children, Disability and Social Welfare of Malawi.
Ms. Kalilani (Malawi): I am delighted to be here
and to be able to apprise the General Assembly of the
progress achieved in the implementation of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons, adopted by resolution 64/293, in order to assess
the related achievements, gaps and challenges and the
implementation of the relevant legal instruments. This
is a very important meeting, as trafficking in persons is
a global issue that requires our concerted efforts to end
this degrading modern-day slavery — the worst form
of slavery, in fact. Its barbarism and evil nature have no
place in the modern world.
The Global Plan of Action calls for Governments,
United Nations bodies, international organizations and
civil society to work together to further integrate the
fight against human trafficking into the Organization’s
broader programmes for global development and to
strengthen security around the world.
Malawi joins the rest of the States Members of
the United Nations in the commitment to combating
trafficking in persons. That commitment is underscored
by the fact that the Global Plan of Action is complemented
by the Sustainable Development Goals, which include
three targets that directly relate to trafficking and to the

17-3013425/31

A/72/PV.24

implementation of the Global Plan of Action. Malawi
acknowledges the implementation of the Global Plan at
the international, regional and national levels.
On 17 March 2005, the Government of Malawi ratified
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its two Protocols — the Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, and the Protocol
against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and
Air. Furthermore, the Government of Malawi enacted a
trafficking in persons act, No.3 of 2015, which provides
a comprehensive legislative framework for combating
and preventing trafficking in persons through a human
rights-focused and victim-centred approach.
Malawi has also established an institutional
framework for effective and coordinated regulations
on trafficking in persons and related matters, including
provisions for protecting victims of trafficking,
preventing trafficking in persons, establishing funding
arrangements and caring for and supporting victims, as
well as for penalties for specific offences.
Malawi has continued to translate that political
will into concrete, specific, time-bound measures,
with its adoption of a 2017-2020 national plan of action
against trafficking in persons, officially launched on
29 August. The plan acknowledges a holistic approach
to interventions by all stakeholders in order to achieve
its vision of creating a Malawi free of trafficking in
persons and is aligned with the United Nations Global
Plan of Action. We are very grateful to the Organization,
especially the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, as well as to the Southern African Development
Community and the Royal Norwegian Government,
for their technical and financial support for achieving
those milestones.
However, more support will be needed for our
implementation of our national plan. A high-level
national coordination committee was established in
2016 to coordinate and manage all issues relating to
trafficking in persons. We are currently in the process
of establishing an anti-trafficking fund with the sole
purpose of supporting victims of trafficking; providing
capacity-building for enforcement, social welfare and
judicial officers and for investigators and prosecutors;
and reintegrating victims back into their communities.
Malawi is also implementing its national registration
programme, which includes birth registration. This is
very important for citizens and will deter traffickers
26/31

27/09/2017

from taking our children, who are the victims most
affected.
Today we need to ensure that the United Nations
Global Plan of Action addresses issues of transparency
and resource mobilization in order to support the
Member States in anti-trafficking programmes,
effective partnerships and dealing with corruption.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Ms. Vassiliadou (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its member States. Turkey, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
The United Nations Global Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons remains essential as a
framework for joint action to combat trafficking. Today
we renew and reinvigorate our common commitment
to eradicating trafficking in human beings and to
protecting the human rights of the victims.
The process leading up to this meeting, including
the multi-stakeholder meeting in July, has provided us
with an opportunity to take stock of the progress that
has been made in the implementation of the Global
Plan of Action. It has further allowed us to address the
persistent and emerging challenges that we face in our
efforts to combat trafficking in persons.
The Global Plan of Action is structured around
prevention, prosecution, protection and partnerships.
This approach, which is also reflected in the European
Union anti-trafficking strategy, has proved its
applicability in practice, and we look forward to seeing
it applied to addressing trafficking in human beings
under the United Nations global compact on migration
and the United Nations global compact for refugees.
The EU has set forth, through law and policy, a
comprehensive framework for addressing trafficking in
human beings in a victim-focused, human-rights-based,
gender-specific and child-sensitive way. The EU and its
member States have demonstrated their commitment
to implementing the United Nations Global Plan of
Action and to upholding the legal standards enshrined
in the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocols, as well as other
17-30134

27/09/2017

A/72/PV.24

international legal instruments addressing trafficking
in human beings.

and children, especially unaccompanied children and
those separated from their families.

We are working globally with partners to build
capacities and promote those standards. The EU remains
the world’s largest donor of aid, and it finances many
projects promoting anti-trafficking action around the
world. One example is the joint European Union-United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Global Action to
Prevent and Address Trafficking in Persons and the
Smuggling of Migrants, launched in January 2016. It
delivers assistance to 13 countries around the world,
in partnership with the International Organization for
Migration and UNICEF.

We must ensure accountability for perpetrators. It
is the traffickers that should be punished by the law, not
the victims.

No country in the world is immune to trafficking
in human beings. We need to promote cooperation,
in particular among countries of origin, transit
and destination, including in the development of
transnational referral mechanisms — which link
national referral mechanisms so as to better identify,
refer, protect and assist victims — as well as of data
collection systems and the exchange of information
for the development of evidence-based policies.
Cooperation with non-governmental organizations,
national human rights institutions, the private sector
and all other relevant partners is also essential.
We are faced with a number of emerging and
persistent challenges in the fight against trafficking,
which will require increased efforts in the future.
They include trafficking in the context of migration
and the refugee crisis, the nexus between conflict and
trafficking in human beings, the risk of trafficking in
supply chains, and trafficking for the purposes of sexual
abuse and exploitation, including of children online.
We have come a long way, but what is now vital
for the lives of victims and survivors is the effective
implementation of legal standards at national and
international levels. We must address trafficking in
human beings both as a heinous crime and as an abuse
and a violation of human rights. There is a need to
address root causes that render people vulnerable, and
we will work to achieve our commitments under the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in order to
address such root causes and vulnerabilities.
We must continue to promote the efforts of all the
relevant actors to identify victims of trafficking as early
as possible so as to ensure the realization of their right to
appropriate assistance, protection and support, taking
into account the particular vulnerabilities of women

Most important, we must work on prevention and
partnerships, since anything else comes too late for
the victims. Prevention is central to the Global Plan of
Action and to EU law and policies. We must step up our
efforts to discourage the demand that fosters all forms
of exploitation, in both the legal and illegal economies.
We also call for more cooperation at the United
Nations level and stress the role of the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons,
which has an essential part to play in ensuring that
efforts across the United Nations are coherent and
avoid duplication.
Finally, we reaffirm our full commitment to
continuing and reinforcing our work in this direction,
further enhancing international cooperation and
working towards an effective global response.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia.
Mr. Djundev (Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia): It is my great honour to take part in today’s
high-level meeting on the appraisal of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons.
The delegation of the Republic of Macedonia aligns
itself with the statement of the European Union, but I
would like to share with the General Assembly a few
remarks in my national capacity.
Let me first welcome this timely high-level
discussion on an important framework document. It is
crucial to keep focus on this heinous crime in all of its
aspects and forms, so that it is kept on the agenda along
with a variety of other pressing issues we are confronted
with. Trafficking in human beings is of particular
relevance in the context of the ongoing discussions on
the two compacts, on migrants and refugees.
In recent years we have witnessed the determination
and action of the United Nations and its Member
States, individually and collectively, to suppress this
extremely negative phenomenon, which constitutes
a serious threat to human dignity, human rights and

17-3013427/31

A/72/PV.24

development. Although some progress has been
achieved, there is no room for complacency. Challenges
remain that are gaining new forms and requiring an
innovative approach.
The Republic of Macedonia has always supported
initiatives to raise awareness within the United Nations
and other, regional, organizations aimed at more
efficient, effective and coordinated action in the area
of preventing and combating trafficking in human
beings. Although the primary responsibility for the
protection of human rights and the prevention of and
fight against trafficking in persons lies in the hands
of the Government, coordination, partnership and
cooperation with other national stakeholders, including
civil society and the private sector, are prerequisites
for effective implementation of protection measures
and policies.
On the national level, my country has taken a
number of important legislative and organizational steps
to prevent and combat trafficking in human beings.
Special attention is paid to prevention and to protection
measures that address the vulnerability of women and
children as the most likely victims of trafficking. Being
on the Balkan route, another important challenge for
my country has been human trafficking in the context
of illegal migration.
Unfortunately, despite all the efforts undertaken at
the national, regional and international levels, human
trafficking is still widespread. A more resolute and
comprehensive approach on the ground is therefore
required. In addition to prevention, we must protect
and assist victims, as well as prosecuting criminal
groups engaged in trafficking in persons, all of which
are prerequisites for yielding results in the fight against
this contemporary form of slavery.
Let me conclude by underlining that progress in the
implementation of the Global Plan of Action depends on
our resolve and the sustainability of our efforts, as well
as on our commitment to translate the obligations we
have undertaken into concrete actions on the ground.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
deputy Chair of the delegation of Israel.
Ms. Furman (Israel): One might think that slavery
and prostitution are problems of the past, relics from
another era. But unfortunately, even today, in the
twenty-first century, we still see innocent people fall
victim to human trafficking. Human trafficking does
28/31

27/09/2017

not exist in a vacuum. It is closely linked to organized
crime and terrorist groups that prey on their victims
in times of crisis. Nearly 80 per cent of all detected
trafficking victims are women and children. More
than half of trafficking worldwide is for the purpose
of sexual exploitation. Forced labour, which accounts
for nearly 40 per cent of all human trafficking, is the
slavery of our time.
The Bible tells us that thousands of years ago the
Israelite people were slaves in Egypt. After hundreds
of years of servitude, we were emancipated and gained
our freedom. But with that freedom came the eternal
obligation to remember the slavery we experienced.
For Israel, internalizing the slavery of our past informs
and shapes our efforts to end human trafficking and all
forms of modern slavery.
Throughout the 1990s and early 2000s, Israel
was faced with a severe spate of human trafficking
in which women were brought to Israel and forced
into prostitution. At the height of that phenomenon,
approximately 3,000 women a year were being brought
to Israel. Since then, Israel has developed two national
plans and aligned a range of ministries, including in
the areas of health, social services, internal affairs
and justice, to help combat human trafficking. Israel
has also enacted far-reaching legislation to prevent
human trafficking, covering all forms of trafficking
identified by the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol on
trafficking in persons.
Israel is a tier 1 country in the battle against
trafficking. Most important, Israel has succeeded in
reducing the most severe form of trafficking in women
for prostitution, which was prevalent in Israel. That is
mainly due to our hard work on all four Ps — prevention,
prosecution, protection and partnership.
Beyond our legislative work and determined
enforcement efforts to combat human trafficking, we
continue to allocate resources for the rehabilitation
of trafficking victims. We have established dedicated
shelters, for both women and men, that provide
resources, including financial aid, legal assistance,
work visas and medical and psychological care. While
we would prefer that those shelters not be needed at all,
they provide refuge for dozens of people and play an
important role in their rehabilitation.
In addition, through the appointment of an
anti-trafficking coordinator to liaise between the
17-30134

27/09/2017

Government and non-governmental organizations, we
have increased our partnership with civil society. That
has proven critical in reducing the scourge of human
trafficking and better identifying, and then assisting,
victims.
While Israel is encouraged by the progress made
by the international community, much work remains
to be done. At this appraisal meeting of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons, we call on all countries that have yet to ratify
the Palermo Protocol on trafficking in persons to do so.
Human traffickers pay no attention to borders.
Similarly, as members of the international community,
we must transcend borders in our efforts to end
human trafficking. By continuing to combine our
collective willpower, we can and will find answers,
working together to attain our joint goals in the Global
Action Plan.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Samsar (Turkey): I would first like to thank the
President of the General Assembly and the SecretaryGeneral for organizing this timely meeting. We
believe that our deliberations here today will further
strengthen our collective efforts to eradicate this
heinous crime. Human trafficking constitutes a clear
violation of human rights. It is a serious offence to the
dignity and integrity of persons and is rightly described
as modern-day slavery. Transnational organized crime
has immense costs for the social and economic fabric
of our societies.
It is a global problem and requires a comprehensive
response. Although it can be countered by sophisticated
measures, efforts to prevent trafficking and protect
trafficked persons remain a challenge. We should
therefore address the four pillars — prevention,
prosecution, protection and partnerships. In order
to be relevant, trusted and responsive, we have to
develop inclusive, human-rights based and humancentred approaches, including legislative and criminal
measures. Our efforts should also be aimed at taking
every possible measure in our countries in line with
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol on combating
trafficking in human beings.
While doing that, we should not lose sight of
the fact that human trafficking cannot be prevented

A/72/PV.24

by Governments acting individually. We should
recalibrate and coordinate our ongoing efforts. We
have the necessary international instruments in force.
Moreover, the New York Declaration for Refugees and
Migrants clearly mandates us to do so. Besides, the
Assembly will recall that we pledged to take immediate
and effective measures to eradicate forced labour and
end modern slavery and human trafficking in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
In that vein, I would like to reiterate our commitment
regarding the full implementation of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons. We believe that it is a solid basis on which
to reinforce our legal obligations and a comprehensive
guideline of our actions. It will also be instrumental in
promoting coordinated and consistent responses at the
national, regional and international levels to counter
human trafficking.
We all know that, due to the inability of the existing
international humanitarian system to respond properly
to the needs of people affected by catastrophes and
emergencies, criminal networks find fertile ground to
exploit the vulnerabilities of migrants by smuggling
and trafficking them. Unfortunately, we see how human
trafficking has become a very profitable business for
terrorist organizations such as Da’esh, the Partiya
Yekîtiya Demokrat/Yekîneyên Parastina Gel and the
Partiya Karkerên Kurdistanê (PKK). For example,
the human-trafficking activities of the PKK terrorist
organization were emphasized in the United States
Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report
2017. As the country hosting the largest number of
refugees in the world, including more than 3.1 million
Syrians, Turkey is resolved to undertake necessary
measures to prevent the human trafficking, forced
labour and slavery of those who had already fled the
horrors of conflicts.
Mr. Shava (Zimbabwe), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
On the other hand, given the complex nature of
human trafficking, we need a whole-of-society approach
to combating organized crime. It is imperative that the
private sector and civil society also join Governments’
endeavours. With that understanding, we successfully
ensured a seat for the private sector during our chairship
of the Global Forum on Migration and Development in
2014 and 2015.

17-3013429/31

A/72/PV.24

In that regard, we would also like to stress the
fact that, with a view to effectively combating human
trafficking, legal pathways for migrants seeking a
decent life must be strengthened. We should make every
effort to provide the necessary conditions for tearing
down the barriers standing in the way of safe, regular
and orderly migration. Let me once again underline that
Turkey supports the work towards two global compacts,
on migration and for refugees. We have been actively
taking part in those processes since their inception. We
are confident that, under the able leadership of Special
Representative Arbour and High Commissioner Grandi,
we will achieve a great deal.
Turkey remains strongly committed to eradicating
human trafficking by implementing a progressive
approach. With that understanding, we introduced
administrative and legal measures to combat
the phenomenon through prevention, protection,
prosecution and cooperation. Our efforts are focused
on enhancing our legislation and improving the
implementation of our obligations. In that connection,
with the enforcement of our law on foreigners and
international protection, the national task force on the
fight against human trafficking has been replaced by
a coordination commission against human trafficking.
The commission has decided to develop and put into
practice an updated national action plan on the fight
against human trafficking in the coming period.
Furthermore, initiatives such as a multilingual toll-free
helpline, a victim support programme and a voluntary
and safe return programme have been put into practice.
We are party to the relevant international and
regional instruments, including the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and its supplementing Protocols and the Council of
Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in
Human Beings.

27/09/2017

to Combat Trafficking in Persons, in 2010, the extent
of the crime of human trafficking across the globe
has worsened. Thankfully, however, during the same
period, the recognition of the dimensions of the
problem, the resources required to respond to it and the
resolve of Governments, institutions and individuals to
combat it have grown.
That is, alas, a meagre consolation, because the gap
is still growing between our commitments and efforts
and the reality confronting victims, including the
serious dangers that persons in vulnerable situations
face every day. Finding effective measures to close that
gap is the reason we are gathered here.
My delegation would like to structure its assessment
on the progress of the Global Plan of Action around
the four objectives that underpin it, often referred to
as the four Ps — to prevent trafficking in persons by
addressing what drives it, to protect and assist victims,
to prosecute those involved in the crime of trafficking
and to promote partnerships among governmental
institutions and all stakeholders to eradicate trafficking
and rehabilitate survivors.
There has been significant progress in identifying
and addressing many of the social, economic, cultural,
political and other factors that make people vulnerable
to trafficking in persons, in formulating comprehensive
policies and programmes and developing educational
and awareness-raising campaigns. At the same time,
however, several of the drivers of vulnerability have
worsened, particularly armed conflicts that provoke
enormous humanitarian emergencies, forced migration
and the refugee crisis, which have exacerbated the
dramatic situations faced by people, especially women
and children.

The Acting President: With the consent of the
Assembly, I now give the floor to His Excellency
Archbishop Paul Richard Gallagher, Secretary for
Relations with States of the Holy See.

With regard to cultural factors, the political
declaration (resolution 72/1) on the implementation of
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons commits the international
community to intensifying its efforts to prevent and
address, with a view to eliminating the demand that
fosters trafficking, especially of women and girls, and
all forms of exploitation. Doing so in a resolute way
requires a frank and courageous examination of those
practices that foster sexually addictive behaviour and
the dehumanization of other persons as mere objects
of gratification.

Archbishop Gallagher (Holy See): Since the
adoption of the United Nations Global Plan of Action

Concerning the protection of and assistance for
victims, my delegation believes that there is now greater

All of the challenges that we face will take time
to be resolved, and advancing in our efforts requires
collaborative but decisive action. We need to recognize
the different needs of our countries while also ensuring
mutual benefits and joint success.

30/31

17-30134

27/09/2017

awareness and legal recognition that the victims of
trafficking are indeed victims rather than silent partners
or, even worse, perpetrators of crimes. More services
are in place to identify and liberate victims from the
clutches of modern slavery, regularize their situation
and put them on the path to recovery. As a result of
the deep traumas they suffer, however, there is need
for greater recognition that the work of rehabilitation
cannot be a brief programme, but requires a long-term
investment in order to provide the healing and training
necessary for the victims to begin a normal, productive
and autonomous life.
With regard to the prosecution of crimes of
trafficking in persons, there have been various advances
in terms of formulating adequate legal instruments to
investigate, prosecute and punish traffickers, unlocking
the financial chains, understanding the connection to
other forms of organized crime and corruption, and
fostering cooperation at and across borders. At the same
time, however, as the Global Report on Trafficking
in Persons 2016 makes clear, there are still very few
convictions and too much impunity.
There has also been progress in the formation of
partnerships to strengthen collective action among
Governments and governmental agencies, academic
institutions and the media, civil society and the private
sector. The political declaration specifically mentions
partnerships with and among faith-based organizations.
The Santa Marta Group, named after the residence of

A/72/PV.24

Pope Francis, is an international alliance of police chiefs
and bishops who work together at all levels to promote
coordination between law enforcement and faithbased organizations in combating human trafficking
according to the specific competencies of each.
Similarly, the many groups and networks of Catholic
religious sisters, coordinated internationally by Talitha
Kum — a network of 22 member organizations in 70
countries — show how faith groups can collaborate
with law enforcement authorities and with one another,
joining more powerful coalitions with multi-pronged
strategies, in the fight against trafficking in persons
and other contemporary forms of slavery.
In his 2015 message on the World Day of Prayer
for Peace, dedicated to the theme of eliminating
human trafficking, Pope Francis emphasized the need
for partnerships and a new worldwide solidarity and
fraternity to remedy the indifference and exploitation
that form a polluted human ecology in which human
trafficking thrives. He wrote that we are facing a
global phenomenon that exceeds the competence of
any one community or country. In order to eliminate
it, we need a mobilization that is comparable in size
to that of the phenomenon itself. The Global Plan of
Action is an important part of that mobilization, and
this appraisal meeting is a means to help make the
Global Plan increasingly effective. Our efforts must be
commensurate to the challenge.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

17-3013431/31
