United Nations

S/PV.6484

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6484th meeting
Friday, 18 February 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Viotti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Čolaković
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-23845 (E)

*1123845*

S/PV.6484

The meeting was called to order at 3.55 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I should like to invite
the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Belgium, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Chile, Comoros, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Cyprus, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Finland, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, the Lao People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Lesotho,
Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Peru, the
Philippines, Qatar, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Slovenia, Somalia, the
Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, the United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen and Zimbabwe to participate in this
meeting.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Reuben
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 18 February
2011 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations, which will be issued as document
S/2011/79 and which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council that will
be held on Friday, 18 February 2011, on the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.”

2

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2011/24, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Afghanistan, Algeria,
Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belgium, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Chile, Comoros,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Finland,
Gabon, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Jordan, Kuwait,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco,
Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, the Philippines, Portugal,
Qatar, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, the
Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, the United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen and Zimbabwe.
I wish to point out that the draft resolution before
the Council contains a tentative list of sponsors. The
official list of sponsors will appear in the draft
resolution that will be issued under the same document
symbol as an official Security Council document.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
I shall first give the floor to the members who
wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
beginning of this week, on Monday, 14 February, the
occupying Power’s municipal authorities in Jerusalem
adopted a plan to construct 124 new housing units in
what is known as the Ramat settlement. On 16 January,
the Israeli occupying authorities approved a plan to
construct 1,400 new housing units in what is known as
the Gilo settlement, south of East Jerusalem. And on
9 January, the Israeli occupying authorities demolished
the Shepherd Hotel in occupied Jerusalem — a well-

11-23845

S/PV.6484

known historic landmark and important part of
Palestinian heritage — in a measure to pave the way to
establishing a settlement of approximately 400 housing
units.

“the Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian Territory (including East Jerusalem)
have been established in breach of international
law” (see A/ES-10/273, para. 120).

The truth of the matter is that since the Israeli
authorities lifted their settlement moratorium last
September — a moratorium which, as is well known,
was only partial — settlement activity has not returned
to its previous rate. Rather, it has doubled. Some have
estimated that, in the first six weeks since that date,
settlement activity caught up with and surpassed the
work that had been partially halted during the previous
10 months.

Part 2, article 8, paragraph 2 (b) of the 1998
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
classifies as a war crime the

It is also worth noting here that, according to a
statement issued on 12 February by the United Nations
Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator for the
occupied Palestinian territory, the demolition of
Palestinian houses as part of settlement activity in East
Jerusalem and surrounding areas increased by 40 per
cent in 2010.
If this is part of the reality of Israeli settlement
activity, then where are the principles of international
law — the principles and provisions that our
Organization was built to protect and defend, as stated
in the Charter of the United Nations?
Article 49, paragraph 6, of the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the protection of civilian
persons in time of war stipulates that “The Occupying
Power shall not deport or transfer parts of its own
civilian population into the territory it occupies”. In
resolution 446 (1979), the Security Council reaffirmed
that the Fourth Geneva Convention applied to Arab
territories occupied by Israel since 1967. It also
determined, in paragraph 1 of that resolution, that
“the policy and practices of Israel in establishing
settlements in the Palestinian and other Arab
territories occupied since 1967 have no legal
validity and constitute a serious obstruction to
achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in the Middle East”.
The Council came to that conclusion dozens of years
ago, and has since reiterated it in many resolutions on
settlement activity.
If anyone still has any doubts as to the illegality
of settlement activity, the July 2004 advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice on the wall
concluded that

11-23845

“transfer, directly or indirectly, by the Occupying
Power of parts of its own civilian population into
the territory it occupies, or the deportation or
transfer of all or parts of the population of the
occupied territory within or outside this
territory”.
In addition, in dozens of resolutions — most
recently in resolution 65/104 — the General Assembly
has reiterated that settlement activity in the Arab
territories occupied in 1967 were illegitimate and an
obstacle to peace. It has also called for an immediate
and complete halt to that activity.
It is worth noting here that the Road Map,
established by the international Quartet and adopted by
the Security Council in resolution 1515 (2003),
compels Israel to freeze “all settlement activity
(including natural growth settlements)” (S/2003/529,
annex). It also compels Israel to “immediately
dismantle[…] settlement outposts erected since March
2001”.
The Joint Understanding of the 2007 Annapolis
Conference also confirmed the commitment of all
parties to continue to fulfil their respective obligations
under the Road Map until a peace treaty is reached.
That of course includes compelling Israel to freeze all
settlement activities. The Council adopted the contents
of that concluding document in resolution 1850 (2008).
In its statements — the most recent of which was
issued on 7 February — the international Quartet has
continued to call for the implementation of the
provisions of the Road Map, including a halt to
settlement activity.
These are the provisions of international law on
settlements. These are the resolutions of the General
Assembly. These are the resolutions of the Security
Council. This is the legal opinion of the International
Court of Justice. These are the positions of the
international Quartet on Israeli settlement activity.

3

S/PV.6484

However, these are the same positions and rulings
that Israel has continued to ignore and challenge — to
the point where the number of settlers in Jerusalem and
the West Bank now exceeds 517,000. We have
therefore submitted today’s draft resolution on Israeli
settlement activity, which we invite members to vote
on today.
We are proud of the unprecedented number of
States — more than 100 — that have agreed to sponsor
the draft resolution. We would like once again to
express our special thanks to those States. The purpose
of the draft resolution is to have the Security Council
play its required role and choose the side of justice and
righteousness. We therefore hope that the draft
resolution will enjoy unanimous support from the
members of the Council.
We have come to the Council not just because we
believe that our cause is a just one, which it is. We are
also here because we believe in the Charter of the
United Nations and in the Organization’s central role in
upholding justice in the world, without which there can
be no international peace and security. We have come
to the Council because, in accordance with Article 24
of the Charter, it is the body to which the Members of
the United Nations have given the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Today we have come to this Council, and we will
continue to return to this Council as long as a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace is not achieved in
our region of the world, and as long as the Arab
Palestinian people are not granted the possibility to enjoy
self-determination and to establish their independent
State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital — for
Jerusalem, O Jerusalem, you are the path of those who
have ascended to Heaven, as sings our country, and you
will continue to be the jewel of all cities.
The President: I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.
In favour:
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Gabon, Germany, India,
Lebanon, Nigeria, Portugal, Russian Federation,
South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland

4

Against:
United States of America
The President: There were 14 votes in favour
and 1 against. The draft resolution has not been
adopted, owing to the negative vote of a permanent
member of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members who
wish to make statements after the vote.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): The United
States has been deeply committed to pursuing a
comprehensive and lasting peace between Israel and
the Palestinians. In that context, we have been focused
on taking steps that advance the goal of two States
living side by side in peace and security, rather than
complicating that goal. That includes a commitment to
work in good faith with all parties to underscore our
opposition to continued settlements.
Our opposition to the resolution before this
Council today should therefore not be misunderstood
to mean we support settlement activity. On the
contrary, we reject in the strongest terms the legitimacy
of continued Israeli settlement activity. For more than
four decades Israeli settlement activity in territories
occupied in 1967 has undermined Israel’s security and
corroded hopes for peace and stability in the region.
Continued settlement activity violates Israel’s
international commitments, devastates trust between
the parties and threatens the prospects for peace.
The United States and our fellow Council
members are also in full agreement about the urgent
need to resolve the conflict between the Israel and the
Palestinians on the basis of the two-State solution and
an agreement that establishes a viable, independent and
contiguous State of Palestine once and for all. We have
invested a tremendous amount of effort and resources
in pursuit of that shared goal, and we will continue to
do so. But the only way to reach that common goal is
through direct negotiations between the parties, with
the active and sustained support of the United States
and the international community. It is the Israelis’ and
Palestinians’ conflict, and even the best-intentioned
outsiders cannot resolve it for them.
Therefore, every potential action must be
measured against one overriding standard: whether it
will move the parties closer to negotiations and an
agreement. Unfortunately, this draft resolution risks
hardening the positions of both sides. It could

11-23845

S/PV.6484

encourage the parties to stay out of negotiations and, if
and when they did resume, to return to the Security
Council whenever they reached an impasse.
In recent years, no outside country has invested
more than the United States of America in the effort to
achieve Israeli-Palestinian peace. In recent days we
offered a constructive alternative course forward that
we believe would have allowed the Council to act
unanimously to support the pursuit of peace. We regret
that this effort was not successful and thus is no longer
viable.
The great impetus for democracy and reform in
the region makes it even more urgent to settle this
bitter and tragic conflict in the context of a region
moving towards greater peace and respect for human
rights. But there simply are no shortcuts. We hope that
those who share our hopes for peace between a secure
and sovereign Israel and Palestine will join us in
redoubling our common efforts to encourage and
support the resumption of direct negotiations.
While we agree with our fellow Council
members — and indeed with the wider world — about
the folly and illegitimacy of continued Israeli
settlement activity, we think it unwise for this Council
to attempt to resolve the core issues that divide Israelis
and Palestinians. Therefore, regrettably, we have
opposed this draft resolution.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I am
delivering this statement on behalf of the United
Kingdom, France and Germany.
The United Kingdom, France and Germany are
seriously concerned about the current stalemate in the
Middle East peace process. We each voted in favour of
the draft Security Council resolution because our views
on settlements, including in East Jerusalem, are clear:
they are illegal under international law, are an obstacle
to peace and constitute a threat to a two-State solution.
All settlement activity, including in East Jerusalem,
should cease immediately.
Our primary goal remains a just and lasting
resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We will
continue to work actively to turn this ambition into
reality: the creation of a sovereign, independent,
democratic, contiguous and viable Palestinian State,
living in peace and security side by side with Israel.
Our views are clearly set out in the European Union

11-23845

Foreign Affairs Council conclusions, most recently in
December 2009 and December 2010.
We believe that Israel’s security and the
realization of the Palestinians’ right to statehood are
not opposing goals. On the contrary, they are
intimately entwined objectives. We therefore call on
both parties to return as soon a possible to direct
negotiations towards a two-State solution on the basis
of clear parameters.
For those negotiations to be successful, they will
need to achieve an agreement on the borders of the two
States, based on 4 June 1967 lines, with equivalent
land swaps as may be agreed between the parties. They
will need to achieve security arrangements that for
Palestinians respect their sovereignty and show that the
occupation is over, and for Israelis protect their
security, prevent the resurgence of terrorism and deal
effectively with new and emerging threats. The
negotiations must achieve a just, fair and agreed
solution to the refugee question, and they must fulfill
the aspirations of both parties for Jerusalem. A way
must be found through negotiations to resolve the
status of Jerusalem as the future capital of both States.
Despite the challenges ahead, the key elements of
a solution are well known. Thanks to work commended
by the international community as a whole, the
Palestinian Authority has developed the capacity to run
a democratic and peaceful State, founded on the rule of
law and living in peace and security with Israel.
Further delay will reduce, rather than increase, the
prospects for a solution. We therefore look to both
parties to return to negotiations as soon as possible on
that basis.
Our goal remains an agreement on all final status
issues and the welcoming of Palestine as a full Member
of the United Nations by September 2011. We will
contribute to achieving that goal in any and every way
that we can.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation voted in favour of
the draft resolution. Given our fundamental position,
we will not accept any unilateral actions that prejudge
the outcome of negotiations on final status issues. We
strongly urge the Government of Israel at last to
comply with the demands of the international
community and to stop settlement activity, which
violates the norms of international law and hinders the
resumption of Palestinian-Israeli negotiations.

5

S/PV.6484

Unfortunately, no unanimity was achieved among
Security Council members today, and the draft
resolution was not adopted. However, the issue of
Israeli settlement activity remains on the agenda, and
the urgency of solving the issue will only increase.

the security of both Palestinians and Israelis; Jerusalem
as the capital of the two States, in accordance with
modalities to be negotiated between the parties on its
status; and finally, a just, fair and agreed solution to the
refugee problem.

As a permanent member of the Security Council
and a member of the Quartet of Middle East mediators,
Russia consistently continues to advocate a prompt
resumption of direct dialogue between the parties by
cooperating with regional and international partners in
seeking a just and comprehensive peace settlement in
the region, in accordance with Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace
Initiative.

The Palestinian Authority has worked diligently
in preparing for statehood. In doing so, it has proved
itself a dependable partner and demonstrated its
capacity to assume full sovereignty as an independent,
democratic and peaceful State living in peace with
Israel.

We hope that by implementing the still relevant
Russian proposal to send the first-ever full Security
Council mission to the Middle East will be a useful
practical contribution towards assisting the peace
process.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Portugal’s
position on Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory is well known. We have repeatedly
stated that settlements, including in East Jerusalem, are
illegal under international law and an obstacle to
peace.
That has also been the consistent position of
the European Union. So it would not surprise the
Council if my statement follows that of France,
Germany and the United Kingdom closely.
Settlements thwart attempts to move the
negotiations process forward. They also erode the
prerequisites of the two-State solution, a goal to which
we remain firmly committed. All settlement activities
in East Jerusalem and the rest of the West Bank,
including natural growth, should cease immediately.
Our ultimate goal remains that of a lasting, just
and comprehensive peace in the Middle East, based on
the creation of a sovereign, independent, democratic,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State living side by
side with Israel and its other neighbours in peace and
security.
Therefore, we call on both parties to return as
soon as possible to direct negotiations towards an
agreement on all core issues by September 2011. The
parameters of a final status agreement are known to all,
namely, a Palestinian State based on the 4 June 1967
borders; a security arrangement that fully respects the
sovereignty of the Palestinian State, while protecting

6

As I have previously stated, it is essential that the
parties urgently resume direct negotiations. Our aim is
an agreement on all final status issues. With that in
mind, we look forward to active international and
regional diplomatic efforts so that we can indeed
welcome Palestine as a full Member of the United
Nations by September 2011.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China voted in favor of the draft resolution drawn up
by Arab States on the Israeli settlements. We deeply
regret that the draft resolution was not adopted.
China has always firmly supported the just cause
of the Palestinian people to gain legitimate national
rights. At present, Israel continues to build settlements,
which has become a major obstacle to mutual trust and
the resumption of peace talks between Palestine and
Israel.
China resolutely opposes Israel’s construction of
settlements and the separation wall in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including the West Bank and East
Jerusalem. We firmly support the legitimate demands
of the Palestinian people. China has always maintained
that, on the basis of the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the principle of land for peace, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Road Map to Middle East
peace, Palestine and Israel should conduct dialogue
and negotiations to settle differences so as to ultimately
establish an independent State of Palestine, with the
two countries living side by side in peace.
China supports the Security Council playing its
due role in the Middle East peace process. We also
hope that the Quartet meeting to be held on the
question of the Middle East will achieve a positive
outcome and will help break the stalemate in the
Middle East process.

11-23845

S/PV.6484

Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation
regrets that the Council was unable to adopt the draft
resolution before it today. South Africa voted in favour
of the draft resolution, as we joined those that believe
that the illegal Israeli settlement activity has become
an obstacle to moving the peace process forward.
The continued illegal settlement-building changes
the geographical composition of Palestine and has the
potential to render the desire to bring about a two-State
solution impossible, which is in line with the
overwhelming call for the creation of the sovereign,
independent, viable and contiguous State of Palestine,
coexisting peacefully alongside the State of Israel on
the basis of the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.
The Council has an obligation to ensure that the
peace process moves forward and that a final
settlement can be reached between the parties. The
Council should therefore respond to obstacles, such as
the illegal settlement activity, which hampers the peace
process, and thus poses a threat to international peace
and security.
Despite the failure of the Council to act, the
peace process must move forward after today. Both
parties are still under the obligation to comply with
their previous agreements and obligations in terms of
the Quartet Road Map, which includes those on illegal
settlements. In that regard, we call on Israel to
immediately and completely cease all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem.
The draft resolution called on the parties to
continue their negotiations on final status issues, which
include questions on Jerusalem, settlements, borders
and refugees. It is imperative that the parties do not
abandon the path of negotiations. We in the
international community have an obligation to support
the parties in their endeavour to reach that goal.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): In
noting the results of the voting on the draft resolution
submitted for the Council’s consideration, on which
Colombia voted in favour, I would like to reaffirm my
country’s conviction that the appropriate path to
achieve a lasting peace between the peoples of Israel
and Palestine and the coexistence of the two States is a
negotiated solution, not hostile confrontation.

11-23845

We voted in favour of the draft resolution, as we
have done on other occasions on this issue, because we
believe that settlements contravene international law
and do not comply with the agreements under the Road
Map and the negotiations promoted by the Quartet.
We support bilateral, direct negotiations between
Pelestinians and Israelis as the only possible way to
resolve the existing differences. We share the vision of
the creation of two democratic States living in peace
and with defined, recognized and safe borders. We
firmly believe in the need for both parties to act in
keeping with international law and to comply with
their respective commitments and obligations.
For Colombia the fundamental principles in the
peaceful settlement of disputes are the obligation not to
use force in international relations, and the free
determination of peoples. Israelis and Palestinians
cannot continue to be bogged down in confrontation
without confidence. We vigorously call on them to
maintain and intensify the talks between the parties on
the basis of mutual respect and recognition of the
identity and rights of each people. The Palestinians
have the right to their own State that lives in peace
with Israel and progresses toward common prosperity.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina):
Bosnia and Herzegovina voted for the draft resolution,
and I wish to explain our position.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is and will remain
committed to the two-State solution, with the State of
Israel and an independent, democratic and viable State
of Palestine living side by side in peace and security.
We consider that to be a basic precondition for
achieving lasting peace and security in the region.
One of the main obstacles to achieving that goal
is the settlement activities on occupied land, which are
illegal under international law and are contrary to
Israel’s obligation under the Road Map. Bosnia and
Herzegovina calls upon Israel to respond positively to
appeals by the international community and end all
settlement activities in occupied Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem.
Furthermore, we urge the parties to take the
necessary decision to overcome the current obstacles in
the peace process as the only way to secure a better
future for their peoples through a resumption of direct
talks.

7

S/PV.6484

Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): This Council has
consistently expressed concern over the situation in the
Middle East, including the continued Israeli settlement
activities in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. This
issue is of serious concern to my delegation because of
its implication for peace and security in the region. We
view the cessation of settlement activities as a
confidence-building measure with the potential to
return the parties to the negotiating table. We therefore
felt constrained to vote in favour of the draft
resolution, and we regret that it was not adopted.

Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): My delegation voted in favour of the draft
resolution submitted by the non-aligned countries to
encourage the two parties to resume direct talks with a
view to a lasting peace in the Middle East. We thus
invite the State of Israel and Palestine to overcome all
differences and to come to an agreement with a view to
resuming direct negotiations and to work towards a just
and lasting peace, with the ultimate goal of creating a
Palestinian State living side by side with Israel within
secure and internationally recognized borders.

We reiterate that it is time for the parties to this
dispute to demonstrate their undivided commitment to
peace. They should remove all obstacles to the
resumption of direct negotiations to resolve persistent
permanent status issues. The Council, for its part,
should continue its supporting role in the peace
process, fostering security and stability within the
occupied Palestinian territory.

The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity as representative of Brazil.

For our part, we shall remain firmly committed to
the goal of seeing a secure State of Israel living side by
side in peace and security with an independent State of
Palestine with recognized borders.
While peace in the Middle East is attainable, it
must come on the back of sustained political will and
commitment. The Middle East needs peace. The world
needs peace.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): Consistent
with our long-standing position of solidarity with the
Palestinian people and our position that the settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territories are illegal under
international law, India co-sponsored the draft
resolution and voted in its favour. It is our sincere hope
and expectation that wiser counsel will prevail among
the parties concerned and that the path of dialogue will
be the path followed to realize peace in the region.
Even though the Council today could not adopt
the resolution, we expect that the sentiments expressed
by its members will impel the parties to serious
introspection and to the realization that the only way to
resolve the problem is to restart talks on all pending
issues so that a lasting peace is established and that —
as mentioned by many in the Council today — by
September 2011 we can welcome to the international
community an independent, viable and united State of
Palestine, living within secure and recognized borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, side by side and at
peace with Israel.

8

The peaceful resolution of the question of
Palestine is, arguably, the single most important
objective for peace and stability in the world. For its
part, the continued expansion of Israeli settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territory became the most
important obstacle to concrete progress in negotiations
leading to a just and durable solution to this question.
It is therefore only natural that the Security Council
deal with this issue in a manner consistent with its
primary responsibility for international peace and
security. We welcome an increased engagement by the
international community, including through the
Security Council, in this matter.
The draft resolution that we had before us today
restated that all Israeli settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, are illegal and constitute a major obstacle to
the achievement of peace on the basis of the two-State
solution. It recalled Israel’s obligations under the Road
Map endorsed by resolution 1515 (2003). It also called
for the immediate resumption of credible negotiations.
Brazil co-sponsored the draft resolution not only
because we fully agreed with its content, but also
because we firmly believe it could help us achieve the
two-State solution and therefore contribute to the longterm security and stability of the whole region,
including Israel. In seeking to advance the peace
process, we also have in mind Israel’s right to live in
security, free of attacks and threats to its existence.
Brazil and Israel are good friends and important
partners, both bilaterally and through MERCOSUR.
We also co-sponsored the draft resolution because
its adoption would have sent some urgent key
messages. The first is that continued disregard for
international obligations relating to settlement

11-23845

S/PV.6484

construction poses a threat to peace and security in the
region. Second, halting settlement activities should be
seen not as a concession but as the lawful conduct
under international law. Third, unilateral action shall
not prevail. Upholding international law is always in
the interest of peace. The Security Council cannot
settle for less.
Over the years, Brazil has supported the
fulfillment of the legitimate aspirations of the
Palestinian people for a cohesive, secure, democratic
and economically viable State within the 1967 borders
and with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by
side and in peace with the State of Israel. As we have
strengthened our diplomatic relations with all countries
in the region, we have also deepened our commitment
to stability in the Middle East, our condemnation of all
forms of terrorism and our conviction that the peace
process must be accelerated.
Brazil’s recent recognition of the Palestinian
State is fully consistent with our willingness to
contribute to a just and lasting solution to the question
of Palestine. As explicitly indicated at that time, that
decision did not mean abandoning the conviction that
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians are
indispensable. On the contrary, we see it as a stimulus
for further negotiations. Only dialogue and peaceful
coexistence with all neighbours can truly advance the
Palestinian cause.
Many years of negotiating efforts have produced
a substantial basis upon which progress can be
achieved. It is our hope that the more intensive
schedule of meetings of the Quartet indicates a
willingness to take concrete steps that will lead to an
agreement on the final status issues by September.
We believe that the inclusion of more countries in
the peace process, including developing countries from
outside the region and with good relations with all
parties, would bring a breath of fresh air to the peace
process. Brazil stands ready to participate in and support
those efforts. We have been making our contribution to
the Palestinian Authority’s State-building efforts,
including through bilateral and IBSA — India, Brazil
and South Africa — cooperation.
In times of unprecedented change in the Middle
East, it is even more urgent that progress be made on
the Israeli-Palestinian peace process. Now more than
ever, the brighter the perspectives for Palestinian
statehood, the greater the chances that the region will

11-23845

advance more
democracy.

steadily

towards

stability

and

Halting the construction of settlements would be
a clear signal of political will to engage in serious
negotiations. To achieve an agreement, difficult
political decisions will be required. Brazil is confident
that the Israeli and the Palestinian leadership will
display statesmanship and will be ready to make the
painful concessions needed for the next generations to
enjoy the benefits of peace.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I wish to thank you,
Madame President, for convening this important
meeting. I wish to express our deep appreciation for
your principled, sincere efforts in this process in your
national capacity and in your capacity as the President
of the Security Council this month.
I also wish to thank Bosnia and Herzegovina for
its skilled stewardship of the Security Council in
January, particularly during the Council’s open debate
on 19 January (see S/PV.6470 and Resumption 1) and
throughout the series of consultations undertaken on
the draft resolution on Israeli settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, on which the Council has just taken action.
At this time, I also wish to express Palestine’s
deep appreciation and gratitude to Lebanon, the Arab
representative on the Security Council, for its
principled efforts and unwavering support throughout
this important exercise.
We also wish to thank the Arab Group for their
serious consideration of this matter, their constant
coordination and their strong support. We express
appreciation for the able leadership of the Chairs of the
Arab Group since we began this exercise in December
2010. In that context, we also extend our appreciation
to the important and sincere efforts of the Arab League
Follow-up Committee and its Chair, Qatar, at all levels
in the region, in Cairo and here in New York.
We must also express our appreciation and
gratitude to the members of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM) and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and to the Chairs, Egypt and Tajikistan, for

9

S/PV.6484

their sincere efforts and their valuable support and
solidarity with Palestine. In that regard, we also convey
our thanks to the members of the NAM caucus of the
Security Council for their consideration and support on
this most important issue.
Of course, Palestine also wishes to extend its
deep gratitude to all of the countries that co-sponsored
the draft resolution, from all corners of the world —
from Africa, Asia, Europe and Latin America. Their
strong and principled support was invaluable and
illustrated to us once again the importance, weight and
necessity of a collective effort and position in our work
in the international arena as we strive to uphold
international law and make peace and justice a reality.
When we decided to come to the Security
Council to address the critical and dangerous issue of
Israel’s
ongoing
illegal
settlement
campaign
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, we did so with a sensible draft
resolution reflecting agreed language and principles.
That represented a responsible and serious attempt on
our part, along with the entire international community,
to address the issue of illegal Israeli settlement
activities in order to remove that obstacle from the path
of the peace process.
Our overarching goals remain to bring an end to
the Israeli colonization and occupation of our land and
its destruction of the two-State solution, and to create
the appropriate environment and dynamics for the
conduct and ultimate success of genuine peace
negotiations for the achievement of the two-State
solution for peace in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles,
including the principle of land for peace, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Quartet Road Map.
Unfortunately, however, the Security Council has
failed to uphold its responsibilities to respond to the
crisis in the long search for peace and security in the
Middle East and to legislate the existing global
consensus in demanding that Israel, the occupying
Power, immediately and completely cease all
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem.
We reiterate that it is high time to send a clear
and firm message to Israel that it must comply with its
international legal obligations, including in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions, and

10

cease all of its violations and its obstruction of the
peace process.
Israel, the occupying Power, should not question
the determination of the international community to
bring an end to those violations, including its illegal
settlement campaign, including in occupied East
Jerusalem. The proper message that should have been
sent by the Security Council to Israel, the occupying
Power, is that its contempt of international law and the
international community will no longer be tolerated.
We fear, however, that the message sent today
may be one that only encourages further Israeli
intransigence and impunity. That must be remedied.
Otherwise, we will face a situation in which Israel’s
illegal, reckless and expansionist campaign will put in
final jeopardy the prospects for achieving our
collective goal, the goal that will bring peace and
security to our region: the two-State solution for the
peace of an independent and viable State of Palestine
living side by side with Israel on the basis of the 1967
borders.
Despite the negative outcome today — and of
course, we appreciate the positive votes of the 14
countries that voted in favour — we are calling and
will continue to call on the Security Council to uphold
its duties and responsibilities vis-à-vis the question of
Palestine, because we believe in international law and
in the central role of the Council in maintaining
international peace and security. The Council must
undertake this role seriously and consciously in the
Middle East in its ongoing attempts to resolve the
Arab-Israeli conflict, the core of which remains the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
The situation on the ground in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, is
intolerable and the status quo is untenable. We must
continue to uphold our duties towards our people and
our just cause, and will thus continue to consider all of
our options at the United Nations in order to address all
of the critical issues we face and to promote the
achievement of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace
settlement. We do this with full conviction and
commitment, and with deepest gratitude and
appreciation to all the member States of the
international community whose support and solidarity
in this long search for peace have been so vital and
unwavering.

11-23845

S/PV.6484

The Palestinian people and their leadership will
not forgo their legitimate national aspirations and will
not cease their honourable efforts to achieve a peaceful
resolution of this conflict in all its aspects. This
includes, foremost, bringing a complete end to the
Israeli occupation of the Palestinian land that began in
1967 and the achievement of the inalienable right of
the Palestinian people to self-determination in their
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, where they can live as a dignified and proud
people, enjoying peace, freedom, democracy, security
and prosperity in their homeland.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Reuben (Israel): Direct negotiations between
Israel and the Palestinians have been, and still remain,
the only way forward to resolve the long-standing
conflict in our region. Therefore, the draft resolution
that was before the Council should never have been
submitted. Instead, the international community and
the Security Council should have called upon the
Palestinian leadership, in a clear and resolute voice, to
immediately return to the negotiating table without
preconditions and to renew direct negotiations in order
to resolve all outstanding issues. This is the way to
achieve peace. Indeed, this is the path through which
we have reached peace agreements in the past.
Today’s debate will not assist efforts to bring
both sides back to the negotiating table. In fact, this
process, in its adversarial nature, is likely to harm
ongoing attempts to resume negotiations. It sends the
wrong message to the Palestinians, signalling that they
can avoid the negotiating table.
Time and time again, Israel has demonstrated its
willingness to take significant steps — indeed, painful
steps — to rebuild confidence between the two sides.
However, these efforts were not met with similar steps
by the other side. Furthermore, Israel’s withdrawal
from the Gaza Strip in 2005, including the painful
dismantling of all settlements, has led to an increase in
terror and violence from the areas that we left.

11-23845

However, Israel continues to demonstrate its
willingness to renew talks, with the express goal of
resolving all outstanding issues. Prime Minister
Netanyahu has called upon the Palestinian leadership
to return to the negotiating table and engage in peace
talks in good faith. This goal is within reach, but will
require painful compromises. The road to peace lies
between Jerusalem and Ramallah, which are only 10
minutes apart.
In the Declaration of Principles and the IsraeliPalestinian Interim Agreement on the West Bank and
the Gaza Strip, settlements are but one of the
outstanding issues that both sides have explicitly
agreed to address as part of final status negotiations.
Any effort to predetermine a central, permanent State
issue in effect prejudges what was agreed to be directly
negotiated between the two sides.
Furthermore, it is not fitting or constructive to
isolate this single issue from all other core matters,
such as the security arrangements, refugees and
incitement, as well as the need to address the relentless
rocket fire on Israel by Hamas, which controls the
Gaza Strip.
As the Middle East continues to undergo dramatic
and historic changes, one wonders whether the issue
before us is really the most relevant for discussion in
this Chamber.
In conclusion, we would like to thank the United
States for its long-standing and responsible leadership
in this process. Its vote today reflects the
understanding that the only way forward is through
direct negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians.
We reiterate our call to the Palestinian leadership to
return to the negotiating table without preconditions, so
that negotiations can resume without further delay.
The President: There are no more speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

11
