UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/2
8 January 1996
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3617th meeting of the Security Council, held on 8 January 1996 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Croatia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 21 December 1995 (S/1995/1051) submitted pursuant to its
resolution 1019 (1995) of 9 November 1995 on Croatia and in particular the
humanitarian situation and human rights violations described therein.
"The Security Council strongly condemns the violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights in the former sectors North
and South in the Republic of Croatia, as described in the report of the
Secretary-General, including killings of several hundreds of civilians,
systematic and widespread looting and arson and other forms of destruction
of property. The Council expresses its deep concern that there is a
considerable discrepancy between the number of perpetrators that have so
far been brought to justice and the number of reported violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights. The Council urges the
Government of the Republic of Croatia to make every effort to arrest all
perpetrators and bring them promptly to trial.
"The Security Council is disturbed by the humanitarian and security
situation of the mostly elderly Serb population who have remained in the
former sectors in the Republic of Croatia. The Council is gravely
concerned at the information contained in the report on continuing
extensive harassment and intimidation, looting of property and other forms
of abuse. It reaffirms once again its demand that the Government of the
Republic of Croatia take urgent measures to stop all such acts immediately
and calls on the Government of the Republic of Croatia to provide urgently
needed food, medical assistance and proper shelter to the Serb population.

96-00292 (E)

080196

/...

S/PRST/1996/2
English
Page 2

"The Security Council reaffirms that all those who commit violations
of international humanitarian law will be held individually responsible in
respect of such acts. It recalls with dismay the failure to date of the
Government of the Republic of Croatia to transfer to the custody of the
International Tribunal established pursuant to its resolution 827 (1993)
persons indicted by the Tribunal and expresses its concern at the recent
appointment of one of those indicted to a position in the Croatian army.
The Council reiterates that all States must cooperate fully with the
International Tribunal and its organs.
"The Security Council expresses its deep concern at the situation of
the refugees from the Republic of Croatia who wish to return. The Council
shares the Secretary-General’s view that the rights of the members of the
Serb population who fled during the military operation to return to their
homes in safety and dignity are being severely curtailed by the absence of
constructive measures to facilitate their return. The Council reaffirms
its demand that the Government of the Republic of Croatia respect fully the
rights of the members of the local Serb population, including their right
to remain, leave or return in safety, and demands that that Government
create conditions conducive to the return of those persons and urgently
establish procedures to facilitate the processing of requests by persons
wishing to return. It also urges the Government of the Republic of Croatia
to refrain from any measure which would adversely affect the exercise of
the right to return.
"The Security Council reaffirms its call on the Republic of Croatia to
lift any time-limits placed on the return of refugees to reclaim their
property. It notes the decision of the Government of the Republic of
Croatia of 27 December 1995 to suspend the deadline set in the relevant
Croatian law as a step in the right direction. The Council will follow
closely whether the Republic of Croatia will lift any such time-limit in a
definitive manner.
"The Security Council takes note with appreciation of the decision of
the Government of the Republic of Croatia of 30 December 1995 to suspend
criminal proceedings against and release 455 local Serbs detained on
suspicion of armed rebellion. The Council calls on the Government of the
Republic of Croatia to take appropriate measures to ensure that the right
to a fair trial of those Serbs who remained and have been arrested and
accused of war crimes or armed rebellion is safeguarded.
"The Security Council affirms that it is necessary to ensure that the
rights of persons belonging to the Serb minority are adequately safeguarded
in the legal and constitutional framework of the Republic of Croatia. It
urges the Government of Croatia to rescind its decision to suspend several
articles of the ’Constitutional Law on Human Rights and Freedoms and the
Rights of National and Ethnic Communities in the Republic of Croatia’ as
described in the report of the Secretary-General. The Council stresses
that strict respect for the rights of persons belonging to the Serb
minority will also be of great importance to the implementation of the
Basic Agreement of 12 November 1995 on the Region of Eastern Slavonia,
Baranja and Western Sirmium (S/1995/951, annex).
/...

S/PRST/1996/2
English
Page 3

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to keep the
Council regularly informed on the progress of measures taken by the
Government of the Republic of Croatia to implement resolution 1019 (1995)
and the demands set out in this statement, requests the Secretary-General
to report to it no later than 15 February 1996 on this matter and expresses
its intention to act as appropriate.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
