asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6937

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6937th meeting
Thursday, 21 March 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Bliss
Mr. Mehdiyev
Ms. Jiang Hua
Mr. Briens
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Kayinamura
Mr. Kandangha-Bariki
Mr. Parham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Second report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of
resolution 2061 (2012) (S/2013/154)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-26635 (E)

*1326635*

S/PV.6937

Iraqi territory. This week, a series of atrocious terrorist
attacks added more innocent persons to the long list of
victims of such attacks. My condolences go the families
of the victims and to the people of Iraq.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Those incidents demonstrate how Iraqis face a
complex set of interrelated problems, among them
the very real potential for a spillover of violence from
Syria. Such destabilization would add to and fuel the
existing political and security challenges facing Iraq,
which threaten the achievements of the past decade.

The situation concerning Iraq
Second report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 2061
(2012) (S/2013/154)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Iraq to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Martin
Kobler, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/154, which contains the second
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution
2061 (2012).
I now give the floor to Mr. Kobler.
Mr. Kobler: At the outset, let me take this
opportunity to wish happy Nowruz to all those who
celebrate on 21 March.
I am honoured to present to the Council today the
second report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/154)
pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 2061 (2012), on
the activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI). I shall also brief Council members
on the most recent developments in Iraq.
I would like to begin by describing two significant
and contrasting events that recently took place in Iraq.
On 27 February, Iraqi Airways flight number 157 landed
at Kuwait International Airport. That historic flight
was the first after the 22-year halt in commercial air
traffic between Iraq and Kuwait. That event affirmed
the strong desire of the leaders of Iraq and Kuwait to
open a new chapter in their relations, which have been
heavily burdened by history.
However, a few days later, on 4 March, more than
40 Syrian soldiers and 10 Iraqis were killed inside

2

Since late December, tens of thousands of
demonstrators in Iraq’s western provinces have taken
to the streets to voice their grievances. Their demands
are centred around issues of human rights and access
to basic services. They feel unprotected, insecure and
excluded.
My colleagues and I witnessed that firsthand in
Ramadi, Samarra, Mosul, Fallujah, Tikrit and Kirkuk.
Around the country, we listened to the demonstrators’
frustrations. Over time, they spoke more harshly and
proposed more radical solutions.
The volatility on the streets is also reflected at the
political level. The ministers of the Al-Iraqiya Sunni
bloc continue their boycott of Cabinet meetings, which
has lasted for almost three months. Political coalitions
are weakening. In essence, the political fabric is fraying.
The Government has taken a number of initiatives
to address the demands of the demonstrators. I have
welcomed those efforts, which have yielded some
results.
One such initiative was the establishment of a
committee chaired by Deputy Prime Minister Hussein
al-Shahristani. The committee has reported that it has
facilitated the release of approximately 3,400 prisoners.
In addition, all female prisoners have been transferred
to their home governorates, where they will serve the
remainder of their sentences. Those measures are in
direct response to the demands of the demonstrators.
The committee has also reinstated pension
payments for 11,000 public-sector retirees who were
members of the former Baath regime. Combined with
decisions on other issues, the al-Shahristani committee
claims that its decisions have covered roughly 100,000
individuals.
A second committee, under the chairmanship of
the head of the National Alliance, Ibrahim al-Jaafari, is

13-26635

S/PV.6937

focused on finding common language for three pieces
of highly contentious legislation, naemly, the law on
counter-terrorism, the accountability and justice law,
and a new general amnesty law. In that regard, tangible
results still have to be achieved.
Since the onset of demonstrations, I have sought
to advance inclusive and direct political dialogue and
national reconciliation. I have offered our good offices,
first as a means of relaying information between the
demonstrators and the Government. I have expressed
our approach as follows.
First, UNAMI is an impartial actor. We keep an
equal distance from all sides. We offer our good offices,
whether for mediation, convening, or witnessing, any
negotiated agreement. However, secondly, UNAMI is
not neutral on human rights. We have spoken up against
the increasing use of sectarian language. We have
advocated the principle of non-violence, including to
the demonstrators. We have called on the Government
to exercise the utmost restraint. Thirdly, UNAMI urges
the Government to respond to those popular demands
that can be addressed in the short term, and to do so
immediately. Other demands will require more time for
a response. The demonstrations have been under way
for nearly three months. However, the mistrust among
the components of Iraq — Shia, Sunni and Kurd and
other communities — goes much deeper. The deepseated lack of trust threatens the political fabric and
the social bonds that should bring Iraqis together in one
united, federal country on the basis of the Constitution.
Members of each and every ethnic and social
group continue to be the target of acts of terrorism,
assassination and kidnapping, including while
practicing their faith. Terrorists seek to ignite sectarian
conflict and turn the clock back on Iraq’s nascent
stability.
In total, acts of terrorism from November 2012 to
the end of February 2013 claimed the lives of almost
1,300 civilians. More than 3,000 innocent Iraqis have
been wounded. Furthermore, almost 600 Iraqi security
forces have been killed and 1,000 injured as a result of
those atrocious terrorist acts. I have condemned those
acts in the strongest possible terms. I have called on all
of Iraq’s leaders and religious authorities to rise as one
to stop the bloodshed.
Relations between the central Government and
the Kurdistan Regional Government continue to be
strained. Kirkuk remains the flashpoint for Arab-

13-26635

Kurdish relations. On 16 January, for example, a series
of attacks resulted in 26 deaths and the wounding of
190 other individuals.
The absence of President Talabani, who has had a
truly stabilizing role in Iraq, is bitterly felt. I wish him
a speedy recovery.
I strongly encourage talks to continue between the
Iraqi army and the Peshmerga on the withdrawal and
relocation of troops.
To bring about fruitful relations between the
central and regional Governments, the passage of the
revenue-sharing and hydrocarbon laws will be crucial.
I call on the Parliament and the political blocs to reach
a consensus on those laws without further delay. I wish
to renew my offer of good offices to the parties, and
call upon their goodwill. The sharing of the immense
natural resources of Iraq in a fair and equitable way is
a must, and a prerequisite to rebuilding the trust. We
will continue to build trust no matter how difficult it is.
Iraq is set to hold provincial council elections in
less than one month from today. On 19 March, the
Cabinet in Iraq decided that the council elections in the
Ninewa and Anbar provinces would be postponed by
six months, with reference to the deteriorating security
conditions in those locations. I have expressed my
concern about that decision, as the citizens of those
provinces are looking forward to those elections with
great hope.
As the Independent High Electoral Commission is
continuing the technical preparations for the elections
in all 14 provinces, I have called on the Government and
Electoral Commission to ensure that elections can take
place as scheduled in a peaceful and secure environment.
I wish to commend the leadership of the High Electoral
Commission, in particular, Chairman Sarbast Rasheed,
as well as the dedicated commissioners and staff of the
Commission and polling stations, for their excellent
work. They are often subject to considerable pressure.
Unfortunately, and despite our efforts, there has been
no consensus on passing the law on holding elections in
Kirkuk province.
Iraq is committed to strengthening its relations
with its neighbours. By doing so, it aims to fully take
up its rightful place in the Arab world, the region
and the international community. I have mentioned
the progress achieved towards the normalization of
relations between Iraq and Kuwait, including through

3

S/PV.6937

Iraq’s positive steps towards fulfilling its remaining
obligations under Chapter VII of the Charter. A major
milestone in that process will be the completion of
boundary maintenance work. The finalization of the
removal of obstacles along the border, in particular
the three houses in Umm Qasr, is a necessary step.
Understandably, that step is sensitive and politically
difficult for Iraq. However, it must be done by 31 March.

fully supported requests made at the highest levels of
the Government of Iraq to improve security at Camp
Hurriya. The Government remains responsible for the
safety and security of the residents in accordance with
the Memorandum of Understanding signed with the
United Nations on 25 December 2011. The Government
has assured me that it will spare no effort in preventing
further attacks.

I also urge the Government of Iraq to accept
the funds set aside with the United Nations for the
compensation of Iraqi farmers pursuant to resolution
899 (1994). I sincerely hope that progress in that area
will lead to consensus on further outstanding issues,
including the file on missing Kuwaiti nationals and
property. During my most recent visit to Kuwait on
5 March, I sensed a spirit of optimism within the Kuwaiti
leadership. Therefore, it is with much anticipation that
I welcome the upcoming visit of Prime Minister His
Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah
to Baghdad in the near future.

We face two major problems. First, the only
durable solution is to relocate the residents outside
of Iraq. I visited Albania on 15 March for talks with
Prime Minister Berisha. I welcome the decision by the
Government of Albania to accept 210 residents as early as
next month. I sincerely thank the Albanian Government
for that humanitarian gesture. Albania is thus the first
country to accept a large number of residents. I urge
other Member States to take similar steps. Yet, despite
additional offers being made, the residents of Camp
Hurriya continue to boycott relocation interviews with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR). I join the Secretary-General in
urging the residents to fully cooperate with UNHCR.
Offers must be accepted.

In December, I visited Saudi Arabia. I sensed the
potential for relations between Iraq and Saudi Arabia
to be strengthened in a number of fields, including a
prisoner exchange based on the agreement reached
between the two sides — it would be a noble gesture if
an agreement could be reached before the holy month
of Ramadan; the opening of a border crossing between
Saudi Arabia and Iraq, with its 800 kilometre-long
border; and the active and committed participation
of both countries in a new regional initiative led
by the United Nations Environmental Programme
(UNEP) to combat sand and dust storms. I urge the
two countries to build upon the recent visit of a highlevel Iraqi delegation to Riyadh. The restoration of
normal relations would benefit the two peoples, the two
countries and the region.
More than a year has passed since UNAMI began
its considerable efforts to facilitate the humanitarian
transfer of the residents of Camp Ashraf to the
temporary transit location of Camp Hurriya and their
relocation to third countries. I wish to reiterate my best
wishes today on the occasion of Nowruz, in particular
to the residents of Camp Hurriya and Camp Ashraf.
The urgency of relocating residents outside of Iraq
was underlined on 9 February, when an attack on Camp
Hurriya killed eight residents and injured an additional
40 persons. The Secretary-General, I and others have
condemned that attack in no uncertain terms. I have

4

Secondly, there are 100 residents remaining at
Camp Ashraf who refuse to join the larger group
at Camp Hurriya until the completion of property
negotiations. I encourage both the Government of
Iraq and the residents to constructively engage with
one another to promptly resolve the matter. I urge the
residents to designate lawyers for that purpose.
Finally, I also appeal to the camp leadership not to
prevent residents who wish to leave the camp from doing
so, to cooperate with the Iraqi authorities when it comes
to medical treatment, and to abstain from aggressive
behaviour against our United Nations monitors. United
Nations monitors must be able to freely interact with
the residents of Camp Hurriya.
I would like to thank Member States, in particular
the United States, and the European Union for their
financial contributions and their support for the efforts
to bring about a peaceful resolution of the issue of Camp
Ashraf and Camp Hurriya. I also wish, in the meantime,
to recognize the hard work of 136 United Nations staff
members, including 60 security personnel, who are
actively working on the file.
Having spoken at length about the group of 3,200
members of the Mojahedin-e Khalq in Iraq, I would like
to note that our far larger humanitarian effort is focused

13-26635

S/PV.6937

on three groups: Syrian refugees, returnees from Syria
and internally displaced persons (IDPs). Iraq currently
hosts nearly 120,000 Syrian nationals who have fled to
Iraq seeking safety and humanitarian assistance. Most
of the Syrian refugee population is currently located in
the Kurdistan region. An average of 800 individuals
enters the country every day. UNHCR is leading the
humanitarian country team in conducting a massive
emergency operation to respond to the refugees’
humanitarian needs. That operation will support the
Government of Iraq in ensuring that the refugees are
protected and assisted.
I would like to commend the Government of Iraq
for the generosity and hospitality it has shown to the
individuals and families seeking safety and security in
Iraq. I call on the Government to extend its generosity
by reopening the Al-Qaim and Rabia border crossing
points. I also appeal to all Member States to urgently
step up their contributions to the refugee response plan,
which still requires funding beyond June 2013.
In addition, approximately 80,000 Iraqis have fled
Syria to return to Iraq in the past few months. They fall
into the larger group of 1.2 million internally displaced
persons. Both returnees and IDPs are in need of urgent
humanitarian assistance. The majority of those persons
live in informal settlements and constantly face the
threat of eviction. Those settlements are in appalling
condition. Returnees and the displaced lack access
to basic services, proper public health facilities and
schools. I call on the Government to increase the amount
and speed of delivery of assistance it provides to Iraqi
returnees from Syria. I also call on the Government to
ensure the swift reintegration of Iraqi returnees.
I would like to turn now to the broader human rights
situation in Iraq, and specifically the administration of
justice. That is an area that continues to be of concern.
Many detainees continue to complain of abuse,
mistreatment and torture, in particular in prisons under
the authority of the Ministry of the Interior. Every
case of torture is one case too many. Confessions
under duress are unacceptable. Courts continue to
be underresourced, which causes long delays in
processing cases, often beyond lawful limits. I wish
to reiterate the Secretary-General’s call on Iraq to
consider a moratorium on all executions in accordance
with relevant General Assembly resolutions. Respect
for the rights of women, children and persons with
disabilities also remains inconsistent. Those groups
face discrimination and other social, cultural and legal

13-26635

barriers to their full participation in the economic,
social and political life of Iraq.
Despite the problems noted, Iraq is making progress
in establishing the High Commission for Human Rights,
with the active support of the Government of Iraq and
the assistance of the United Nations. The Commission
will serve as a cornerstone of an Iraqi-owned and
-led system to guarantee the protection, respect and
promotion of the human rights of all of Iraq’s citizens
in future.
On matters related to the environment, dust storms
have increasingly become a major problem for the
Iraqi people and the region. The dust storms in the
region are mainly generated in Iraq. From airports to
agricultural lands, dust storms extract a heavy annual
economic toll amounting to billions. Dust storms also
place significant strain on public health. Hospitals are
overwhelmed with persons requiring treatment for
respiratory conditions caused by dust.
Last month, I joined the environment ministers of
regional Governments at a meeting in Nairobi hosted
by UNEP. We established a clear political agreement
on the need to address the issue of sand and dust
storms. UNEP will lead in the creation of a regional
programme, in partnership with Governments, the
private sector and civil society. A trust fund has been
established for that effort, and I appeal to Member
States, especially those affected by dust storms in the
region, to contribute resources.
I also welcome the initiative of the Government
of the United Arab Emirates to host the next regional
meeting to discuss further concrete steps.
As in all my previous briefings to the Council,
I would like to conclude by touching on the urgent
problems facing the youth of Iraq. After the devastating
effect of war, and caught amid a soaring political crisis,
Iraq’s youth are largely left to fend for themselves.
Youth unemployment stands at 23 per cent.
I have made young people a priority because, with
their potential and passion, they are the future of Iraq.
They will carry forward efforts towards the stability,
security and prosperity that all Iraqis seek to build. I
very much welcome the Government’s efforts to work
towards a youth agenda. With the support of the United
Nations Population Fund, a national youth strategy will
be launched in the second quarter of 2013.

5

S/PV.6937

In February, I visited three different holy places in
Baghdad with 30 young Iraqis of different faiths and
backgrounds. Together we sat in shrines, churches and
temples in order to discuss what unites us, along with
our differences. I saw first-hand that reconciliation in
Iraq can truly begin with the young.
UNAMI will continue to provide a platform for
young people to express themselves, be empowered and
vocalize the actions that will build their country.
In closing, I am reminded that the Iraqi people are
blessed with three important assets: a rich and ancient
culture; a vibrant young population; and natural wealth.
I hope that Iraq will remain determined and steadfast
in this very challenging time and take advantage of this
rich endowment to further advance the country.
With the support of Member States, UNAMI will
continue to assist the people and the Government of Iraq
in its mandated tasks. I wish to thank the Government
of Iraq for its cooperation during 2013, as in previous
years.
I wish to place on record my deep thanks to the
Security Council for its continued support.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Kobler for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Mr. President, allow me at the
outset to congratulate you and your country on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and to extend my thanks to the previous President of the
Security Council, the Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Korea, for his efforts during the month of
February. I also would like to thank Mr. Martin Kobler,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Iraq, and his team in Baghdad and New York for their
commitment, dedication and tireless efforts to assist
the Government and the people of Iraq.
Since we are celebrating the day of Nawrooz, I
would like to congratulate our Kurdish people in Iraq,
who are celebrating the year 2713, and the Assyrian
Christian Iraqis, who are celebrating the year 6763.
I convey my best wishes to all nations that celebrate
Nawrooz. As Mr. Kobler mentioned, we have a very
ancient culture, which is obvious from the year being
celebrated by the Assyrian community — around 7,000
years.

6

Having reviewed the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) (S/2013/154), I would like to
make the following comments.
At the political and security levels, Iraq is witnessing
a political stalemate and an exchange of accusations
among some of the political blocs, while protests
are continuing in a number of cities that are making
a number of legitimate demands. The most notable
demands are for the adoption of the general amnesty
law, the abolition of the Justice and Accountability
Law, which replaced the de-baathification law, and the
release of detainees, especially women. Other demands
were added later, such as abolishing the Constitution
and toppling the Government. The preliminary
objectives of the demonstrations deviated from the
path of popular demand when the demonstrators were
infiltrated by certain extremist groups aiming to stir up
sectarian tensions and foment civil war.
The foreign and regional players that hijacked the
legitimate demands of citizens were exposed when the
flag of the Free Syrian Army and portraits of foreign
officers were displayed during the demonstrations.
Proof of that is the support of Al-Qaida terrorist groups
and the leadership of the Baath party. Izzat al-Douri,
who was Vice-President during the Saddam regime,
appeared on television for the first time since 2003 to
announce his support for the demonstrations.
The Iraqi Government declared that the demands
of the protesters should be considered and that it
differentiates between legitimate and illegitimate
demands based on the Constitution. Continuous
governmental and parliamentarian efforts are therefore
under way to respond to those demands.
On 9 January 2013, the Iraqi Council of Ministers
decided to form a ministerial-level committee chaired
by the Deputy Prime Minister, Hussein Al-Shahristani,
and the membership of the ministries of justice, defence,
human rights, municipalities and water resources, as
well as the State Minister for Parliamentarian Affairs
and the Secretary-General of the Council of Ministers,
in addition to the Deputy Minister of the Interior, to
receive the legitimate demands of the demonstrators
through delegations representing them.
The committee was commissioned to study the
demands and to make its recommendations to the
Council of Ministers. Upon the recommendations
of the committee, the Council of Ministers approved

13-26635

S/PV.6937

the following actions: extending the deadline for
those subject to the Justice and Accountability Law to
submit requests for a return to service or retirement;
processing pension applications for all persons subjects
to the Justice and Accountability Law, except Fedayeen
Saddam, Saddam commandos and members of the
highest two ranks of the Baath party; authorizing
the real estate registration department to accept
applications to lift the freeze on the properties of
officials of the former regime; activating item 12 of
the Justice and Accountability Law by giving orders to
ministries to accept applications for exemptions to that
law in order to submit them to the Council of Ministers
and the Council of Representatives for approval;
requesting the High Judicial Council to authorize
judges to activate the legal process for detained women
in order to facilitate their release, except in cases where
prohibited by law; requesting the Ministry of Justice to
immediately implement release orders, and not to wait
for the approval of any other authority.
On 29 January, the Council of Ministers approved
the increase in the salaries of the members of the
Awakening Councils, who are mostly in the western
part of Iraq, to at least 500,000 Iraqi dinars a month,
authorizing the Ministry of Defence to give bonuses
to interrogation officers to speed up the process of
releasing the detainees. Those executive procedures
led to the realization of the legitimate demands of the
demonstrators, including the release of around 5,500
detainees — though I would note that Mr. Kobler said
3,500 — including most of the women; the return to
service of hundreds of officers from the former Iraqi
army; the completion of more than 91,000 pension
applications; and the lifting of the ban on 1,800
properties that belong to members of the former Baath
regime.
With regard to sectarian slogans and calls to cancel
the Constitution, the Ministry of the Interior has warned
that the language of sectarian incitement is considered a
direct threat to the security of the nation and its people.
Such language lays the foundation for a culture of hatred
and the rejection of others and promotes sectarianism
under the pretext of defending the rights of a certain
sect. Such language, together with sectarian motives,
is also responsible for the indiscriminate violence.
The Ministry has pointed out that it is condemned by
the Iraqi Constitution and completely contradicts the
current regulations and laws. It has warned citizens
not to listen to the advocates of sectarian strife. The

13-26635

Ministry has also said that, on the basis of its executive
responsibility, it will decisively address such attempts
to destroy the unity of the county and act against such
voices, in line with its mandate under the law and the
Constitution, regardless of their title, social, religious
or political positions.
Despite that worrying situation, most demonstrations
are still peaceful, as witnessed by UNAMI during its
visit to Al-Anbar province in February. Like many
countries that have emerged from a dictatorship, Iraq
is going through a democratic transition phase that will
be characterized by instability until the democratic
institutions gain strength and competitive political work
runs smoothly and peacefully within the framework of
the Constitution.
Over the past years, Iraq suffered several crises that
finally led to a peaceful solution and positive results,
such as the adoption of the Constitution, the holding
of elections, the formation of the Government and the
adoption of budgets. Such crises and other examples
polarized the Iraqi political currents and led to longlasting tensions. However, they ultimately followed
their course and did not hinder the political process
indefinitely. In other words, the struggle in Iraq moved
from an armed conflict to gain power to a peaceful
conflict within the framework of the Constitution and
the law, as I have described in the past by saying that
Iraqis have learned to shout rather than to shoot at each
other.
The Prime Minister has explained his view of
current events in the region and their impact on the
internal situation in Iraq by stressing the adherence
of Iraqis to their unity and their rejection of violence,
extremism and sectarianism. We have warned several
times against the spillover of the Syrian conflict, which
could cause instability in the whole region. That has been
echoed by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, when, on several
occasions, he has warned about the repercussions of the
Syrian conflict on neighbouring countries.
The killing of Syrian soldiers after they had
surrendered to the Iraqi authorities by armed terrorists,
who crossed from Syria to Al-Anbar province on
4 March, is the best proof of a link between the armed
groups across the border and the impact of the Syrian
conflict on the stability of the region. The Al-Qaida
terrorist group announced its responsibility for the

7

S/PV.6937

murder of those soldiers in collaboration with the
Al-Nusra Front terrorist group in Syria.
Some areas inside Iraq are still witnessing acts
of violence, while others are enjoying a good level
of security. Iraqi citizens are still subject to violence
from terrorism, but less so than in 2011 and certainly
less than the peak of sectarian violence in 2006 and
2007. There is a fear of the possibility of an increase
in violence in the next few months as a result of the
regional situation and if the current political crisis is
not resolved.
Although the Iraqi security forces are combating
terrorist activities, many rebel groups, including
Al-Qaida, are still active in parts of Iraq. The situation
is still critical in Baghdad, Kirkuk, Ninewa, Salah
ad-Din, Al-Anbar and other provinces. The Iraqi
Government, through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
condemned the attack on Camp Liberty on 9 February.
It immediately launched an investigation to find out the
perpetrators and bring them to justice and to reaffirm
its resolve to take the necessary measurements to ensure
the security and safety of the inhabitants of the camp.
Other committees, including the Al-Ja’afari
committee, which was responsible for some political
dialogue, are still conducting talks with all political
groups in order to try and solve the problems between
all factions and to reach a consensus among Iraqi
political groups and the coalition. One positive point
in the political process is that the Independent High
Electoral Commission has affirmed that it is moving
forward with its timetable to hold the provincial
council elections, which are scheduled for 20 April.
The Commission is working despite the challenges to
complete a special programme for the elections, in line
with international standards, in collaboration with the
International Electoral Assistance Team and UNAMI.
The Commission finalized the approval of political
entities and coalitions and has received the names
of candidates in the provinces. The Commission is
working on the last stage of completing the procedures
for hiring polling-station employees and is finalizing
all logistical matters and the printing of ballot papers.
At the economic level, Iraq has succeeded in
curbing inflation, achieving economic growth and
increasing its oil exports. Iraq has achieved significant
progress in development, according to the recent World
Bank report, entitled Country Partnership Strategy for
Iraq 2013-2016.

8

In 2013, the Iraqi Government has focused on
policies to support the private sector, to create job
opportunities for its citizens and to stimulate economic
development. As a result of Iraq’s plan to increase its
oil production, at the end of 2012, the country reached
second place among oil-exporting countries of the
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, after
Saudi Arabia, and now stands at its highest average in
the past 30 years.
In 2012, the Iraqi economy grew by about 10 per
cent for the second consecutive year. The International
Monetary Fund expects the Iraqi economy to grow
by 13.5 per cent in 2013, which would make it one of
the fastest growing economies in the world. The Iraq
Government is trying to diversify the economy and to
create new job opportunities for Iraq’s workforce.
The Government budget for 2013 amounts to
approximately $118.3 billion, with an increase of 18 per
cent compared to 2012. That makes it the largest budget
in Iraq’s history. The budget allocates 29.5 per cent to
energy, 19.7 per cent to security, 17.7 per cent to social
services, 12.8 per cent to education and 6.8 per cent
to health care. The investment portion of this year’s
budget is approximately 40 per cent, which is larger
than in any previous budget.
The thirty-ninth Baghdad International Fair was
opened by the Prime Minister of Iraq in November
2012, with the participation of 1,440 foreign companies
from all over the world. Bilateral agreements were
signed with participating countries and companies
aimed at expanding trade relations. In December
2012, Iraq ratified a framework agreement for trade
and investment with the United States as a first step
towards expanding trade and investment between the
two countries.
The European Parliament has ratified a partnership
and cooperation agreement between the Republic of Iraq
and the European Union. In addition, Iraq’s membership
was accepted by the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative on 12 December 2012 after it had completed
all the necessary requirements and procedures. That
step was part of Iraq’s efforts to enhance the company
working environment in the extractive industries.
Iraq is working to attract investment for
reconstruction after years of neglect due to years of
wars and sanctions. According to a report published in
May 2012, foreign companies have invested more than
$55 billion in investment projects, service contracts

13-26635

S/PV.6937

and other activities throughout Iraq. Direct foreign
investment reached about $2 billion from being almost
nothing a decade ago. Such amounts do not include the
tens of billions of dollars of investment in the energy
sector.
Within the framework of infrastructure projects,
$5 billion were allocated to building housing projects in
all parts of Iraq according to the population percentage.
Several projects have been inaugurated, including the
Al Saedia project in Baghdad in late November 2012.
The foundation was laid for the third Khaldon housing
project for families of martyrs in Basra in mid-February.
In Najaf, another project is under construction that
contains 1,100 apartments. It will be supplied by clean
electricity through solar panels and will include a
medical clinic, schools and kindergartens.
With regard to adopting communication solutions
and technology to support social and economic
development, the percentage of cell phone users in Iraq
has now reached 80 per cent, and will rise to 93 per
cent in 2015. According to statements made available
by four Internet and telephone service providers, more
than 5 million Iraqis use the Internet, and Iraq has more
than 25 million cell phone users.
At the regional and international levels, Iraq is
continuing to develop its relations with all countries
of the region, especially the State of Kuwait. Iraq is
making efforts to support the moderate current in the
region, encouraging dialogue and steering the region
away from the danger of regional interventions.
With regared to the Kuwaiti issue, the dispute was
ended and a final settlement reached on the matter of
Iraqi Airways versus the State of Kuwait through the
signing of an agreement between the two sides and
Iraq’s payment of $500 million. On 29 January, the
Iraqi Council of Ministers ratified the draft law on the
agreement concerning navigation in the Khor Abdallah
waterway. Iraqi Foreign Minister Hoyshar Zebari
visited the State of Kuwait on 27 February aboard
the first Iraqi Airways aeroplane to fly to Kuwait in
23 years. A joint technical team is currently working
on the border pillars maintenance project. It expects to
finish its work by the end of this month, bringing to a
close one of the most important issues between the two
countries. That would pave the way to bilateral relations
based on mutual respect and common interests, as well
as for Iraq’s exit from its Chapter VII status.

13-26635

In the context of Iraq’s regaining its international
status, with a view to building on the successful holding
of several conferences in 2012, Prime Minister Nouri
al-Maliki opened the twenty-ninth session of the Arab
Council of Ministers of Housing and Construction in
Baghdad on 18 December 2012.
That same month, Baghdad hosted a conference
on Palestinian and Arab prisoners in Israeli
prisons, with the participation of 70 countries. The
conference concluded with the Baghdad declaration
and recommended the acceptance of Iraq’s proposal
to establish a fund to support Palestinian and Arab
prisoners and their families. The Government of Iraq
made an initial $2 million contribution to the fund.
During its presidency of the League of Arab
States Summit, Iraq proposed holding the first Arab
conference on legal and national awareness, which
was opened in Baghdad on 10 March. The aim was to
develop and consolidate legal and national awareness of
the concept of citizenship and an awareness that human
rights will generate affiliation, interdependence and
integration into the melting pot of society. Citizenship
is a right of every citizen in society, regardless of racial,
religious or sectarian affiliation. Violations of human
rights open the door to wars.
At the international level, Iraq participated in the
seventeenth Conference of the States Parties to the
Chemical Weapons Convention, which was held in The
Hague from 26 to 30 December 2012. Iraq was elected
as a Vice-President of the Conference, as well as a
member of the credentials committee. That affirmed
Iraq’s commitment to supporting international efforts
to achieve a world free from chemical weapons and to
ensure international peace and security.
Foreign Minister Zebari participated in the Munich
Security Conference that opened on 1 February. The
Conference discussed the most important international
policy issues and security and economic problems at
the regional and international levels, including their
implications and ways to face them.
The Foreign Minister also participated in the
ministerial-level meeting of the Russian-Arab
Cooperation Forum, held in Moscow on 20 February.
The Prime Minister chaired the Iraqi delegation
participating in the twelfth Summit of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, held in Cairo on 8 February.

9

S/PV.6937

Building on Iraq’s role in efforts to resolve the Syrian
problem peacefully and to support the humanitarian
situation in that country, Iraq participated in the donors
conference held in Kuwait. It is worth mentioning
that Iraq is sheltering approximately 100,000 Syrian
refugees, as Mr. Kobler mentioned, spread over the
cities of Iraqi Kurdistan, Anbar province and other
provinces. During her visit to New York, I asked
Christine McNab, Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq, about the status of Syrian
refugee camps in Iraq, and she answered that she had
visited them and that they were good.
On 26 February, our Foreign Minister welcomed
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Belgium to discuss the improvement of
bilateral relations and cooperation in combating
extremism and terrorism. The visit resulted in the
signing of a memorandum of understanding on political
and diplomatic cooperation between the ministries for
foreign affairs of the our countries.
On 4 March, the Prime Minister welcomed his
counterpart from the Arab Republic of Egypt. Both
sides held talks to coordinate political positions and
discussed cooperation and trade relations between the
two countries at the regional level.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
importance of the support of the members of the
Security Council in assisting Iraq in emerging from
its Chapter VII status and from the sanctions that
were imposed on it due to Saddam’s crime of invading
Kuwait, which forced the Security Council to adopt
sanctions resolutions and to consider Iraq a threat to
international peace and security. Iraq today is different
from Iraq before 2003, as the Secretary-General stated
in his report to the Security Council (S/2013/154). Iraq
must regain the status it enjoyed before 1990.
Before I conclude my speech, I would like to
mention a few points that Mr. Kobler addressed in
his statement. I think that resuming relations with
Saudi Arabia is a very important step forward, and the
exchange of prisoners between Iraq and Saudi Arabia
is opening the door to that, as is the opening of the
borders, which is also a good step forward.

10

With regard to reopening the border checkpoints
between Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, we have
had several problems in the past. The most recent one
was when Syrian soldiers closed the borders after a
fight started between the Syrian regular army and
the Syrian Free Army, and Iraq wanted to send those
soldiers back from a different checkpoint. So they took
them from Mosul to Anbar to send them back to Syria,
when they were ambushed and killed. All of them,
almost 40 Syrian soldiers and 20 Iraqi soldiers, were
killed.
On torture, the Constitution and the law in Iraq
forbid torture. However, we do not deny that there are
some police officers who are guilty of misconduct, as
in any other country in the world. But many officers
have been dismissed, and some of them were brought
to justice and legal action was taken against them when
cases of torture were proved.
I commend Mr. Kobler for his tireless efforts to
resettle the inhabitants of Camp Ashraf and Camp
Hurriya. I personally commend him for his efforts to
convince Albania to accept 210 of them. That is a good
start. I encourage other members of the Security Council
to accept more camp residents. The only solution to the
problem is to resettle these people in other countries.
With respect to the youth problem, I think that the
Government realizes how important the problem in
Iraq. I encourage the Government to have a plan. By
way of example, the Iraqi Mission to the United Nations
has trained Iraqi youth. We have Iraqis who have come
from different parts of the world, some from as far
away as Australia. I have also given internships to other
students in order to encourage youth and provide them
an opportunity for internships in order to have a better
future. They are from different nationalities and from
all over the world, but the majority of them are studying
in American universities.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

13-26635
