Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the International Committee may submit its observations to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh
session;
4. Invites Governments to transmit their observations on that part of the report of the Commission
on Human Rights on its twenty-eighth session relating
to this question;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit the
replies received and an analytic report on those replies
to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session;
6. Decides to examine this question as a matter
of the highest priority at its twenty-seventh session,
taking into consideration the recommendations transmitted to the General Assembly by the Economic and
Social Council.
2027th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.

2855 (XXVI). United Nations Children's Fund

The General Assembly,
Having considered the section of the report of the
Economic and Social Council dealing with the United
Nations Children's Fund, 11º
Recognizing that, in countries assisted by the Fund,
children and adolescents represent about half of the
total population, and that their number will increase
by nearly a third in the decade of the 1970s,
~onvinced of the importance of ensuring that
children and adolescents receive their due share of
attention and investment in the developing process
of developing countries,
Recognizing the valuable role the Fund is playing,
in co-operation with Governments, the relevant technical and other agencies of the United Nations system
and non-governmental organizations, in furthering the
objectives of the Second United Nations Development
Decade,
W elcoming the efforts of the Fund to bring the
needs of children ·and adolescents in developing countries to world-wide attention and the practica! aid
the Fund gives to developing countries to enable them
to provide services for children and adolescents within
a unified approach to economic and social development,
Noting with approval the prompt and effective assistance that the Fund has provided in natural and other
disasters to meet the urgent needs of mothers and
children, who are particularly vulnerable and constitute
the large majority of those affected by disasters,
1. Commends the United N ations Children's Fund
for its very substantial and significant achievements
?uring its .t":enty-five years of operation, and expresses
1ts apprec1ation to all who helped contribute to those
achievements;
2. Endorses the policies of the Fund;
3. Requests the Fund to continue and expand its
co-operation with countries for the protection of the
younger generation and their preparation for future
responsibilities;
4. Appeals to Governments and other donors to
make every effort to increase their contributions to
the Fund, so as to enable it to reach its target figure
of $100 million by 1975.
2027th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.
IIO Offecial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/8403), chap. VIII, sect. F.

93

2856 (XXVI). Declaration on the Rights of
Mentally Retarded Persons

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the pledge of the States Members of tbe
United N ations under the Charter to take joint and
separate action in co-operation with the Organization
to promote higher standards of living, full employment
and conditions of economic and social progress and
development,
Reaffirming faith in human rights and fundamental
freedoms and in the principies of peace, of the dignity
and worth of the human person and of social justice
proclaimed in the Charter,
Recalling the principles of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, the Intemational Covenants on
Human Rights, the Declaration of the Rights of the
0ñld and ~e ~tandards alr~ady set for social progress
m the constitutions, conventions, recommendations and
resolutions of the Intemational Labour Organisation,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Children's Fund and other organizations concemed,
Emphasizing that the Declaration on Social Progress
and Development has proclaimed the necessity of protecting the rights and assuring the welfare and rehabilitation of the physically and mentally disadvantaged,
Bearing in mind the necessity of assisting mentally
retarded persons to develop their abilities in various
fields of activities and of promoting their integration
as far as possible in normal üfe,
Aware that certain countries, at their present stage
of development, can devote only limited efforts to this
end,
Proclaims this Declaration on the Rights of Mentally
Retarded Persons and calls for national and intemational action to ensure that it will be used as a common
basis and frame of reference for the protection of
these rights:
1. The mentally retarded person has, to the maximum degree of feasibility, the same rights as other
human beings.
2. The mentally retarded person has a right to
proper medical care and physical therapy and to
such education, training, rehabilitation and guidance
as will.enable him to develop bis ability and maximum
potentlal.
3. The mentally retarded person has a right to
economic security and to a decent standard of living.
He has a right to perform productive work or to
engage in any other meaningful occupation to the
fullest possible extent of bis capabilities.
4. Whenever possible, the mentally retarded person should live with bis own family or with foster
parents and participate in different forms of community life. The family with which he lives should
receive assistance. If care in an institution becomes
necessary, it should be provided in surroundings and
other circumstances as close as possible to those of
normal life.
5. The mentally retarded person has a right to
a qualified guardian when this is required to protect
bis personal well-being and interests.
6. The mentally retarded person has a right to
protection from exploitation, abuse and degrading
treatment. If prosecuted for any offence, he shall
