A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/170
18 February 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 20 (d)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/52/L.57/Rev.1 and Rev.1/Add.1)]
52/170. Assistance to the Palestinian people
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 51/150 of 13 December 1996,
Recalling also previous resolutions on the question,
Welcoming the signing of the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements of
1993 between the Government of the State of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, the
representative of the Palestinian people,1 as well as the signing of the subsequent implementation agreements,
including the Interim Agreement on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip of 1995,2
Gravely concerned about the difficult economic and employment conditions facing the Palestinian people
throughout the occupied territory,
Conscious of the urgent need for improvement in the economic and social infrastructure of the occupied
territory and the living conditions of the Palestinian people,
Aware that development is difficult under occupation and best promoted in circumstances of peace and
stability,
Noting, in the light of recent developments in the peace process, the great economic and social
challenges facing the Palestinian people and their leadership,

1

A/48/486-S/26560, annex; see Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-eighth Year, Supplement for
October, November and December 1993, document S/26560.
2

A/51/889-S/1997/357, annex; see Official Records of the Security Council, Fifty-second Year, Supplement
for April, May and June 1997, document S/1997/357.
98-76705

/...

A/RES/52/170
Page 2

Conscious of the urgent necessity for international assistance to the Palestinian people, taking into
account the Palestinian priorities,
Noting the convening of the United Nations Seminar on Assistance to the Palestinian People, "Palestinian
Human Development Needs",3 held at Amman from 20 to 22 May 1997,
Stressing the need for the full engagement of the United Nations in the process of building Palestinian
institutions and in providing broad assistance to the Palestinian people, including assistance in the fields of
elections, police training and public administration,
Noting the appointment by the Secretary-General in June 1994 of the United Nations Special Coordinator
in the Occupied Territories,
Welcoming the results of the Conference to Support Middle East Peace, convened in Washington, D.C.,
on 1 October 1993, and the establishment of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee and the work being done by the
World Bank as its secretariat, as well as the establishment of the consultative group,
Welcoming also the establishment by the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee of the Joint Liaison Committee,
which provides a forum in which economic policy and practical matters related to donor assistance are
discussed with the Palestinian Authority,
Welcoming further the meeting of the consultative group in Paris on 19 and 20 November 1996, at which
the proposed programme of United Nations assistance for 1997 was presented to the donor community,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General,4
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;4

2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his rapid response and efforts regarding
assistance to the Palestinian people;
3. Also expresses its appreciation to the Member States, United Nations bodies and intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations that have provided and continue to provide assistance to the Palestinian
people;
4. Stresses the importance of the work done by the United Nations Special Coordinator in the
Occupied Territories and of the steps taken under the auspices of the Secretary-General to ensure the
achievement of a coordinated mechanism for United Nations activities throughout the occupied territories;
5. Urges Member States, international financial institutions of the United Nations system,
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and regional and interregional organizations to extend,
as rapidly and as generously as possible, economic and social assistance to the Palestinian people in order
to assist in the development of the West Bank and Gaza, and to do so in close cooperation with the Palestine
Liberation Organization and through official Palestinian institutions;
6. Calls upon relevant organizations and agencies of the United Nations system to intensify their
assistance in response to the urgent needs of the Palestinian people in accordance with the Palestinian
priorities set forth by the Palestinian Authority, with emphasis on national execution and capacity-building;

3

A/52/179-E/1997/76.

4

A/52/159-E/1997/69.
/...

A/RES/52/170
Page 3

7. Urges Member States to open their markets to exports from the West Bank and Gaza and on the
most favourable terms, consistent with appropriate trading rules;
8. Calls upon the international donor community to expedite the delivery of pledged assistance to the
Palestinian people to meet their urgent needs;
9.

Suggests the convening in 1998 of a United Nations-sponsored seminar on the Palestinian economy;

10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session,
through the Economic and Social Council, on the implementation of the present resolution, containing:
(a) An assessment of the assistance actually received by the Palestinian people;
(b) An assessment of the needs still unmet and specific proposals for responding effectively to them;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-third session, under the item entitled
"Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance", the sub-item entitled "Assistance to the Palestinian people".
73rd plenary meeting
16 December 1997
