UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1878 th

MEETING:

22 JANUARY

IJjq~Jg$k:
’py
L

1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1878) .: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The Middle East problem including the Palestinian question. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1878

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~rpplmwts
of the Bfficirrl R~WIYLYof the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions crnd
Bcdsions
c$ the Secwity Corrncil. The new system, which <hasbeen applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

.

1878th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,

22 January

President: Mr. Salim A. SALIM
(United Republic of Tanzania).

Mr. AI-Shaikhly (Iraq), Mr. Bishara (Kuwait), Mr. El
Hassen
(Mauritania),
Mr.
Zaimi
(Morocco),
Mr.
Jaroszek
(Poland),
Mr.
Jamal
(Qatar),
Mr. Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Medani (Sudan),
Mr. Driss (Tunisia),
Mr. Ghobash (United
Arab
Emirates), Mr. Saltam (Yemen Arab Republic) and
Mr. PetriC (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania and United States of America.

2. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will now
continue its examination of the question on its agenda.
The first speaker is the representative of Democratic
Yemen. In accordance with the established practice,
I request the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization to withdraw temporarily from the Council
table in order that his place may be taken by the
representative
of Democratic
Yemen. I invite that
representative to take that place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

Provisional agenda (SlAgenda/1878)
1. Adoption
2.

The Middle
question
The meeting

of the agenda
East problem including

the Palestinian

was called to order at 11.25 a.m.
Adoption

1976, at 10.30 a.m.

of the agenda
3. Mr. ASHTAL
(Democratic
Yemen):
Deeply
saddened by the death of Premier Chou En-lai, my
Government has already conveyed its condolences to
the Government and people of China. May I take this
opportunity to pay a tribute to the late Premier Chou
En-lai, a towering figure in world politics and a brilliant
leader of the Chinese people.

The agenda was adopted.
The Middle East problem including
Palestinian question

the

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken by the Council [1870th-1877th meetings],
I invite the representatives of Algeria, Bulgaria, Cuba,
Czechoslovakia,
Democratic
Yemen,
Egypt, the
German Democratic
Republic,
Guinea,
Hungary,
India, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Mauritania,
Morocco,
Poland, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic,
the Sudan, Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates, the
Yemen Arab Republic and Yugoslavia, in conformity
with the usual practice and the relevant provisions of
the Charter and the provisional rules of procedure, to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote.
In accordance with the decision taken by the Council
[187Oth meeting],
I invite the representative. of the
Palestine Liberation Organization to participate in the
discussion.

4. It is with a sense of pride that my delegation
participates in this debate under your wise presidency
and youthful dynamism, a dynamism surpassed only
by your country’s leading role in Africa.
5. To the delegation of the Palestine Liberation
Organization
(PLO) participating
in the work of the
Security Council for the first time, we say welcome.
It took four major wars in the Middle East and the
phenomenal resistance of the Palestinian people for
its sole representatives to be invited by the Council
to plead their case. It might take a few more wars
and a lot of violence for them to be represented in
the Council as a full State Member of the United
Nations, unless the Security Council acts responsibly
to’discharge
the mandate entrusted to it under the
Charter. That, naturally,
takes a little more than
setting down general principles and guidelines.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abdel Meguid
(Egypt), Mr. Sharaf (Jordan), Mr. Allaf (Syrian Arab
Republic) and Mr. Khaddoumi
(Palestine Liberation
Organization)
took places at the Security Council
table;
Mr. Rahat (Algeria), Mr. Grozev (Bulgaria),
Mr. Alar&n
(Cuba),
Mr. Smid (Czechoslovakia),
Mr. Ashtal (Democratic
Yemen), Mr. Florin (German
Democratic
Republic),
Mrs. Jeanne Martin
Cissi
(Guinea), Mr. Hollai (Hungary), Mr. Jaipal (India),

6. The question of Palestine remains at the heart of
the Arab-Zionist
conflict., Even the apologists for
Israeli policies have come to acknowledge that fact,
although with great pain. Let there be no illusions:
the recognition of the Palestine question as the core
1

of the conflict in the Middle East is the result of the
‘valiant and heroic struggle and armed resistance of
the Palestinian people, supported by the Arab masses
and all international
progressive forces. For. it is
evident that rights are not granted out of compassion,
even by a big Power like the United States; they are
taken by force if need be. The semantic bickering,.
then, about Palestinian rights, interests or concerns
will only prove to be an exercise in political sophistry.

battlefield-and
he who endures most will finally
win, for those who might seem weak today can be
powerful tomorrow. The Council, then, would just
take note of the situation and perhaps in a balanced
way.
10. Under the subtitle “Functions
Article 24 of the Charter says:

and Powers”,

“In order to ensure prompt and effective action
by the United Nations, its Members confer on the
Security Council primary responsibility
for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
agree that in carrying out its duties under this
responsibility
the Security Council acts on their
behalf.”

7. We have come a long way from resolution 242
(1967), which refers to the Palestinian
people 3s
anonymous refugees with a problem. Although the
author of that resolution .described it as a “balanced
whole”,’ it is neither balanced nor whole. Nor, for that
matter, is it holy, because nothing about’ United
Nations resolutions, or even the Charter, is sadrosanct.
At a time when even the Charter, itself is being
reviewed,
why should resolution
242 (1967) be
,considered the only prescription for the political ills
of the Middle East? If it is because of the purported
vagueness of that resolution, then it is high time for
the Council to be explicit, for over eight years have
elapsed since that resolution was adopted and virtually
nothing has changed in the field save for some cosmetic
alterations. Is it not too much to ask of Egypt and the
Syrian Arab Republic, whose territories have been
under occupation
ever since? And what of the
Palestinian people, whose homeland had been usurped
long before 1967?

11. Now if the Security Council is entrusted with the
responsibility
to act on behalf of the Members of the
United Nations, then it is in duty bound to take
the general views of the Member States into consideration. Those views have taken concrete form in
numerous resolutions adopted by the General Assembly on the question of Palestine and the Middle East
problem. Is the Council, then, to ignore those resolutions altogether? Mr. Scali once spoke of the tyranny
of the majority in the General Assembly. Can we
not-perhaps
in anticipation-speak
of the tyranny
of the veto against the majority both in the Security
Council and the General Assembly?
12. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger once said
-and I quote The Jerusalem Pod Week& of 18 December 1974: “Normally
a good agreement leaves both
sides happy. In the Middle .East, it is when both
sides are equally unhappy.”

8. In accordance with the purposes and, principles
of the Charter, resolution 242 (1967) should have in the
first instance condemned the outright Israeli aggression. But, instead, it complied with the demand of the
aggressor and ignored the Palestine question completely. Far from being holy, that resolution was the
result of cold-war power politics. The noble principles
of the Charter were all but shelved in a clear attempt
to legitimize the alien Zionist entity. In any case, we
are now in 1976, and what might have seemed to be
a divine truth in 1967 is liable to have changed today.
That is exactly why the October war of’ 1973 took
place. And although that war was inconclusive,
the
message was clear: the balance of power in the Middle
East is not an eternally fixed equation; it tis in a state
of flux and to the advantage of the just cause of the
Palestinian and Arab peoples. The oil crisis was only
a reminder that the conflict in the Middle East has a
strong spill-over effect far beyond that legion. To disregard that message and its far-reaching bonsequences
would be a grave miscalculation,
an obsession with
the form rather than the content.
.

13. If resolution 242 (1967) is to be the basis for
such an agreement, then one side, Israel, is certainly
happy and a party on the other side, the PLO, is not
only unhappy but is not even recognized by that
resolution. The other two parties on the other side,
Egypt and the Syrian Arab, Republic, are far from
being happy, notwithstanding
any tranquillizing
steps
taken here or there. That is exactly why ‘the Security
Council is discussing the whole issue today. Any
mere reaffirmation
of resolution 242 (1967), which
did not work and which cannot work, would simply
be an invitation to more violence and even war. And
the Council will not promote the chances for peace
by simply passing the buck to Geneva.
14. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. In accordance with established
practice, I should like to request the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic to withdraw temporarily
from his seat at the Council table in order that his
place may be taken by the representative
of Cuba.
I invite that representative
to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

9. If it is felt that the function of the Security Council
is to adopt +?esolutions with a semantic balance, then
that is far short of the mandate entrusted to it to
maintain
international
peace and se&ity.
And if
resolutions such as resolution 242 (1967) are only to
reflect the balance of forces of the adversaries at a
given time, regardless of rights and principles, then
the best resolution of conflicts would be on the

15. Mr.
Spanish):
2

ALARCGN
(Cuba) (interpretation
from
Mr. President, first of all I should like to

thank you and the other members of. the Council for
having given me the opportunity
to participate in the
consideration
of, the important question now before
the Council. Before setting forth my Government’s
views on the subject, I should like to fulfil an obligation-which
in this case goes beyond the requirements
of courtesy-and
convey to you our great pleasure at
seeing you presiding over the work of the Council
this month. Your talent, experience and diplomatic
tact have earned you a well deserved reputation
among all the representatives.
You have in an
admirable manner combined devotion to the principles
which guide your Government’s
foreign policy and
inspire the revolutionary
peoples of Africa with a
skilful working style which is at the same time friendly
and direct, cheerful and still profound.

19. The PLO, must participate on an equal footing
in all discussions and meetings dealing with questions
of the Middle East, since the Palestine problem has
been at the .origin and very centre of the succession
of conflicts in that region of the world for a number.of
decades. We believe that we have reached a point
where the basic principles that should govern the
consideration of the Palestine question at the intemational level have been sufficiently.defined
so that all
I need do now is repeat my Government’s
support
for them.
20. Three basic principles should govern any solution to the Palestinian tragedy. Above all, the Palestinian people must be permitted to exercise its right to
repatriation,
to return to the .homes and lands of
which it was unjustly and brutally dispossessed.
Secondly, that people must be allowed to exercise a
sacred and inalienable
right that belongs to all the
peoples of the world: the right to selfdetermination,
the power to decide for itself what its destiny should
be. Thirdly, as an expression of that right, there is
the right to establish a sovereign and independent
State in’palestine.

16. Your long and praiseworthy dedication to the
cause of decolonization
makes your term as President
of the Security Council truly symbolic at this time
when the African peoples are redoubling their efforts
to eliminate completely
the scourge and sequels of
colonialism
and racism. I am particularly
pleased to
extend this welcome to you because you worthily
represent, in the United Nations,
as in Cuba, a
Government and a people with which my Government
and people entertain the most fraternal relations of
solidarity and co-operation.
We pay a tribute, therefore, to the United Republic of Tanzania, to President
Nyerere and to the people of the United Republic of
Tanzania, who have always been in the vanguard of
the African struggle for complete emancipation
and
justice.

21. The world has achieved a large degree of consensus on the validity of those three,basic riquirements
for solving the Palestine problem, just as,it has achieved
a large degree of consensus on the way to resolve the
crisis among the States of the Middle East that began
with the 1967 war; the absolute prerequisite is the
complete withdrawal of all the Israeli forces from the
Arab territories occupied since that date.
22. The United
Nations,
through
the General
Assembly,, has categorically expressed its opinion in
that respect by repeated resolutions adopted with the
affirmative
votes of a considerable
majority of its
membership. That is why the Security Councii should
be in a position now to take the necessary measures
that will enable this important
body of the United
Nations to get in step with the views of the overwhelming majority of the Members of the Organization,
to carry out its essential obligations for the maintenance of international peace, and security, and to make
an effective contribution,, to the promotion of those
ideals in the’ Middle East as well.

i7. The Security Council is considering the question
of the Middle East and Palestine after the international community, following a lengthy process of study
and discussion, defined the cardinal principles that
should be at the basis of the quest for peace and
securit/y in that part of the world. Those criteria
assumed a more definite form during the last two
sessions of the General Assembly, making possible for
the first time the consideration
of these problems in
a just and wise way and thereby creating the bases
for a possible solution.
18. The participation
of the PLO in. these debates
and its recognition as the sole and legitimate representative of its people, which has also been recognized
as having the inalienable right to self-determination,
independence and sovereignty, are the most salient
features of the deep change which the Organization
and the international
community
have brought about
in the treatment of this question during the past two
years. I am pleased to note that the Security Council
has been receptive to that change and has agreed to
invite the PLO to participate in this debate. I welcome
the presence here of the representatives of the heroic
Palestinian
People, and I take this opportunity
to
renew the expressions of deep solidarity of the Revolutionary Government of Cuba.

23. Hence, we regard as very useful and necessary
the initiative’taken
by the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic in pressing for this debate. I take
this opportunity to repeat our support for the Govemment and people of the Syrian Arab Republic in their
struggle to put an end to foreign aggression, to regain
their usurped territories, and to assert their people’s
inalienable right to live in peace and security.
24. The struggle of the Arab peoples to put an end to
Israeli aggresdion and its after-effects and the struggle
of the Arabl’people
of Palestine to exercise their
’ national rights have today found powerful support
in the international
community.
Those struggles are
3

sustained, on the one hand, by the solidarity of the
Soviet Union and the other socialist countries and,
on the other, by that of all the non-aligned countries
and the peoples of the world, which have been
expressing with increasing firmness their support for
the just struggle of the Arabs peoples. None the less,
it is essential that the international
community,
and
in particular the Security Council, should take action
that will make it possible to reactivate the process
leading to a settlement in that part of the world.
25. The Middle East for many years has been and
indeed continues to be today a source of. conflict
and a threat to international
peace. The international
community,
through the General Assembly,
has
expressed its concern over this situation, It has called
upon the competent bodies in the system, and in
particular the Security Council, to abide by their obligations to liquidate that hotbed of tension and threats.
We do not know whether the Council is in a position
to carry out its responsibilities
now, but members of
the Council, particularly
those who support Israel’s
policies in that area of the world, should understand
that the general universal movement expressed through
the General Assembly will not be halted and that
history is on the side of the peoples who are victims
of aggression and on the side of the Arab peoples, and
sooner or later it will assert its will.
26. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Czechoslovakia.
In accordance with
established practice, I request the representative
of
Egypt to withdraw temporarily from the Council table
in order that his place may be taken by the representative of Czechoslovakia.
I now invite that representative
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
27. Mr. SMID (Czechoslovakia):
Mr. President, at
the outset of my statement I should like to greet you
as an outstanding representative of an African State
and of the African continent. The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic has always been a friend of, the people
of Africa fighting against colonialism,
neoicolonialism
and racism. The delegation
of the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic sincerely wishes you success in
your responsible work as President of *the Security
Council. I should also like to thank you and the
members of the Council for allowing the delegation
of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic to participate
in the discussion on this problem which is so important
for international
peace.
28. The Government of the Czechoslovak Socialist
Republic has, during the recent period, several times
expressed at the forum of the United Nations its
opinion concerning the solution of the Middle East
conflict and emphasized the necessity of its settlement
. by peaceful means. It also has stressed the fact
that the settlement of the Palestinian
question represents an inseparable part of the normalization
of
the situation in the Middle East. Czechoslovakia
has

always maintained the oosition that a nermanent solution of the conflict is not possible without securing
the legitimate national rights of the Arab people of
Palestine. Permanent peace and a just solution for all
States and nations in that region can be attained only
by an over-all political settlement in which the important historical aspects of the situation in the Middle
East would not be ignored.
29. Important progress in this respect is represented
by General Assembly resolutions 3236 (XXIX) 3375
(XXX),
3376 (XXX) and 3414 (XXX).
We have
welcomed the fact that the Security. Council has
assumed a realistic view of the present situation and
has invited the PLO to participate in these deliberations. This positive development,
marked by the
negotiations of the Security Council last November in
connexion with the adoption of resolution 381 (1975)
of 30 November 1975 again confirms the fact that the
Palestinian question is not merely a problem of refugees
and a purely humanitarian
question, but a pressing
political problem, the solution of which is of paramount
and decisive importance for the preservation of peace
in the Middle East.
30. It is not possible to seek any way towards the
solution of the conflict without the participation
of
political representatives of the Palestinian people-the
PLO. The participation
of the PLO, the legitimate
representative of the people of Palestine, in all negotiations in search of a permanent, peaceful settlement,
from the very beginning and on the basis of equal
rights, is the indispensable prerequisite for the viability
of such negotiations. This should be understood by all
interested parties.
31. Czechoslovakia
has always supported the just
struggle of the Arab peoples against aggression, not
only during the period of military conflicts but likewise
at present, when the time is ripe for substantial
progress in the negotiations on a peaceful solution of
the long-lasting, complex and dangerous conflict in the
Middle East.
32. The absence of a solution of the unsatisfactory
situation in the Middle East represents a great danger
for world peace and international
security. The cause
of that situation is the fact that Israeli ruling circles
refuse to implement
the respective United Nations
resolutions, including those of the Security Council.
They refuse to leave all Arab territories occupied in
1967, and they refuse to recognize the legitimate
national rights of the Arab people of Palestine. Only
the complete withdrawal of the Israeli troops from all
Arab lands occupied in 1967 and the realization of
the legitimate national rights of the Arab people of
Palestine, including its inalienable right to the establishment of its own State, can lead to the attainment of
lasting peace in the Middle East. Support of and
compliance with those demands is the basic prerequisite for a just and peaceful solution which would
safeguard the rights of all States. of that region to
sovereign and independent existence and development.

33. The appropriate
international
machinery,
the
Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East, has
been created for the very purpose of settling this
conflict on a peaceful basis. It has been established
in the spirit of the aims of the United Nations and in
harmony with its principles. Partial steps which bypass
the Geneva Conference, avoiding key problems of the
settlement,
have naturally failed to bring desirable
results. In fact, they can play into the hands of those
who strive for aggravation of the situation and postponement of the basic solution.

to the United Republic of Tanzania as a pioneer of the
existing ties, and his name has ever since signified
and will continue to signify our friendship with the
Chinese people. Therefore the United Republic of
Tanzania considers the passing away of Premier Chou
En-lai as its own loss. However, over and above the
loss that countries like mine feel is the collective loss
inflicted on the international
community
with the
passing away of a leader of such outstanding calibre,
qualities
and impact, for Chou En-lai’s
eminent
statesmanship
and personal contribution
to world
peace and justice have been recognized throughout
the world. Therefore his untimely death has deprived
the world community
of one of the greatest personalities instrumental
in the pursuit of world peace and
justice. On behalf of the Tanzanian delegation, I wish
to request the Chinese delegation to convey to the
Chinese Government and people our deep sorrow and
sympathy on this sad occasion.

34. Recent developments
have shown that the
aggressor and the circles supporting it are beginning
to find themselves in international
isolation. It is not
difficult to see who is really interested in the attainment of a just and permanent settlement and who is
curbing and sabotaging that process. Present developments call for all those who are striving for a just
solution in the Middle East to assist in the unity of
the Arab States and nations on an anti-imperialist
basis.

38. Coming back to the item before the Council,
I should like in the first place to welcome warmly
the representatives of the PLO to this crucial consideration of the Middle East problem. Their presence and
contriburion
in the Security Council are certainly an
essential element for fruitful consideration
of the
problem. The PLO, which represents a party directly
concerned in the problem, has to be heard in any
negotiations
or talks dealing with the Middle East
problem. As it is the authentic representative of the
Palestinian people, its presence in our midst not only
is logical but will certainly serve to enrich greatly the
Council’s
capacity to proceed in a serious and
constructive way in the search for a soultion to the
burning problem before us. Indeed the Security Council has already been enriched by an important and
in-depth contribution
made by the head of the PLO
delegation, Mr. Khaddoumi,
in his statement in the
Council on 12 January [ibid.].

35. The’ resumption
of the activity of the Geneva
Conference represents a constructive answer to the
pressing need of the present time. All interested
parties, including the PLO, should participate on an
equal basis from the very start of the resumption of
that Conference. The participation
of the Arab people
of Palestine represented by the PLO is the subject
of a request that was supported also by the General
Assembly in its resolution 3375 (XXX) of 10 November
1975. Only in such a forum can an over-all basic
political solution of the conflict in the Middle East be
reached.
36. As in the previous statements on this question,
we similarly
stressed the fact that Czechoslovakia
considers itself a part of those forces which are
endeavouring to achieve a political settlement of the
whole complex situation in the Middle East by peaceful
means and through negotiations.
This corresponds
with the principles‘ of our foreign policy, determined
by the interests of peace, international
security and
progress; likewise it corresponds with our traditional
friendship with the’ Arab States and nations.

39. This occasion, when we are for the first time
undertaking
a consideration
of the whole question
of the Middle East, including its root cause, is a great
opportunity
for all the parties to make a concerted
effort at reaching a final, just and peaceful settlement
of the whole problem. The decision of one of the
parties concerned to be absent from the meeting means
that a great opportunity
is missed. Therefore we
deeply regret that Israel has refused to come and
participate in the Council’s current meetings. Even
at this rather late hour, my delegation would like to
see Israel abandon its boycott of the Council and
take a responsible position by joining the other parties
concerned in this serious debate. That the reason for
its absence is its refusal to recognize the PLO as a
party to the Middle
East problem
is the more
lamentable
as the Palestinian
people constitutes a
reality Israel cannot afford to ignore. A logical extension of this ‘reality is the fact that the PLO is the
legitimate representative of the Palestinian people and
has been rebognized as such by the world. There can
be no lasting‘peace
in the Middle East unless these

37. The PRESIDENT:
As I have no more speakers
on my list for the current ‘debate, I should now like
to speak in my capacity as representative
of the
UNITED
REPUBLIC
OF TANZANIA.
Before I
speak on the subject on the agenda, I wish to associate
the Tanzanian delegation fully with the statement that
I made as President of the Council expressing our
profound grief at the death of Premier Chou En-lai
[187&h meeting]. The sad news’of his death came as
a great shock to the Government,
the Party and the
people of the United Republic
of Tanzania.
The
Tanzanian people, who now enjoy great friendship
and co-operation with the Chinese people, remember
Premier Chou En-lai as one of the outstanding pioneers
and architects of the warm and flourishing relations
between our two countries. In fact he personally came
5

realities are recognized. There can be no just and
peaceful solution if the PLO, which represents an
aggrieved party, is ignored. Therefore the sooner
Israel comes to terms with these realities the better the
prospects of peace in the Middle East. It is, furthermore, ironic that Israel, whose spokesmen have in the
past consistently
‘advocated
dialogue
and direct
negotiations,
has chosen to be away and let slip the
opportunity for that very dialogue which the Security
Council discussion has provided.

tions and tides of emotion. The point has now been
reached when the original issue seems to have been
almost forgotten.
45. Today, the impression is sometimes given that
the cause and effeci of the Middle East problem are
the raging hostilities between the Arab States on one
hand, and Israel on the other. The issue of the rights
of the Palestinian people, which generated the problem,
has been relegated, as it were, to a simple problem of
refugees arising from, but not responsible for, the
Arab-Israeli conflict.

40. By coincidence, no time is more fitting than this
to’undertake
an over-all examination of thi problem
before us. These meetings of the Security Council
have been convened pursuant to Council resolution 381 (1975), whose main purpose was to renew the
mandate
of the United
Nations
Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF),
but the meetings come
just as we are entering a new phase in the life of the
United Nations.

46. Such a misleading conception of the problem
can only continue
to obfuscate the issues and
dangerously to protract the problem. For unless the
underlying causes are examined and viewed in their
proper perspective, the consequential
issues cannot
lend themselves to a solution.
Instead, we shall
continue to be baffled by a. vicious circle and this
only helps those who are interested in perpetuating
the state of affairs for their own ulterior motives.

41. Thirty years have gone by since the. United
Nations was founded to bring peace on earth. This
goal, for which the United Nations was created, has
still to be reached; for, although the United Nations
may rightly pride itself on its achievements
elsewhere, the Middle East problem stands out as one of
its greatest disappointments.
The Middle East ‘problem
not only has been with the world community for the
past 30 years, concurrent with the existence of the
Organization,
but has, like a malignant cancer, grown
worse and affected almost every part of the globe.

47. Those of us who were not present when’the
United Nations created the State of Israel but who
have come to accept that decision have been informed
that the actions of the Organization
were taken out
of sympathy for the wrongs done to the Jews by
nazism. Although other places for the resettlement
had been proposed, the United Nations deemed it
appropriate to provide room for them in Palestine.
But Palestine did not belong to the Jewish community
alone. In fact Jews constituted then a much smaller
percentage of the whole population
than the nonJewish community.
If the Jews were morally or
otherwise entitled
to a homeland,
it is equally
important
to. recognize that the equality of men
demands that the rights and interests of one people,
especially a people that were already inhabiting the
land, should not be subjected to those of others.
Evil should not be remedied by or through the intentional creation of another evil.

42. As we are entering the next phase of the Organization, it is only desirable that we make a fresh
resolution to rededicate our efforts to ensure the
liquidation
of all existing conflicts, especially those
like that of the Middle East which, besides being long
overdue for solution, are threatening the very effectiveness of the Organization.
Any further protraction
of the problem of the Middle East may mean another
man-made catastrophe.
43. Therefore we hope and believe that this opportunity will not be wasted. We believe that Council
members will do everything within their ability to
ensure the laying of a foundation for speeding up
fruitful negotiations on the Middle East problem. In
particular,
we hope that the Council. will act in
accordance with the requirements of the’ realities of
the situation bearing in mind that such an opportunity
as we now have may not be so readily available again.
The Tanzanian delegation wishes to assure the Council
of its total co-operation and commitment
to do everything possible to make the Council’s session on this
.,.
serious problem a fruitful one.

48.. The existence of Israel as a State is a reality
we cannot and should not ignore. But, it is as much a
reality that today we have a people deprived of their
homeland-the
Palestinians. When in 1947 the United
Nations sanctioned the birth of Israel, it did so against
the horrifying
background
of the persecution and
sufferings inflicted upon the Jewish people by Nazi
Germany. It would be futile here to try and examine
the merits and demerits of that decision. One can
argue passionately and rationally that the remedy for
one injustice is not to create another one. Yet one
observation here is very pertinent. The unintended
effect of the United Nations decision was that hundreds
of thousands of Palestinians were forced to assume
the status of refugees with all the attendant misery
and squalor. And the injustice done to the Palestinians
becomes all the more glaring when we bear in mind
that neither the Palestinians nor the Arabs in general
had anything to do with the persecution of the Jews.

44. The issues in the problem of the Middle East,
compounded by the tortuous evolution of the problem,
are in themselves very intricate, but this, phenomenon
has been rendered the more confusing to the general
international public by the barrage of rhetoric, provoca6

,_,-..-._:

.

And certainly,
if the international
community
had
been moved in 1947 to take certain measures, bearing
in mind the long history of persecution of the Jewish
people, it could certainly be expected to be no less
sensitive today to the long sufferings and persecution
of the Palestinian people.

possible between the parties, and to bring its influence
to bear on them in order that they may find a permanent
solution to the problem. In its efforts to search for
a solution, the United Nations has left no stone
unturned. The records of the United Nations abound
in these efforts. Similar efforts have been exerted by
Members of the United Nations on their own initiative.
These also are well known and need no elaboration.
To the disenchantment
of the world community,
peace has continued to elude us. In its place, more
hostilities
and more injustices are brought to our
attention. It is, therefore, the right time for us seriously
to look into the underlying causes of these failures to
realize that desired peace, and to make a fresh attempt
to obtain it.

49. Furthermore,
if the United Nations accepts, as
it in fact has done since 1947 when it sanctioned
the Partition Plan,2 that the Palestinians are, like the
Jews, as much entitled to a homeland as any other
people, we cannot but also accept that we have a
responsibility
to remedy the situation and restore that
right to the Palestinians.
50. The defence of human rights and the ‘liberation
of man continue to be the mission and responsibility
of the Organization. The United Nations cannot afford
to see its own action of establishing the State of
Israel turned into an opportunity for the perpetuation
of the very policies it sought to condemn and reject.
At the same time, if the world community
failed to
endorse and champion the legitimate
rights of the
Palestinians,
it would seriously erode any argument
of those who sought to justify the United Nations.
action on moral principles.

54. In 1967, the Council adopted a resolution
to
which constant reference has been made, namely,
resolution 242 (1967). That resolution came in the
wake of one of the most traumatic experiences in
,the Middle
East problem,
an experience
which
compelled the Council to review the entire question
of the Middle East. As such, the resolution was a
seriousattempt
to take into account the factors which
were responsible for the trouble. It indeed marked
a watershed in the entire process .of the search for
peace in the Middle East. Henceforth, the resolution
formed the basis of ,a11 subsequent negotiations
on
the subject.

5 1. However one looks at or explains the situation,
there are in existence today facts which are common
knowledge to the entire world community.
Israel has
forcibly acquired and illegally occupies a number of
neighbouring
Arab territories,
including Jerusalem,
from which it has refused to withdraw. Israel is
responsible for the homelessness and misery of the
Palestinian people. This very Organization
has determined that Israel has also committed war crimes
and continues to violate the Geneva Conventions of
1949 concerning the respect for human rights in armed
conflicts. All these acts have been in furtherance of the
injustice already committed
against the Palestinians
when they were first dispossessed and uprooted from
their homeland. It is equ.ally recognized that all these
acts are contraventions
of he Charter of the United
Nations, anomalies needin B immediate
termination
and redress. The numerous resolutions of the United
Nations on this matter are clear testimony of this
awareness.

55. Later developments,
however, have brought out
two facts with regard to resolution 242 (1967). On
one hand, the resolution was one of the most serious
attempts to define the prerequisites for the immediate
cessation of the Arab-Israeli
conflict. On the other
hand, it.:had two flaws. The first was that it was not
accurate enough to be unsusceptible of misinterpretations. The second was that the issue of the rights of
the Palestinians
was not given adequate treatment.
With good faith and genuine intentions on the part
of the parties concerned, however, that resolution
should have been able to -facilitate the negotiations
which were embarked upon subsequently.
I
56. Two principles
were announced
with fairly
satisfactory. clarity in resolution 242 (1967), namely,
the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by
war, and the respect for and acknowledgement
of the
sovereignty;
territorial
integrity and political
independence <of. every State in the area and its right
to live in peace within secure and recognized
boundaries free from threats or acts of force. These
principles are stated in the preambuhn
part of the
resolution and are related to the Middle East situation
in the operative part.

52. One truth which is beyond question is that the
parties to the conflict want peace. They may differ in
their qualification
of this goal. One party may wish
to get peace that means quiet enjoyment of the spoils
it has taken from others, while others want not peace
at all costs, but peace with justice. It may also be
that, while all want peace, the initial wrong has
generated so much misunderstanding,
distrust and
confusion
that communication
has broken down
between them making it impossible to agree on the
manner of achieving that peace. Still the fact remains
that all of them crave for peace.

57. It is our view that the operative paragraph
referring to, these two principles is only a corollary
of the statement of principles
in the preambular
paragraph. Specifically,
once the principle of the
inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by war
had been determined
it was not even necessary to

53. The task of the Security Council is to disentangle
the problems which have made communication
im7

mention that all territories acquired by war had to
be returned to their lawful owners. By the same
token, the principle of the respect of the sovereignty,
territorial
integrity
and political
independence
of
every State having been reaffirmed, it was simply a
question of style to repeat it in both the preambular
and operative parts. After all, both these principles
are clearly laid down in, and in fact reproduced from,
the Charter of the United Nations, to which both
Israel and the Arab States are parties. Resolution 242
(1967) could never validly depart or be intended to
depart from the provisions of the Charter. It is therefore absolutely absurd to assert that that resolution
in total contravention
of the Charter could condone
annexation by Israel ,.by force of any part of Arab
territory. It simply did not and could not do so.

the Tanzanian position today. Nothing has happened
to justify any alterations of my Government’s policies.
If anything, the events of the last eight years have
only reinforced our conviction that, in the words of
President Nyerere, “we cannot condone aggression
on any pretext, nor accept victory in war as a justification for the exploitation of other lands, or government
over other peoples.” Nor has the United Republic of
Tanzania
changed its position
in respect of its
recognition of the State of Israel.
61. As to the Palestinian question, it is true that the
Palestinians were not mentioned by name in resolution 242 (1967) but by the reference to refugees in
the region. Nevertheless,
it cannot be seriously
asserted that the Palestinian problem was to be taken
purely as a refugee problem. Standing out very clearly
in that resolution is the emphasis on the need for a
just and lasting peace in the region. Indeed, the
wording of the provision on refugees also stresses
the necessity for a just settlement of the problem.
Thus, if not in words, certainly in spirit, the authors
of that resolution must have recognized that it would
be both unjust and unrealistic to contemplate a settlement of the Middle
East problem
without due
cognizance of the rights of the Palestinians.

58. We therefore
consider
that to attempt
to
capitalize
on linguistic
deficiency,
especially
to
interpret the resolution as contrary to the Charter of
the United Nations, is not only to act in bad faith
but also deliberately to reject the ideals and principles
of the Charter itself. This rejection is all the more
outrageous when accompanied, as it is, by a conduct
which manifests no intention of change of attitude.
We know, for example, that Israel is establishing
permanent settlements
in the occupied territories.
Such facts, deliberately created, only serve to complicate the problem. It is all the more deplorable that
the creation of such “new facts” seems to be part
and parcel of the policies of the Israeli authorities.
The recent announcement of creating new settlements
in the Golan Heights reinforces our concern on this
aspect of Israeli policies which can only be described
as obstructive to the goals of peace.

62. The justice referred to throughout resolution 242
(1967) cannot be partial. It has to be real justice. In
this case, it is among other things and above all the
right of a people to self-determination
an independence. This right was re-emphasized as late as last
year when the General Assembly adopted resolution
3376 (XXX) stressing the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination,
national independence
and sovereignty.

59. In a major foreign policy address at the Party
National Conference at Mwanza, on 16 October 1967,
my President, Mualimu Julius K. Nyerere, infer ah,
made the following remarks concerning the Middle
East situation:

63. The very Partition Plan as adopted by the United
Nations in 1947 contemplated,
though in an unsatisfactory manner, that the Palestinians
would also
exercise their right to self-determination,
national
independence and sovereignty. Those who voted for
the Partition Plan and now seem to equivocate on the
inalienable national rights of the Palestinians would do
well to ponder the consequences of such a volte-face
on their part. Of course we are aware that the subsequent conduct of Israel completely prevented the
Palestinians from even making use of the Partition
plan.

“In expressing our hope that a peaceful settlement of this terribly difficult situation will soon
become possible, it is necessary for us to accept
two things. First, that Israel’s desire to be
acknowledged as a nation is understandable.
But
secondly,
and equally important,
that Israel’s
occupation of Arab territories of Egypt, Jordan and
Syria must be brought to an end. Israel must
evacuate the areas it overran in June of this year
-without
exception-before
it can reasonably
expect that the Arab countries will begin to acquiesce
in its national presence.”

64. However, neither the conduct of Israel nor any
belated repudiation
of the legitimate
rights of the
Palestinians by those who find it convenient to do so
could extinguish the right of the Palestinian people.
The Palestinians
had this right during the British
colonial period, they continued to have it when resolution 242 (1967) was adopted and they have it no
less at this moment. If Israel can claim the right to
be recognized-and
many peoples and States,
including my own, have recognized it-one
would
have thought that the case for the recognition of the
Palestinian right was even more compelling.
Indeed,

And the President went on to stress that Israel must
“accept that the United Nations which sanctioned its
birth is, and mast be, unalterably opposed to territorial
aggrandizement by force or threat of force.”
60. That was the position of the United Republic of
Tanzania, articulated over eight years ago; that remains
8

at least to the extent that Israel desires recognition
from the Palestinians, it cannot but show the example
itself. Unless and until it does so, it cannot expect
similar recognition from the Palestinians,

Nations has failed to work out a solution of the
problem-for the solution has been amply elaborated
and offered to the parties concerned, but unfortunately
rejected by one of them-but, rather, why the party
responsible has chosen so to reject it in spite of the
censure of the United Nations and world opinion at
large.

65. It was the denial to the Palestinians of the
exercise of this right which was the underlying cause
of the Middle East problem; it remains the essence of
the matter. Even the problem of forcible territorial
acquisition and acts of aggression which has featured
more prominently in recent years is only a ramification
of that original question.

70. There would seem to be two options or courses
of action. One is the adoption by Israel of the political
will to come to terms with the realities and accept a
just and lasting solution for peace. The other is the
concerted action of the United Nations in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter, to which
Israel is a party.

66. It is therefore imperative that the Security Council
should categorically and without ambiguity affirm this
inalienab!e national right of the Palestinians. To do so
would be in conformity with the Charter itself and the
many resolutions of the United Nations. To act in
that manner would be addressing ourselves to the
central issue of the Middle East conflict.

71. So far the United Nations has confined itself to
the former course of action. The United Nations has
endeavoured to persuade and even to threaten Israel
into changing its attitude. But it is self-evident that so
far we have not succeeded. A solution in keeping
with the first option or course of action would certainly
be most desirable for, given the political goodwill of
the parties, a solution could be worked out that would
take into account all the legitimate rights of the parties
and would ensure its own permanency. That is indeed
what we still call upon Israel to adopt.

67. As we are fully aware, despite the hope provided
by resolution 242 (1967) and other relevant United
Nations resolutions, indeed despite the clear provisions of the Charter, the intensive efforts ,of the
Organization have not yet yielded results. It is also
very clear that throughout the process of the search
for a solution in the Middle East, the mdor obstacle
has been the refusal by one party to the conflict to
adhere to the principles of the Charter. In so doing
that party has been using the technique of deliberate
misinterpretation of resolution 242 (1967) so as to
rationalize its actions on the problem. It is clearly
a deliberate misinterpretation, because in spite of the
clarity of the Charter itself and in spite of the unanimity
of other resolutions in reaffirming the Charter principles, that party alone has sought to use lame sophistry
to defeat some of the most important principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

72. Needless to,say, no forum whatsoever will yield
any peaceful result if one of the parties continues to
harbour unjustified ulterior motives ab initio Jf that
is the case, the time must therefore come when the
United Nations has to take more realistic and effective
action in accordance with the Charter. It will have to
do so because it is both an obligation on its part
as well as the only course of action left to it. For the
facts give us no options in reality. We either have to
act effectively or face another conflagration in the
Middle East with far-reaching repercussions for all
of us. The portents are too obvious to ignore. Above
all, time is not with us, for a solution to the problem
is long overdue. We entirely agree with all those
of our colleagues who stated before us that these
meetings of the Security Council afford us both an
‘opportunity and a challenge. It is the belief of the
Tanzanian delegation that all the members of the Council will face this challenge with maximum responsibility.

68. There can therefore be no doubt as to what are
the duties and responsibilities of the parties to the
conflict under the Charter of the United Nations. Nor
is world opinion unaware of who is responsible for
the frustration of the efforts for a just and lasting
peace. The United Nations abounds in testimony on
these questions. In fact, outside the United Nations
as well evidence abounds as to the motives of the
party responsible for the deadlock and tension in the
region. I have, for example, already alluded to Israeli
policies of establishing permanent settlements in the
occupied territories, which it knows very well are
not its territories, and from which the international
community has unequivocally demanded its withdrawal.

The meeting

t-we at 12.30 p.m.
Notes

1 See O&%kd

69. What is perplexing and disappointing to the
international community is no longer why the United

Records

of the Security

Council,

Yew, 1379th meeting, para. 19.
z See General Assembly resolution 181 (II).

9.

Twenty-second

-

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United Nations
world. Consult
COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LEZS PUBLICATIONS

DES NATTONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Units
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup&
des ventes, New York ou Gentve.

sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences dCpositaires du
de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies, Section

KAIC

OPI-AHZi

IIOIIY’IHTh

Hs~a~ws

H3AAHHR

3AIxWi

OB%EflNHEHHhIX

HAIIHli

Barnerd
HauHA.

Opramraaunn
06zensnennhix
HaueR
rdonoio xynn~b
a KHHXH~IX
araraw BreriTcTaax
BO BC~X patioriax
~wpa.
HasonwTe
cnpaartm
06 HaAaHWRX B
xrimrc~~o~ Maraamre
HUH nmaw~e
no anpecy:
Oprann3aqw~
‘06%enwHemiblx
Cexunn
no nponame
nanaHnB,
Hbm-Ffop~
HUH Xeriesa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

3NHax

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estin en venta en Jibrerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

83-60801-May

1984-2,200
