A/RES/76/234

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
30 December 2021

Seventy-sixth session
Agenda item 100
General and complete disarmament

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on
24 December 2021
[on the report of the First Committee (A/76/444, para. 93)]

76/234.

Promoting international cooperation on peaceful uses in the
context of international security
The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, 1 the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on their
Destruction 2 and the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction 3 and the
provisions of relevant United Nations resolutions,
Reaffirming the need for all Member States to fulfil their obligations in relation
to arms control and disarmament and to prevent proliferation, in all its aspects, of all
weapons of mass destruction,
Reaffirming also that proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons,
as well as their means of delivery, constitutes a threat to international peace and
security,
Reaffirming further support for the multilateral treaties whose aim is to
eliminate or prevent the proliferation of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and
the importance for all States parties to these treaties of implementing them fully in
order to promote international stability,
Bearing in mind the potential impact that scientific and technological advances
can have on global security,

__________________

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
Ibid., vol. 1015, No. 14860.
3
Ibid., vol. 1974, No. 33757.
1
2

21-19665 (E)

050121

*2119665*

A/RES/76/234

Promoting international cooperation on peaceful uses in the context
of international security

Recognizing the inalienable right of all States to participate in the fullest
possible exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and technological information
for peaceful purposes, in accordance with relevant international obligations,
Reaffirming that preventing the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons should not hamper international cooperation on materials, equipment and
technology for peaceful purposes, while the goals of peaceful utilization should not
be misused for proliferation purposes,
Bearing in mind the significant role of international cooperation on materials,
equipment and technology for peaceful purposes in facilitating the economic and
social development of Member States, in particular the development of developing
countries,
Acknowledging the need to continue the exchange of technologies for peaceful
uses, including in accordance with relevant international obligations,
Acknowledging also the importance of technology as one of the key means of
implementation in the pursuit of sustainable development,
Noting with concern that undue restrictions on exports to developing countries
of materials, equipment and technology for peaceful purposes persist,
Emphasizing that proliferation concerns are best addressed through multilaterally
negotiated, universal, comprehensive and non-discriminatory agreements,
Emphasizing also that non-proliferation control arrangements should be
transparent and open to participation by all States and should ensure that no
restrictions are imposed on access to materials, equipment and technology for
peaceful purposes required by developing countries for their continued sustainable
development,
Emphasizing further the importance of promoting international cooperation for
peaceful purposes,
1.
Urges all Member States, without prejudice to their non-proliferation
obligations, to take concrete measures to promote international cooperation on
materials, equipment and technology for peaceful purposes, in particular not to
maintain any restrictions incompatible with the obligations undertaken;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views and recommendations of
all Member States on all aspects of promoting international cooperation on peaceful
uses in the context of international security, including identifying undue restrictions
on exports to developing countries of materials, equipment and tec hnology for
peaceful purposes, possible measures to achieve a balance between non -proliferation
and peaceful uses, and the way forward;
3.
Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a report containing the
views and recommendations to the General Assembly at its seventy-seventh session,
for further discussion by Member States;
4.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-seventh session
an item entitled “Promoting international cooperation on peaceful uses in the context
of international security”.
54th (resumed) plenary meeting
24 December 2021

2/2

21-19665
