V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Comrnittce

Requests the Committee for Development Planning
at its fourteenth session to give consideration, as a
matter of priority, to the question of the inclusion of
Tonga in the list of the least developed countries and
to submit its conclusions to the Economic and Social
Council at its sixty-fifth session.
101st plenary meeting
13 December 1977
32/95.

Assistance to Mozambique

The General Assembly,
Recalling the decision of the Government of Mozambique to implement mandatory sanctions against the
illegal régime of Southern Rhodesia in accordance
with Security Council resolution 253 ( 1968) of 29
May 1968,
Conscious of the substantial economic sacrifices
made by Mozambique in the implementation of its
decision to enforce sanctions and to close its borders
with Southern Rhodesia,
Deeply concerned at the continued acts of aggression
committed by the illegal régime of Southern Rhodesia
against Mozambique and thc resultant loss of life and
destruction of property,
Recalling Security Council resolution 3 86 (1976) of
17 March 1976, in which the Council appealed to all
States to provide immediate financia!, technical and
material assistance to Mozambique and requested the
Secretary-General, in collaboration with the appropriate
organizations of the United Nations systcm, to organize,
with immediate effect, all forms of financia!, technical
and material assistance to enablc Mozambique to carry
out its economic development programme normally and
to enhance its capacity to implement fully thc United
Nations mandatory sanctions,
Endorsing the provisions of Security Council resolution 411 (1977) of 30 June 1977, in which the
Council, inter alia, condemncd the illegal régime of
Southern Rhodesia for its acts of aggression against
Mozambique and requested the international community to provide financia!, technical and material assistance to enable Mozambique to overcomc thc severe
economic loss and destruction of property brought
about by such acts of aggression,

Noting Economic and Social Council resolutions
1987 (LX) of 11 May 1976, 2020 (LXI) of 3 August
1976 and 2094 (LXIII) of 29 July 1977, and recalling
General Assembly resolution 31 / 43 of 1 December 1976,
Noting also the report of the Secretary-General dated
9 J une 1977 33 submitting the report of the second review
mission assessing Mozambique's specific food, material
and economic requirements and describing its special
needs resulting from floods and the large influx of
refugees from Southern Rhodesia,
Having examined the note by the Secretary-General
dated 20 October 1977 34 transmitting the report of the
mission to Mozambique, which provided an assessment of the financia!, technical and material assistance
33 A/32/96.

;H A/32/268-S/12413.

For the printed text, see O/licia/
Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second Year, Supplement for October, Novemher and Decemhcr 1977.

81

required for Mozambique to overcome the loss and
destruction caused by Southern Rhodesia's acts of
aggression and which reviewed the over-all economic
situation in Mozambique in the context of Security
Council resolutions 386 (1976) and 411 (1977),
1. Fully endorses the assessment and recommendations of the mission which was dispatched to Mozambique under the terms of Security Council resolution
411 ( l 977), contained in the note by thc SecretaryGeneral dated 20 October 1977;
2. Fully supports the provision of assistance to
meet:
(a)
The specific food, material and economic requiremcnts arising from the special economic situation
facing Mozambique;
( h)
The financia! and material needs required to
deal with the large influx of rcfugees from Southern
Rhodcsia, as outlined in the report of the SecrctaryGenl'ral dated 9 Junc 1977 and the note by thc Secretary-Gcneral dated 20 October 1977;
3. Deeply appreciates the measures taken by the
Secretary-Gcneral to organize and mobilizc an effective
programme of international assistance to Mozambique;

4. Notes with satisfaction thc assistancc so far
prnvidcd to Mozambiqu~ by various States and by various regional and international organizations;

5. Expresses deep concern, however, that the total
assistancc received to date to meet the economic sacrificcs made by Mozambique in the enforccment of sanctions still falls far short of its rcquirements to cope
with the situation;
6. Draws the attention of the intcrnational communitv to additional financia!, economic and material assistance urgently required by Mozambique to enable it
to ovcrcomc the severe cconomic loss and destruction
of property causcd by the acts of aggression that are
detailed in the note by the Secretary-General;
7. Urges ali Sta tes and ali regional, financia! and
intergovernmental organizations to provide financia!,
material and economic assistance to Mozambique to
enablc it to cope with thcse new economic and social
probkms;
8. Notes with satisfaction the programmes of humanitarian assistance provided by Zimbabwean refugees
in Mozambique by the United Nations High Commissioncr for Refugees and urges the international community to provide him speedily with the neccssary
means to carry out an extcnsion of thesc programmes
along the lines recommcnded in the note by the Secretary-Gcneral;
9. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system-in particular
th.: United Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations
Dcvclopment Programme. the World Food Programme,
the Fnod and Agriculturc Organization of thc United
Nations, thc World Health Organization and the International Fund for Agricultura! Development-to assist
Mozambique in carrying out its planned development
projccts without interruption and to co-operate closely
with thc Secretary-Gencral in organizing an effcctive
international programme of assistance;
1O. Further requests the appropriatc organizations
and programmcs of the United Nations system to report

82

General Assernbly-Thirty-second Session

regularly to the Secretary-General on the steps taken
by them and the resources they have madc availablc
to assist Mozambique;
11. Requests the Sccrctary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the resources neccssary for an effective programme of financia!, technical and material assistance to Mozambique;
( b) To cnsure that adequate financia! and budgetary arrangements are rnade to continue the mobilization of resourccs and to co-ordinate the intcrnational
programme of assistancc to Mozambique;
(e) To arrange for a rcview of the economic situation of Mozambique in time for the matter to be considered by the Economic and Social Council at its
sixty-fifth session;

(d) To keep the situation in Mozambique under
constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies and international financia]
institutions, and to report on the question to the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session.

101st plenary meeting
13 December 1977

32/96.

Assistance to Sao Tome ami Principe

The General Assembly,
Mindful of its rcsolution 31 / 187 of 21 December
1976, in which it expressed deep conccrn at the serious
economic and social situation in Sao Tome and Principc
as a rcsult of thc total lack of infrastructure for dcvelopment,
Recalling its resolution 31 / 156 of 21 Decembcr
1976, in which it urged ali Governments, in particular
those of thc developed countries, to lend their support,
in the context of their assistance programmes, for thc
implcmentation of the specific action envisagcd in
favour of developing island countrics within the frarncwork of their devcloprnent plans and prioritics.
Noting that thc appeal rnade in resolution 31 / 187
for assistance to Sao Tome and Principe thus far has
not met with the desired response,
Having noted the report of the Sccrctary-Gencral on
assistance to Sao Tome and Principc 3 " and thc statcmcnt subrnitted by thc Governmcnt of that country on
its most urgent needs, 36
Having noted thc report of thc Committee for Devclopment Planning, in which thc Committce decidcd
to cxamine 37 at its fourteenth session the question of
the inclusion of Sao Torne and Principe in the list of
the Ieast developed countries, 38 on the basis of more
recent and more detailed information,

1. Renews the
31/187;
2.

appeal

madc

in its resolution

Requests the Sccretary-General:

35 A/32/220 and Add. t.
36 A/32/220/ Add.1, appendix.
3 7 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 4 ( E/ 5939 and Corr.1),
para. 83.
38See resolutions 2768 (XXVI) and 3487 (XXX).

(a) To continuc his cfforts for the mobilization of
thc financia!, technical a:1d cconornic assistance of thc
interriational community, in particular of thc dcveloped
countries and the appropriate organizations within the
United Nations systcm, with a v;ew to meeting the
short-term and long-term nceds of Sao Tome and
Principc;
( b)
To ensurc that adcquate financia! ami budgetary arrangcmcnts are madc to continuc thc mobilization of rcsources ami to co-ordinate the intcrnational
programmc of ~1~;sistancc to Sao Tome and Príncipe;
(e)
To seno a special mission to Sao Tome aml
Principe with a vicw to continuing the consultations
with the Govcrnrncnt on urgent necds and identifying
thc crnnomic prob!ems facing the country, and to
cnsurc that the report of thc mission is issued in time
to enablc the Economic and Social Council to consider
the q ucstion at its sixty-fifth session;

( d)
To ensure that the report of thc special mission is circulatcd to ali Member States and to all regional and intcrnational organizations concerncd, including the Unitcd Nations Development Programmc.
the World Bank, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Food Programrne
and the United Nations Childrcn's Fund;

(e) To kccp thc situation in Sao Tome and
Principe under constant review and to maintain close
contact with Member States, regional and other intergovcrnmental organizations, the specializcd agencies
and intcrnational financia! institutions, and to rcport on
the question to the General Assembly at it thirty-third
session.
101st plenary meeting
13 December 1977
32/97.

Assistanee to Botswana

The General A ssembly,
Recalling Sccurity Council resolutions 403 (1977)
of 14 January 1977 and 406 (1977) of 25 May 1977
concerning thc comp!aint by the Governmcnt of Botswana of acts of ag:grcssion committcd airninst its tcrritory by thc i1lcgal ;égime in Southcrn Rhodcsia,
Deep/v com·emed at the loss of human lifc and
damagc to propcrty causcd by the acts of the illcgal
régimc in Southcrn Rhodesia against Botswana,
Rca!izing the nced for Botswana to strcngthen its
sccurity in ordcr to safcguard its sovercignty, territorial
intcgrity and indcpendcncc.
Recogni::.ing thc plight of thc rcfugecs lkeing from
opprcssion and the additional burdcn imposed upon
Botswana by thcir continuing influx,
Nvting the rcport of thc mission to Botswana,
transmitted by a note by the Secretary-General dated
28 March 1977,:rn which assessed the special economic
nceds of Botswana in February 1977,
Having examined the report of the review mission to
Botswana, transmitted by a note by the SecretaryGeneral dated 26 October 1977 40 in accordance with
39
Official Records of tlze Security Council, Thirty-second
Year, Supplement for ltmuary, February and Marclz 1977,
document S / 123 07.
40
A/32/287-S/12421. For the printed text, see Ofjicial
Records of the Security Counci/, Thirty-second Y ear, Supplement far October, November and December 1977.
