204

33/121.

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

Investments of the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Fund in transnational corporations ami in developing eountries
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in its resolution 31/197 of 22 December 1976, it requested the Secretary-General to
ensure that the resources which the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund holds invested in shares of
transnational corporations are invested on safe and
profitable terms and, to the greatest extent practicable,
in sound investments in developing countries,
Recalling also that, in its resolution 32/73 A of
9 December 1977, it requested the Secretary-General
to redouble his efforts, in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 31/197, to ensure that a larger
proportion of the investment of the resources of the
Fund is made in developing countries,
Recalling further the resolutions adopted by the
United Nations and other international bodies concerning the new international economic arder and
transnational corporations,
Reaffi,rming its belief, expressed in the third preambular paragraph of its resolution 31 / 197 and reiterated
in the fourth preambular paragraph of its resolution
32/73 A, that investments by the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund in shares of transnational
corporations might contradict the objectives and purposes of the organizations of the United Nations
system,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on investments of the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Fund with particular reference to developing countries,99
Observing that, following the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 31/197, investments by the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund in transnational
corporations had amounted to $772 million in bonds
and equities on 31 March 1977, which declined to
$745 million on 31 March 1978, while investments
made directly in developing countries in bonds
amounted to just over $43 million on 30 June 1978,
l. Renews its request to the Secretary-General
that, in pursuance of General Assembly resolutions
31/197 and 32/73 A, he redouble his efforts, in
consultation with the Investments Committee, to ensure
that the resources which the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund holds invested in shares of transnational
corporations are reinvested in developing countries to
the greatest extent practicable, subject to careful observance of the requirements of safety, profitability,
liquidity and convertibility, and in conformity with the
Regulations of the Joint Fund;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
88th plenary meeting
19 December 1978

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/73 B of 9 December
1977,
so A/C.5/33/7.

Taking note of the results so far achieved by the
Secretary-General in his efforts to initiate negotiations
with financia! institutions in Africa with a view to
investing sorne of the portfolio of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund directly in Africa on safe
and profitable terms,
Requests the Secretary-General to intensify the contacts and inquiries with institutions and Governments
in Africa with a view to increasing substantially the
amount invested in Africa, on safe and profitable terms,
and to report on the matter to the General Assembly
at its thirty-fourth session.
88th plenary meeting
19 December 1978

33/142.

Administrative and buclgetary co-ordination of the United Nations with the
spedalized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency
A

The General Assembly,
Concerned with the growing need far effective administrative and budgetary co-ordination within the
framework of the United Nations system,
Recalling its decision taken at its 2440th plenary
meeting, on 15 December 1975, to consider in depth
the item entitled "Administrative and budgetary coordination of the United Nations with the specialized
agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency"
normally in off-budget years, 100
Having considered with appreciation the report of
the Advisorv Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the administrative and budgetary
co-ordination of the United Nations with the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy
Agency, 101
l. Concurs with the observations and comments
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions as contained in its report;
2. Refers to the organizations con cerned the observations and comments contained in that report;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to refer to the
executive heads of the organizations of the United
Nations system, through the Administrative Committee
on Co-ordination, matters arising out of the report of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Ouestions which call for their attention and
necessary action;
4. Transmits the report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to the
Board of Auditors, the Panel of Externa! Auditors
and the Joint Inspection Unit far their information;
5. Requests the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to give greater emphasis in its future reports on administrative and
budgetary co-ordination to budgetary developments in
individual organizations which are of potential interest
to other organizations and to supplement those annual
100 O/ficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 34 (A/10034 ), p. 146, item 98.
101 A/33/309 and Corr.1 and Add.1.
