UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS
~LIBRARY

THIRTY-FOUR.TH

2181”

m/s

MIxrING:

NEW

JAN 10

YEAR

1984

~LLEa=1!oN

~~DECEMBER

1979

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2

18 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
. (4 Letter dated 12”December 1979 fro’m the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the UnitedNations
addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/13688);
(b) Letter dated 14 December 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Madagascar to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13693);
(4 Letter dated 18 December 1979 from’the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/13698) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

WPV.2181

1

.
;:;

!. ..;:
I .,ij ’ P.r:<. +
koTE

Symbols of United Nations doc&mentsare composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
V-c;,)1.
I . ,,. ~ ,;,:3 ,: !
Documents of the Security Council (symbol W...) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Olficial Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resohtfons and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system,which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2181st MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 21 December 1979, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

letters from the representatives of Botswana, Cuba, Liberia,
Madagascar, Mozambique and the United Republic of Tanzania in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules
of procedure.

Mr. CHEN Chu (China).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2181)
1. Adoption

At the invitation of the President, Mr. 7lou (Botswana),
Mr. Oramas (Cuba), Mr. Tubman (Liberia), Mr. Rabetafika
(Madagascar), Mr. Monteiro (Mozambique) and Mr. Foum
(United Republic of Tanzania) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

of the agenda

2. Question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia:
(a) Letter dated 12 December 1979 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13688);
(b) Letter dated 14 December 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Madagascar to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13693);
(c) Letter dated 18 December 1979 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13698)

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese): The
Security Council is meeting today in response to the letter
dated 18 December from the Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom addressed to the President of the
Council [S/Z3698].
3. Members of the Council also have before them the
following other documents: S/13688, containing the text of
a letter dated 12 December from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom addressed to the President of the
Council; S/13693, containing the text of a letter dated 14
December from the Permanent Representative of Madagascar addressed to the President of the Council; S/13699,.
containing the text of a draft resolution which has been
prepared in the course of consultations.

IGe meeting was called to order at 4.30p.m.

4. It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution contained in
document S/13699. As there is no objection, I shall now put
the draft resolution to the vote.

Adoption of the agenda

llte agenda was adopted.
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
((;) Letter dated i2 December 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/13688);
(b) Letter dated 14 December 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Madagascar to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13693);
(c) Letter dated 18 December 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/13698)

A vote was taken by show of ha&.
In favour: Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, France, Gabon,
Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Zambia
Against: None
Abstaining: Czechoslovakia,
Republics

Union of Soviet Socialist

i%e draft resolution was adopted by 13 votes to none, with
2 abstentions. ’

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese): I wish
to inform the members of the Council that I have received

’ See resolution

1

460

(1979).

12. I need not underline the fact that a co-operative effort
by the international community is demanded by the situation. Let me assure the Council that I shall do everything I
can to organize all possible assistance to the front-line
States, in accordance with the terms’of the resolution just
adopted by the Council. I shall undertake this task’in close
consultation with the Governments concerned and in collaboration with the appropriate agencies of the IUnited
Nations system,

5. The PRESIDENT
(inte.rpretufionfiom
Chinese): I now
call upon the Secretary-General, who wishes to make a
statement.
6. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I welcome the formal
signing today in London of the agreement ending the conflict in Southern Rhodesia and setting in motion the process
by which Rhodesia will become a free and independent
Zimbabwe under genuine majority rule. This agreement
brings to an end 14 years of rebellion in that Territory, with
its tragic loss of life, human suffering and destruction, not
only in Southern Rhodesia but also in Botswana, Mozambique and Zambia.

13. I also wish to assure the Council that I shall, in due
course, enter into detailed discussions with the new Govemment in Zimbabwe ‘with a view to organizing an effective
programme of financial, economic and technical assistance
geared to the immediate and long-term needs of the country.
On the basis of those discussions, I shall again address the
international community in order to provide detailed information as to the requirements for assistance to deal with the
situation.

7. The resolution just adopted by the Council calling upon
Member States to terminate the measures taken against
Southern Rhodesia under Chapter VII of the Charter
creates a new situation in southern Africa which will
undoubtedly have a profound effect on the course of events
in that region.

14. The resolution calls upon the international community
to facilitate the repatriation of all refugees and displaced
persons to Southern Rhodesia. In this regard, I should like
to inform the Council that the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees is acting to facilitate the voluntary
repatriation and resettlement of refugees from wherever
they are to Southern Rhodesia and, if requested to do so, is
willing to co-ordinate all offers of international assistance to
this end. Special efforts will be needed to assist in the resettlement and rehabilitation of those inside Southern Rhodesia who have been displaced as a result of the conflict.

8. ,The resumption of normal relations with Southern
Rhodesia provides both an opportunity and a challenge for
the international community, and particularly for those
neighbouring States whose economies were so closely linked
to that country. We are all aware of the special nature and the
magnitude of the problems faced by these countries as a
result of the application of sanctions and the disruption of
normal trade, traffic and communications in the region. For
the past years, in response to resolutions of the Council and
of the General Assembly, I have been closely involved in the
United Nations effort to mobilize financial, technical and
material assistance to enable these countries to overcome
the difficulties they faced as a result of the rebellion in
Rhodesia. I wish to take this opportunity to express my
appreciation to those members of the international community who responded with additional assistance.

15. Before concluding my remarks, I wish to take this
opportunity to congratulate the United Kingdom, as well as
the other parties involved in the negotiating process, on the
positive outcome of the conference and to wish them every
success in bringing this long-standing problem to a happy
conclusion.
16. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): I begin
with some brief comments on details of the resolution just
adopted.

9. However, in spite of this response, it did not prove
possible for those countries to pursue their normal development in the face of the diversion of resources needed to cope
with the extraordinary situation and the burden of applying
sanctions. In the case of Zambia and Mozambique particularly, the burden of sanctions has been enormous.

17. Paragraph 2 calls upon Member States to terminate
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia. Our view remains
that the obligation to impose those sanctions fell away automatically with the return to legality of the colony.But we
have been very conscious that many countries have attached
great importance to the adoption by the Council of a resolution on this subject. We have been glad, in a spirit of
co-operation, to support a resolution acknowledging that
sanctions have fulfilled their purpose. As regards the final
preambular paragraph, we do not regard this paragraph as
constituting a fresh determination of the existence of threats
to international peace and security in the region.

10. The successful outcome of the Lancaster House conference creates a new situation for the countries of the
region. In all cases, the economic and social structures have
been seriously disrupted. There will, therefore, be an urgent
requirement for international assistance on a massive scale
to enable these countries to restore their economies and to
take advantage of the opportunities which peace and security will finally provide. I am glad to note from the resolution that the Council has taken these important
considerations fully into account.

18. This is a moment of history. During the past three
months I have spoken many times in the General Assembly
and in the Security Council on the progress of the Rhodesia
negotiations. I have faithfully kept the Assembly informed
and I had the occasion to announce with deep and genuine
feeling to the Assembly the final initialling of the cease-fire
agreement which, as I put it, unlocked the door to peace and
stability in Zimbabwe. This afternoon I shall not go over the

Il. The assistance required will involve rebuilding basic
facilities which have been destroyed in the fighting, and
rehabilitating transport and communications
networks,
particularly railroads and ports. It will also take advantage
of the new opportunities for the revival of agriculture,
industry and services in the region.
2

same ground. I shall look briefly to the future. No one who
took part in the Council’s decisions to take measures against
the rebel colony could have feared or foreseen that the years
ahead held so much bloodshed, destruction and misery for
the peoples of Rhodesia and for neighbouring countries.

peace and dignity and looking forward to the prosperity and
tranquillity that its people long for and deserve.
24. Mr. LUSAKA (Zambia): At their meeting at Lusaka
last August, the Commonwealth Heads of Government
adopted an historic communique [.S/Z3515J which laid a
solid foundation for the convening, by the United Kingdom,
of the Lancaster House conference on Zimbabwe which has
just concluded. After three and a half months of detailed
and complex negotiations, the principal parties involved in
the conflict in Southern Rhodesia, which has defied solution
for a decade and a half, concluded an agreement which will
constitute the basis for the holding of free and fair elections
in the Territory. These elections are designed to launch the
British colony of Southern Rhodesia into the free and
genuinely independent nation of Zimbabwe, assured of
recognition and acceptance in the community of nations.

19. But at long last the moment has come to set all this
behind us. The agreement reached at Lancaster House is a
great tribute to the flexibility and strength of purpose of the
parties represented there, to the African leaders, particularly
those of the front-line States, who have given such wise
counsel, and to the Commonwealth leaders who conceived
the guidelines for the conference and whose continued support will be so vital during the electoral period. But it is also
important to say in this chamber at this momentous time
that the agreement wasa triumph for every man and woman
in the world who believes that problems, however difficult,
can and should be solved by negotiation.

25. This hopeful prospect is obviously exciting. A new
chapter, indeed one which should make pleasant reading,
has been opened in the history of the future Zimbabwe. The
parties at the Lancaster House conference deserve commendation. The conference, the results of which herald a new era
for the troubled British colony, could not have succeeded
without goodwill and statesmanship% the part of all those
concerned. In this regard, it is to be noted that after many
years of prevarication the United Kingdom has shown determination, in accordance with its responsibility as administering Power, to resolve the problem in a just manner
acceptable to the international community.

20. It is a moment of history in the Council and it is the
very beginning of the history of a free and independent
Zimbabwe. It is to the future that we must look. Nobody
pretends that the next few weeks will be free of danger and of
difficulty. But the agreement that has been reached provides
the chance that the people of Zimbabwe have been awaiting
so long to determine their own future in a fully democratic
way. It is essential that all parties comply with the agreement. We ask the Governments of all Member States to do
everything to assist in whatever way they can and to do
nothing which might jeopardize the democratic process. I
pledge for my Government that we shall do everything
within our power to ensure that conditions are right for free
and fair elections.

26. Above all, credit must go to the people of Southern
Rhodesia as a whole, who, through their national liberation
movement, the Patriotic Front, fought heroically for the
enjoyment of their inalienable right to self-determination
and genuine national independence. It is largely through the
efforts of those gallant freedom fighters that suitable conditions were created for the holding of the Lancaster House
conference. It was through their vigilance and tenacity of
purpose, reinforced by the steadfast support of African,
non-aligned and other progressive countries, that the
manoeuvres aimed at according so-called independence to
outhern Rhodesia were frustrated.

21. Let us not forget, in our preoccupation with constitutions, transitional arrangements and the cessation of hostilities, the fundamental humanitarian problems. Many people
have been displaced and their lives shattered throughout the
long years of strife in Zimbabwe. There are over 200,000
refugees outside the country. The front-line States have suffered great loss and destruction of property. The resolution
which we have just adopted rightly takes full account of
those facts and I warmly welcome the statement which the
Secretary-General has just made and the action which will
be taken by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and by non-governmental organizations.

27. Zambia has always stood for principles in respect of
the situation in Southern Rhodesia in particular and in
southern Africa as a whole. It is in accordance with these
basic principles that we have consistently rendered our total
support to the oppressed people of Southern Rhodesia and
to their national liberation movement in their legitimate
struggle for freedom and independence. As the international
community is aware, that has entailed tremendous sacrifice
on our part as a nation. Our economy has suffered immensely as a result of our compliance with the decisions of
the Council in respect of the sanctions imposed against Southem Rhodesia. Incidentally, Southern Rhodesia not only is
contiguous to Zambia but is also a country with which we
have had a history of interdependence founded on common
colonial experience. Over the years Zambia, a land-locked
country, has been the target of deliberate and systematic
acts of aggression perpetrated by the then regime in Southem Rhodesia, aimed at the destruction of our economic
infrastructure. Many of our people have died in the course

22. The rapid resettlement of the refugees, the reconstruction of damaged economies, the righting of social dislocations are not only a vital humanitarian imperative. They are
also an important element in the normalization of conditions in Zimbabwe. The lifting of economic sanctions is, I
need hardly say, a cardinal element in this process. The rapid
restoration of normal conditions is of the greatest consequence for establishing the atmosphere in which free and
fair elections can be conducted and, of course, for the future
of an independent Zimbabwe.
23. This is a moment which all of us present will not forget.
But I look forward to an even more unforgettable moment
in the weeks to come: the moment when we here in the
Council take the decision to welcome to the Organization a
new Member-a
free and independent Zimbabwe, born in
3

of the struggle for the liberation of Southern Rhodesia and
many more have been maimed.

resumption of normal economic relations with that Territory. That is why my delegation voted in ‘favour of the
resolution just adopted by the Council.

28. In spite of the pressures brought to bear on us as a
nation, we have consistently refused to succumb. We have
neither entertained blackmail nor sacrificed our principles on
the altar of expediency. We are glad and indeed proud to be
associated with the present achievements of the struggle of
the people of Southern Rhodesia for freedom and genuine
national independence, to which we have contributed in
many ways, although rather humbly.

32. The agreement, which must indeed be seen as a package and a composite whole, satisfies in our view the three
cardinal elements which were basic to the imposition of the
sanctions more than 10 years ago. Those elements, reflected
in the preambular provisions of resolution 253 (1968), relate
to (a) the United Kingdom’s primary responsibility for
Southern Rhodesia, (b) the legitimacy of the struggle of the
people of the Territory for the enjoyment of their rights as
set forth in the Charter and in conformity with the objectives
of General Assembly resolution 15 14 (XV), and (c) the need
to put an end to the threat to international peace and
security posed by the situation in Southern Rhodesia.

29. The stage has been set and it is now up to the people of
Southern Rhodesia to choose their leaders in free and fair
elections, which will be followed by the accession of the
Territory to independence. We sincerely hope that the electoral process soon to begin will be genuinely free and fair
and will be Seento be so by the international community. ‘Ihe
onus for ensuring that is, of course, on the administering
Power. We hope and trust that .the United Kingdom,
through its Governor in Southern Rhodesia, will live up to
its undertakings in the true tradition of democracy. For our
part we in Zambia shall respect the results of genuinely free
and fair elections in Southern Rhodesia. In the meantime we
shall do our utmost to co-operate in every possible manner
to facilitate the process.

33. The Lancaster House agreement has made it possible
for the United Kingdom to resume its direct authority over
the Territory, and a governor has been sent to Southern
Rhodesia. Furthermore, an agreed Constitution has been
worked out and the agreement provides for the exercise by
the people of Zimbabwe of their inalienable right to selfdetermination, through the holding of free and fair elections.
Finally, the agreement provides for a cease-fire which will
restore conditions of peace and security in Southern Rhodesia and in the region.

30. The immediate task before the Security Council, and
indeed the purpose of this meeting, is to take action in
respect of the mandatory sanctions imposed by the Council
against Southern Rhodesia under Chapter VII of the Charter. Regrettably, we are meeting against the background of
actions taken by the United Kingdom and a few other
Member States which lifted unilaterally the mandatory sanctions against Southern Rhodesia. In this regard, I wish to
state most emphatically the considered view of my Government that the mandatory sanctions imposed in resolution
253 (1968) by the Security Council against Southern Rhodesia, under Chapter VII of the Charter, can be lifted only by
the Security Council itself. Until the Council had taken such
action, all Member States were morally, politically and
legally under obligation to maintain them in accordance with
Article 25 of the Charter. No State should be allowed to
usurp the authority of the Council. This sad precedent should
have been avoided before the meeting and decision today.
By their precipitate, ill-timed and unilateral action, the few
Western countries which lifted sanctions unilaterally generated undue controversy and acrimony on the question of
sanctions. It was incumbent upon the United Kingdom in
particular, as it did when it requested the imposition of the
sanctions, to come to the Council and seek their termination. That is a matter both of law and of principle. The authority of the Council should be scrupulously maintained at all
times and its permanent members have a particular duty to
uphold its powers.

34. On behalf of my Government, I wish to take this
opportunity to commend the Committee on Sanctions* for
the important work it did in trying to ensure compliance by
all States with resolution 253 (1968). I wish also to thank
those States which adhered strictly to the sanctions policy in
accordance with their obligations under Article 25 of the
Charter.
35. But all is not yet over in Southern Rhodesia. Much still
remains to be done to ensure the exercise, by the people of
that Territory,
of their inalienable
right to selfdetermination, freedom and independence in accordance
with the Charter and in conformity with the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples. This, therefore, is an occasion for cautious optimism. It is important that the international community as a
whole, and above all the Security Council, remain absolutely vigilant in respect of the situation in Southern
Rhodesia.
36. The Council cannot be aloof to, or take lightly, the
threats of the racist r&ime of South Africa to intervene
militarily in Southern Rhodesia in the event of a Patriotic
Front victory. It is imperative that the rule of law must be
respected. South Africa should be in no doubt as to the
seriousness of its threatened intervention in Southern
Rhodesia, which would strike at the very heart of democratic principles and values and, of course, grossly violate
international law. The Council should leave South Africa in
no doubt that, in the event of such an adventurous act, it
would be absolutely imperative for it to take enforcement
measures against the Pretoria regime under Chapter VII of
the Charter.

31. It has always been the attitude of my Government that
the mandatory sanctions against Southern Rhodesia should
be lifted by the Security Council once the purposes for
which they were imposed had been achieved. Against the
background of the conclusion of the Lancaster House
agreement and its signing today, we consider that it is now
opportune and appropriate for the Council to terminate the
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia and to authorize the

*Security Council
253 (1968)

4

concerning

Committee
estabtished
in pursuance of resolution
the question of Southern
Rhodesia.

37. For the present, it is,mcumbent upon the Council to call
for the immediate expulsion from Southern Rhodesia of all
South African military ,forces, security personnel and, all
other mercenaries. The ,people of Southern Rhodesia
should be allowed to exercise their inalienable right::to
selfdetermination
and genuine independence in a free
atmosphere without the presence of the wanton South African forces and other soldiers of fortune.
I~.i
38. Finally, let me express the hope of my Government that
there will be strict adherence to the agreement concluded at
Lancaster House and that it will be fully and faithfully
implemented. The agreement heralds a bright future for the
people of Southern Rhodesia who have suffered and languished for too long under the illegal racist minority rule.
For us in Zambia, nothing could be more heartening than
the triumph of the cause of justice in Southern Rhodesia.

1514 (XV); thirdly, tastrengthenthe institution of the Security Council as the,organ for the maintenance of intemational peace and security; fourthly; to lift the sanctions that
were imposed by the Council on the rebel regime; tifthly, to
aid Zimbabwe and the front-line.countries
to overcome
their economic and social difficulties.
44. At this juncture, one cannot but recall some tragic
episodes of the rebellion in Southern Rhodesia, which has
resulted in so much loss of life and wanton destruction of
property both inside Zimbabwe and in the neighbouring
States. One must recall that urgent meeting of the Security
Council which the then Permanent Representative of. the
United Kingdom requested in his letter dated 11 November
1965 [S/689dJ. He had informed the President of the Council in that letter that the white racist settlers in Southern
Rhodesia had illegally and unilaterally declared independence for Southern Rhodesia. The African Group, on the
same day, requested the President of the Council to convene
an emergency meeting of the Council to discuss the rebellion in Southern Rhodesia, as its implications for Africa and
the world created an obvious threat to international peace
and security. The reaction of the Security Council and the
General Assembly, which was then in session, was swift and
predictable. In spite of the fact that the rebellion was against
the British Crown and that it was aimed at perpetuating the
power to control a British colonial Territory’s destiny of a
tiny white minority regime comprising only one twentieth of
the Southern Rhodesian population, the measures proposed
by the British Government to reestablish the rule of law in
that territory were clearly tentative, inadequate and pusillanimous. It not only ruled out the use of military force, but
sought to mislead or misdirect the international community
at every critical moment of the rebellion by pursuing ineffective and pussyfooting policies towards crushing it.

39. Mr. CLARK (Nigeria): Three things I shall not say or
do at this historic meeting of the Security Council.
40. First, I shall not impugn or derogate from the integrity, validity and uniqueness of the agreements reached at
the Lancaster House conference regarding the future of
Zimbabwe. The agreements are the fruits of extensive and
intensive negotiatipns .between the administering Power
and the nationalists of Zimbabwe, particularly the Patriotic
Front. They arc the results of the collective wisdom and
sense of realism of those who took part in them. They are a
triumph of and a tribute to the sacrifice, perseverance and
patriotism especially of the Patriotic Front leaders, who,
above all, made the agreements possible and who, faithful
to the Lusaka Declaration on the decolonization of Africa,
never hesitated to negotiate even when armed struggle
seemed to yield better results than the negotiations with
authorities who betrayed their trust.

45. Hence we are meeting for the umpteenth time since
1965 to consider the question of Southern Rhodesia, the last
bastion of British colonial rule in Africa. While in the past
we used to consider measures and adopt resolutions, notably resolutions 232 (1966) and 253 (1968), to bring about the
end of the rebellion and racist white minority rule, this time
we meet against the background of the recently concluded
Lancaster House conference which culminated in the signing today in London at 12 noon of an agreement which
commits and obliges the administering Power, the Govemment of the United Kingdom, to decolonize Southern
Rhodesia on the basis of free and democratic elections,
which wiil lead it to genuine independence acceptable to the
international community in accordance with the objectives
of resolution 1514 (XV).

41. Secondly, in spite of the temptation to do so, I shall not
indulge in bitter recriminations. Indeed, I shall not dishonour the memory of the 20,000 Zimbabweans who lost their
lives, by dwelling on the criminal attempt by the white racist
settlers to spit in the face of history. We shall let bygones be
bygones even if we, in Nigeria, reserve the right to arrest and
try Mr. Smith and his immediate henchmen as war criminals
and mass murderers if they ever set foot in Nigeria.
42. Thirdly, Nigeria would never subscribe to any move or
statement likely to weaken the authority of the Security
Council. Nor shall we modify the principles of selfdetermination and non-interference in the internal affairs of
States enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.‘We
perceive the democratic evolution of the political and psychological situation in the entire region of southern Africa
to be inevitable. The tide of freedom and majority rule
will break down the banks of the Limpopo river, expanding
and deepening the frontiers of independence and antiracism to the farthest comers of southern Africa,

46. From all accounts, the negotiations were difficult and
complex. This is nothing of a surprise, bearing in mind the
long history of missed opportunities, and misperceptions of
the most equitable routes to genuine independence and
democratic rule. Nigeria closely followed the progress of the
negotiations. We did not fail to express our concern over the
“Dutch uncle” or hectoring attitude of the British principals, as we felt the Lusaka Commonwealth communique,
which led to the negotiations, required all parties to agree to
their provisions without blackmail or coercion.

43. We fully support the fivefold purposes of the resolution just adopted, which are, as we understand them, as
follows: first, to restore the rule of law to the British colony
_ of Southern Rhodesia by putting an end to the rebellion in
that colony; secondly, to decolonize the colony in accordance with the objectives of General Assembly resolution

47. It has been our conviction all along that the three
crucial elements in the talks were: first, the constitution for
5

an independent, democratic Zimbabwe; secondly, the tran-’
sitional arrangements: and, thirdly; the Cease-fire. While the,
first two could be railroaded or adopted through ultimai
turns and brinkmanship, there has never been the ghost of ai
chance that a cease-fire agreement could be imposed unilaterally. Events have now vindicated our position.
‘..
48. Now that all parties have signed the agreement,’ as
envisaged in the Lusaka Commonwealth communique, we
should not be lulled into euphoria or any sense of security.‘,

accepted, ‘in good :faith, the assurances of the British
Government by appending its signature to the constitutional documents in respect of an independent Zimbabwe.
The least we expect from the British Government is that this
good faith and trust be reciprocated, eschewing all perfidy.
In this connexion, we should not forget that the cease-tire
agreement, a crucial component of the over-all constitutional conference, was eventually signed by Messrs. Joshua
Nkomo’and Robert Mugabe after tinn and specific assurances
from the British Foreign Secretary; Lord Carrington, that
the illegal Rhodesian armed forces, including its vandal and
lawless air force, would be controiled and put on an equal
footing with the forces of the Patriotic Front; that the
Commonwealth monitoring force, would be adequate for
the purpose for which it was established, and, most importantly, that South Africa would discipline itself, for a
change? suppress its rabid attitude, for a change, and not
meddle in the affairs of the British colony during the ceasefire and the elections, for a change.

49. First, the prophecy that the Bristish authorities merely
wished to wash their hands of the haunting spectre of a
rebellious colony by taking the steps which led to the Lancaster House agreement must not be seen to be true. Britain
owes it as a duty to itself, the Commonwealth, the front-line
States and the international community to make the agreement succeed.
50. Secondly, I wish to draw attention to some elements,
the resolution of which will, in my delegation’s judgement,
ensure the accession to peace and genuine independence in
Zimbabwe. The first is the end of the white racist rebellion,
which has now technically been accomplished by the adoption of the Westminster Zimbabwe bill, the appointment
and arrival at Salisbury of Lord Soames as Her Majesty’s
Governor, and the signing of the constitutional accord
incorporating the cease-fire agreement. It is interesting to
note that, in terms of the Zimbabwe bill, Rhodesia is to be
granted “fully responsible status as a republic”. Regarding
the second element, the rebel colony of Southern Rhodesia
and racist ‘South Africa are so notorious for their intransigence and defence that the Security Council has had to
invoke enforcement measures against them under Chapter
VII of the Charter. The sanctions imposed against Southern
Rhodesia did not stem solely from the rebellion, even
though that act instigated them. The measures adopted
against the rebel colony arose from the fact that the
circumstances and events leading to the rebellion constituted a threat to international peace and security. The end
of the rebeflion has by no means removed that threat,as the
recent raids against the front-lines States of Botswana,
Mozambique and Zambia show.

53. The assurances given by the British Government
regarding the presence of South African armed forces and
security personnel in Zimbabwe are so imprecise and noncommittal that we shall hold that Government responsible
for any further South African intervention in Zimbabwe.
We are also concerned by British statements that the
resolution of the situation in Southern Rhodesia would
mean the end of the isolation of South Africa. Nothing can
be further from the truth. As long as South Africa continues
to defy the United Nations over its policy of apartheid and
Namibia, it will continue to remain in the “doghouse”, an
international pariah. Furthermore; South Africa has been
issuing threats to subvert or intervene militarily in Zimbabwe if any of the parties which do not sympathize with the
racist policies of South Africa comes .to .power in independent Zimbabwe. These are grave threats, which cannot go
unnoticed by the Security Council.
54. The erstwhile illegal regime has not denied the fact
that South African troops and mercenaries have been
involved in the fighting on its side. Rather, it has attempted
to justify that. Only recently, one Mr. Rowan Cronje, one of
Bishop Muzorewa’s so-called “ministers”, admitted that
South African troops were involved in Rhodesia and that
there were mercenaries in the Rhodesian Light Infantry.
These South African armed forces and security personnel,
as well as the mercenaries from Europe, the United States
and elsewhere, must be expelled without delay from
1
Rhodesia.

51. Giving a narrow interpretation to the sanctions
measures, a number of States, all Members of the United
Nations-particularly
the United Kingdom and United
States, which ought to know better both the political and
legal implications of their precipitate action, being permanent members of the Security Council with special responsibility for upholding and .defending the authority of the
Council-have
been lifting those sanctions unilaterally.
This is, in my delegation’s judgement, in violation of Article
25 of the Charter. Since the sanctions were imposed by the
Security Council, it is the only competent organ that can lift
or modify them. I wish to emphasize that we do not regard
interpretation of the Charter and Member States’ obligations under it as elastic codes of convenience to be contracted and expanded to suit whims or situations of those
‘States.

55. The presence of South African forces and white mercenaries is only one dimension of the amount of arms and
ammunition owned and used by the whites which makes
them rank among the most heavily-armed populations of
the world. It is estimated that there are up to 160,000
weapons in private hands. We have all seen photographs of
whites-men and women, as well as children under the age
of IS-carrying, or receiving training in the use of, auto
matic weapons. Then there are the white farmers-about
5,300 of them-who have an armed and trained militia. In
addition, there are the mujibahs, young gangs belonging to
the private armies of Muzorewa and his friends. Nigeria
fully. supports the Patriotic Front’s demand that all-l

52. Thirdly, I believe that it is in the spirit of compromise,
love of country and a genuine desire to achieve peace and
democracy in Zimbabwe that the Patriotic Front has again
._

6

repeat: all-civilians
in Zimbabwe be,disarmed. We expect
that this will be one of the first preoccupations of the,
administering Power.
:
56. British policies in southern Africa have created so
many “Frankensteins” in Rhodesia and southern Africa
that the British will therefore bear the grim and full responsibilities for the actions of these monsters if they fail to keep
them in check. Hand-wringing and unconvincing pleas of
impotence or lack of time will not suffice.

front-lines States, particularly’ Mozambique, Zambia and
Botswana. No words can express our zolossal gratitude to
them. No offer of aid,and assistance can be too much for
those front-line States. The reckless raids into their territoties .by. the rebel .forces and mereenaries brought untold
death and destruction to many innocent persons who are
now beyond help. We can only pay a tribute to their
memory.~
63. ,.The Right Honourable Mrs. Margaret Thatcher, the
British Prime Minister, speaking in New York a few days
ago, said that momentous events in the history ofany nation
are achieved through “resolve” and “imagination”.
Let us
hope that her Government and the international cornmu-’
nity have enough resolve and imagination to assist Zimbabwe to be reborn a great nation and a beacon of inspiration
to the benighted apartheid regime of South Africa.

57. For too lqng the people of Zimbabwe have been cast in
the role of the surrogates of other peoples’ ideological and
colonial rivalries; for too long they have been visited by
death and destruction;.for too long they have been denied
their inalienable right to -self-determination and distracted
from the common challenge of building their national
social, political and economic institutions. The Zimbabweans deserve peace-peace with honour-not
another
betrayal or skilful sell-out. I assure them of Nigeria’s support until that goal has,been achieved.

64. Mr. N’DONG (Gabon) (interpretationfrom French):
Everyone here recalls the sad day of 11 November 1965. It was
on that day that Ian Smith, then Prime Minister of the
British colony of Southern Rhodesia, chose to throw down
the gauntlet to the whole world by unilaterally proclaiming
the independence of the Territory on behalf of 250,ooO
whites, thereby preventing an accession to power by the
black majority.

58. The advent of independence in Zimbabwe calls for an
increased effort on the part of both the Member States and
the United Nations itself to ensure that adequate and immediate international assistance is provided to both Zimbabwe
and the front-line States for reconstruction, relief and rehabilitation purposes. The international community-has been
so painfully and intimately involved with the tragic plight of
Zimbabweans, the senseless loss of life, the waste and the
suffering of more than half a century of colonialism, particularly those caused by 14 years of pig-headed racism and
rebellion, that they deserve our help and assistance.

65. That challenge, by. Ian Smith elicited two sorts of
reactions. Along with the internal reaction, which was the
organisation
of liberation movements leading to an armed
struggle, there was also an international reaction which led
to the adoption by the Security Council of a number of
resolutions imposing mandatory economic sanctions on
that rebellious colony, including resolutions 232 (1966) 253
(1968) and 314 (1972>--to cite only a few.

59. An adequate amount of economic support and skilled
manpower training should be made available to make Zimbabwe’s independence a true reality. In this connexion, we
note that the United Nations has been supporting important
training programmes for southern Africans, including Zimbabweans. I refer here specifically to the-United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for southern Africa
and the United Nations Development Programme’s special
programmes for assistance to national- liberation movements in southern Africa. These have greatly assisted Zimbabweans and other South Africans in their training
endeavours, and we should like at this particular time to call
upon the Secretary-General to increase further and expand
these and other programmes and to train on an accelerated
basis, both at home and abroad, indigenous Zimbabweans
for the tasks ahead of an independent Zimbabwe.

66. Fourteen years later, we are today called upon to
consider a question which my delegation feels is of crucial
importance. Indeed, the lifting of the sanctions imposed by
the Council on Southern Rhodesia some 11 years ago
means at least two things. First, it means that the international
community today recognizes that the reasons that compelled it to impose such sanctions are no longer justified, in view of
the fact that the imposition of those sanctions was to be part
and parcel of the effort by the international community to
ensure that the United Kingdom restored legality to Southem Rhodesia. With the agreement reached after the Lam%ter House talks and officially signed today by the parties concerned, we are entitled to believe that this is finally an
accomplished fact: Rhodesia henceforth falls under British
responsibility. Secondly, this means, perhaps by extension,
that we can reasonably expect an end to the insecurity of the
borders and the interior of the neighbouring countries, especially the front-line countries. This might also entitle us to
believe that international peace’ and security in the region
will be ensured.

60. There is also a crying need to auend to the humanitarian questions of refugees, displaced persons and freedom
fighters from South Africa caught and detained in Southern
Rhodesia under one pretext or another during the period of
the rebellion.
61. It is in the light of those considerations that I express
warm appreciation and gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his statement this afternoon.

67. Even if we have not yet had the opportunity of examining in detail the contents of the London agreement and
even if it might be a bit premature at this-point to speak of
the complete restoration of legalityin that regained British
Territory, my delegation, for the aforementioned reasons,
voted in favour of the resolution which the Council has just
adopted. Nevertheless, I should like it to be understood that

62. No appeal for assistance, relief, rehabilitation and
reconstruction can be complete without referring to the
enormous sacrifices and dislocation of the economies of the
7

,(

“’

:_.,-,

..

a,

my d&g&i&,
w&h has always &$xted
and will c&L
tinue to support. peoples, struggling for their freedom,‘
acknowledges and welcomes that agreement but firmly
hopes that it will be complied with and implemented in all its
aspects so as finally to bring Rhodesia to complete independence within the framework and in the spirit of the:obje&
tives of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV).

has been achieved.It was in recognition of that fact that the
United. States made its recent. announcement regarding
sanctions. With that element behind us, the United States
looks forward to a positive process of self-determination
and reconstruction in a society intrinsically rich in resources, people and spirit. We look forward to welcoming a new
and independent Zimbabwe into the community of nations.

68. Before concluding, I should like to draw the attention’
of members of the Security Council to the fact that the lifting
of sanctions will surely be of great benefit, from the economic and other standpoints, to South Africa, which-let us
not forget-has been defying the Organization for a long
time now. Indeed, we all know that this is an additional
opportunity for the trade and industry of that homeland of
apartheid to develop with a vengeance.

76. What has happened and what we hope will now
happen to bring an equitable peace to Zimbabwe is, simply
put, a triumph for the constructive spirit. It is an endorsement of the basic principles of the Organization. It is a
victory for all of us. We wish all parties well as the process
now unfolds to its conclusion. ,
77. Mr. LEPRETTE
(France) (interpretation from
French): The Security Council often meets to confront crisis

69. Our fears in this respect should therefore be an added
motive for the international community to mobilize and
increase its assistance to Rhodesia and the front-line States
to enable them to undertake with greater chances of success
the work of reconstruction and development of their respective countries, the importance of which need not be stressed
here.

situations that are likely to jeopardize peace. Today, it is
different. This meeting has been caused by an event that is a
harbinger of hope and of return to peace. The signing in
London a few hours ago of agreements reached at the,
Lancaster House conference closes a painful chapter in the
history of decolonization in Africa. My delegation pays a
tribute to the memory of all of those who were its victims.

70. In conclusion, my delegation wishes to commend all
those who, directly or indirectly, took part in the Lancaster
House negotiations and to salute the memory of thosewhose number is legion-who
sacrificed their lives in a
devastating conflict which we hope has ended after 14 years.

78. Throughout this long conflict,.bittemess, anger, disappointment and mistrust have accumulated. The welcome
outcome of the negotiations begun three months ago is
therefore all the more praiseworthy. We should unreservedly congratulate all those who have been instrumental in
this development. It has been a great collective effort that has
required imagination and perseverance, a spirit of compromise and faith in the future. That is why my delegation
pays a joint tribute to the Governments of the United
Kingdom, the front-line States and the Commonwealth
States, and also the Salisbury authorities and the leaders of
the Patriotic Front, who themselves have finally shown the
virtues of negotiation.

71. Mr. VANDEN HEUVEL (United States of America):
Thii is an important and impressive day for the Security
Council and for the United Nations itself. We have this
afternoon adopted a resolution which, following the signing
of the cease-fire agreements in London today, permits us to
greet the days ahead with the confidence that difficult,
almost intractable problems can be solved by hard work,
resolve and goodwill.

79. Under the terms of the agreement, the cease-fire
should now be applied. Free and democratic elections are to
be organ&d on the basis of majority rule. They will enable
the future Republic of Zimbabwe quickly to attain internationally recognized independence. , ,_

72. A long agony of death and destruction has come to an
end. With the free and fair election of the leaders of a new
Zimbabwe, the rebuilding process will be well under way,
healing the wounds and laying the foundation for a just and
prosperous society based on the common aspiration of all
the oeoples of Zimbabwe.

80. In these conditions, the circumstances that justified the
adoption of sanctions against Rhodesia no longer exist, and
it is appropriate for the Council to draw the appropriate
>.
conclusions.
..
81. It was with deep satisfaction that my delegation voted
in favour of the draft’resolution submitted to the Council.
We need therefore feel no hesitancy in expressing our regret
that it refers to certain texts which my country had not
,’
approved.

73. We do not underestimate the practical difficulties of
implementing the Lancaster House agreements, but we are
confident that the door to true majority rule and independence for Southern Rhodesia and the achievement of
genuine self-determination for all of its people in now open.
74. May I once again on behalf of my Government congratulate all the parties to this momentous agreement. We
are aware of the obstacles which were overcome and the
statesmanship, vision and courage that were necessary to
overcome them.

82. In conclusion, I express the hope’ that now that the
weapons have been silenced the people of Zimbabwe as a
whole will endeavour to restore its unity and to work for
peace and independence. The United Nations impatiently.
awaits the day when this new State joins us.

75. The United States was happy to join in support of the
draft resolution before us today. It is pleased that the
Council is calling upon Member States to terminate the
measures taken against Southern Rhodesia under Chapter
VII of the Charter because the objective of those measures

83.

Mr.

DE

(interpretation
8

ZAVALA-URRIOLAGOITIA

(Bolivia)

from Spanish): Bolivia. has repeatedly con-

derimed the attacks of the Rhodesian n5gime a’gainst the
front-line States, just as (we have depldred the incredibleprolongation of a warlike conflict with attenant suffering of’
every kind during 14 long,pears of cruel civil war.
I
,
_’
84. From one end of the world to the other, prolonged
regional conflicts time and.tiine again rekindle the threat to
peace and security. But theingredients of those disturbances
are always the same, although the intentions, masks or
labels may vary.

Mr. President. for your excellent and balanced guidance.
tyljical of the proveibial wisdoin’df Cl&a; and a&he same.
time to wish you the greatest succeS‘s‘in your firesidency;“:
,: ., ., _.
._
91: .I Mr.‘KAISER
(Bangladeih):.&r; thk pressure of&&
and the constraints of time have prevented me from, extending to you in fuller measure, our congratulations on y?ur
assumption of the Presidency of the Council for this month.’
May I say how happy we are to see you in the Chair on this
occasion. You are a representative of a country which not
only belongs to our own region of the world, but with which
Bangladesh has the closest and friendliest of relations. Ties
between the Governments and peoples of Bangladesh and.
China have always been strong; they continue .to be consolidated in all spheres of activity. The people of Bangladesh.
are particularly cognizant of the solidarity that has governed
our relations and of the principled stand of the people of
China. Your personal qualities have won for you the
respect and esteem of all of us present in the Council. Your
diplomatic ability, your devotion to duty and your understanding and patience have already contributed in large
measure to the successful conduct of the Council’s work in
this critical month, and will surely continue to do so for the
remainder of your term. I wish you all success.

85. Precisely therein lies the gravity of the case, because
often contradictions coindide with the traditional feelings of
friendly and peace-loving peoples because there are those
who govern and legislate with a very short memory, who
compromise with merciless utilitarianism
and neglect
friends. That is the case of Bolivia, whose long-suffering
people contributed to the &i&tory to the allied cause and that
of the United States. But now that very people, showing
solidarity and friendship during difficult times, is doomed to
proverty whenever the General Services Administration
announces the sale on the open market of a part of its
mineral strategic reserves. In that way the economy of the
Bolivian people, which in very good faith contributed to the
stockpiling of those-reserves, accepting burdensome prices
for several years to defend freedom and democracy, is cast
into crushing poverty and deep social disquiet whose consequences are unforseeable and might be detrimental to the
constitutional process my Government has begun. This
ambivalent conduct comes not from the generous people of
the United States but from power sectors in which financial
1 consortia manoeuvre;

92. Bangladesh wholeheartedly welcorpes the signing of
the Lancaster House agreement between the parties to the
conference in London. It is an historic occasion, a hopeful
occasion and a happy occasion. It is historic because it
marks a crucial milestone on the long and arduous road to
decolonization, a return to legality and legitimacy and the
explicit recognition that no enduring solution of the RhodeSian problem can be assured without a constitution that has
the agreement, support and participation of all parties concerned. It is hopeful because the signing signifies the beginning of a process leading to the free and unfettered exercise
by the people of Zimbabwe of their inalienable iights to
self-determination,
freedom and independence, and the
emergence of a truly independent and thriving Zimbabwe. It.
is a happy occasion because it is a giant step towards closing
a dark chapter of struggle and sacrifice, involving great
human and material loss, against forces of illegality, brutal
repression and racism and all its evil manifestations.

86. The actions may be brazen or covert, but the colonialist characteristics are the same in the dispute for spheres of
influence. In southern Africa in the past, those influences
took shape in flagrant acts of the illegal Southern Rhodesian
r&me that were crudely racist and anti-human.
87. It was in that light that we analysed with great satisfaction the signature this morning of the peace and cease-fire
agreement at the conclusion of the conference held at Lancaster House, which in the opinion of my delegation lays
down the basis for a free and independent society in Zimbabwe by providing principles and genuine rules of conduct
for majority government and by drafting a new constitution
in accordance with the objectives of General Assembly resolution 1514(XV).

93. We have repeatedly stressed that the process has
only just begun. The Security Council, as the primary organ
of our world body, charged with the maintenance of peace
and security, has a continuing and crucial responsibility to
bring this positive momentum to its logical end until the
rights of the people of Zimbabwe have been fully exercised
and a sovereign, independent Zimbabwe emerges into
nationhood on the basis of the principles of the Charter and
in conformity with the objectives of the historic General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 1960. The Council must
remain ever alert and increasingly vigilant in promoting
these objectives.

88. Being aware of that, we supported the draft resolution
which has won approval in the Council this afternoon, and
we wish to express our hope that a lasting peace will prevail
in that tormented a&a of the world.
89. Together with.*our non-aligned brothers, and in
accordance with what was said by the Secretary-General, we
urge all States Members of the United Nations and of the
specialized agencies ‘to mobilize their assistance both to
Southern Rhodesia and to the front-line States in their plans
for reconstruction and in their efforts to facilitate the repatriation of all refugees to Southern Rhodesia.

94. The Bangladesh delegation warmly welcomes today’s
statement by the Secretary-General. It should be our collective duty to strengthen the hand of the Secretary-General in
the urgent and successful implementation of the resolution
just adopted, particularly paragraph 8, in all its aspects.

_’

90. Finally, since I believe that this will be my final statement in the Council, I wish to express my gratitude to you,
9

95. While emphasizing all-this; we want to pay a genuink
and sincere tribute to all those &ho have contributed to this
long-awaited initiative for a’peaceful sblution of the pr6blem. Our heartfelt congratulations are extended to those
who have fought so hard and sacrificed so much in theii
determined struggle for their inalienable rights, to those
unsung martyrs who gave ‘their lives in order that their
country might truly be free, and to those who have suffered
brutality, harassment, intimidation
and even prolonged
incarceration rather than abandon their cause.
96. .We commend the role of the United Kingdom, which,
as the administering Power,- finally and resolutely assumed
its responsibility to undertake serious negotiations with all
parties concerned and pursue them to their logical end,
despite built-in obstacles. It goes without saying that this
responsibility remains a grave and continuing charge in the
full and scrupulous implementation of the agreement that
has been concluded.
97. In this process the role of the front-line States, as the
vanguard of the Commonwealth conference, cannot be overemphasized. Their sustained support and pressure, despite
tremendous economic constraints and sacrifice, were the
last bastion in the undermining of the illegal minority
rigime. The travail and misery suffered by the peoples of
Zambia, Mozambique, Angola and Botswana are well
known to the members of the Cotincil and I need not refer to
them once again. The statesmanship of their leaders, their
combined will and determination and their pragmatism
have made an enormous contribution to the progress that
has been achieved. As a fellow member of the Commonwealth, Bangladesh takes justifiable pride in these developments and in its participation in the proceedings of the
Council today.
98. In the tinal analysis, the hopeful auguries that have
been generated in Rhodesia are a ieflection of the will and
desire of the entire world community in its pursuit of the
fundamental prerogatives and principles of the Charter. We
eagerly await the day when we shall be able to welcome into
our midst, as an independent and sovereign equal, the
Government and people of Zimbabwe.
99. Taking cognizance of what the representative of the
United Kingdom has rightly termed a moment of history, I
should like to state that we are nearing the end of a tumultuous and eventful year in the work of the Council. In many
ways, this has been a record year, unprecedented in the
annals of the Council, in both procedural and substantive
terms. Bangladesh has been privileged to serve in the
Council-particularly
today-and to participate in, learn
from and contribute to its deliberations. If the pressure of
events has kept us in these halls and corridors through late
hours of intense cotisultations and critical moments of anxiety, it has also underscored a basic lesson: that all nations,
big or small, powerful or weak, have a stake in the interests
of mankind, in the preservation of peace, in the uplifting of
peoples and in the recognition of our common humanity
and interdependence.
100. Peace is not yet an inherent right for all. It is built up
brick by brick in an edifice whose foundations need continually to be bolstered. It is painstakingly arrived at through

compromises, through understanding, persuasion, even
through the sacrifice of some commitments. But the essential catalyst for peace goes beyond the dictates of power and,
in reality, is unswervingly founded on the principles of the
Charter, the norms and rules of international law and its
treaties and conventions, and on the moral attributes common to all religions and societies.
101. For Bangladesh, the Islamic principles of tolerance,
compassion, magnanimity, brotherhood and, above all,
peace, justice and equity have been a binding code in conducting our work. It is our hope that in the many critical
issues that face our world in the future, it is the spirit of
community, understanding and the recognition of our common fate and interdependence that will guide and govern
our conduct, so that we may solve our outstanding problems peacefully, both in the Council and outside it.
102. I cannot conclude without thanking those members
of the Council who will be leaving our midst at the end of
this year, the Permanent Representatives and delegations of
Bolivia, Czechoslovakia, Gabon, Kuwait and Nigeria.Their
co-operation, support and contribution to our work have
been invaluable, Their guidance and advice to my delegation
in particular, without exception;deserve our heartfelt gratitude and commendation.
103. I wish to take this opportunity to thank in particular
the representative of Bolivia, who, with exemplary skill,
devotion and impartiality conducted our work during the
month of November. I express also my personal sense of
loss at the departure of Ambassador Clark of Nigeria. His
courageous initiatives as well as his wisdom and judgement
will be missed. We assure him of our deep and abiding
respect and friendship. I shall also sorely miss the cooperation and friendship of Ambassador N’Dong of
Gabon and Ambassador Hulinskjl of Czechoslovakia.
Finaily. a word for my brother Ambassador Bishara, who
not only is a fellow member from Asia but also, as a member
of the Council, has established with me and members of my
delegation a deep and personal friendship. His contribution
to the Council is well known. His leadership, his statesmanship, his humour and his charm, his innovative abilities and
his knowledge of procedure have served us again and again.
His unstinting co-operation aiid assistance, particularly to
me and my delegation, have helped us immeasurably in
meeting the responsibilities imposed by membership of the
council. We shall sorely miss him, and the Council will
sorely miss him.
104. Mr. NEIL (Jamaica): My delegation takesgreat Satisfaction in noting that the sustained efforts, lasting over a
decade, to bring the rebellion in Southern Rhodesia to an
end andto achieve an acceptable settlement to the Rhodesian problem have finally resulted in the historic signing of a
comprehensive agreement in London today.
105. Jamaica has always closely followed developments in
Southern Rhodesia since Jhe time of the unilateral declaration of independence and we have in the intervening years
supported all measures designed to bring the rebellion to an
end.
106. We. are particularly gratified that the momentum
geneiated at the Commonwealth Heads of Government

evil designs do not succeed and that. the people of
Zimbabwe will not be denied the fruits of their struggle, for
which they have sacrificed SO much.

conference at Lusaka in August has resulted in success.The .
way is now open for arrangements to ensure a transfer.of /
power to the majority of the people of Zimbabwe in a .
situation where the peace and security of the region can be,
ensured.
.:
107. My delegation takes this opportunity to commend
the parties to the Lancaster House talks, particularly the
British Government, the front-line States and the Patriotic ”
Front, for the statemanship and goodwill displayed
throughout the duration of these difIicult talks and for their
eventual success.

113. Mr. ,&LG,&RD (Norway): The Norwegian Govern-‘
ment warmly, welcomes the historic agreement at the Lancaster House conference. On this occasion I am pleased, I.
therefore, to express, on behalf of the Norwegian
Government, our sincere congratulations to the British
Government upon the successful conclusion of these
extremely difficult negotiations. Equally, the parties concerned deserve praise for their willingness to negotiate and
to find the necessary compromises. The Norwegian Govern-.
ment likewise wishes to express its deep appreciation to the
African front-line States and to the Commonwealth countries which have contributed actively to the highly important
results achieved over the last few months.

108. Since the state of rebellion has now been brought to
an end and the legal authority of the administering Power
has been restored in Rhodesia, it is right and proper that the
Security Council should meet and take the decision to
remove the sanctions imposed by resolution 232 (1966).
There is no doubt that the application of sanctions played
an important role in bringing international pressure to bear on
the rebel regime. There have been some problems and
violations which undermined their effectiveness. but in the
long run it proved impossible for the rebels to remain in
isolation and to continue their defiance indefinitely.

114. In view of the agreement reached in London, it is
appropriate that the Security Council has today lifted the
sanctions which .were imposed on the illegal regime in
Southern Rhodesia. We fully support, therefore, the resolution which has just been adopted.
115. In concluding, I should like to express the hope that
the recent developments regarding Zimbabwe will positively
influence the situation in southern Africa as a whole, and
particularly in Namibia. The Lancaster House agreement
and the decisions which the Council has just made are of the
greatest encouragement for al! those who have been striving
for freedom, peace and progress in southern Africa.

109. The people of Zimbabwe themselves have played a
decisive role and they have done this in waging a long and
hard struggle under the leadership of the Patriotic Front to
achieve their right to freedom, selfdetermination
and
national independence.
110. The front-line States, which throughout stood in
brotherly solidarity with the people of Zimbabwe, have
earned the admiration and respect of the entire international
community. A number of these States, particularly Botswana, Mozambique and Zambia, have had to pay a very
high price and have had to carry a heavy burden in this
process. Not only have their economies been dislocated by
the imposition of sanctions, but these States have suffered
immensely from the unprovoked acts of aggression carried
out by the rebel regime throughout the period since the
- unilateral declaration of independence. It is now necessary
for the international community as a whole to render a!!
available assistance to these States and to give assistance to
the refugees in the region so that the task of rebuilding may
proceed and a!! displaced persons may speedily be reintegrated into their countries of origin.

116. Mr. HULINSKi’
(Czechoslovakia) (inrerpretarion
from Russian): The Czechoslovak delegation would like to
make some comments on the decision just adopted by the
Council to lift sanctions against Southern Rhodesia.
117. In a!! frankness, we wonder whether the Councirwas
not too hasty in taking that decision. For thesituation which
has obtained in Southern Rhodesia since 1965 and wtiich led
directly to the adoption of mandatory sanctions by the
Council has remained virtually unchanged. There has been
only a forma! change in the status of the country, while the
erstwhile regime has not really been eliminated. First and
foremost the regime’s military and police-forces and other
important attributes of power have not been disbandedelements which, among others, are, under resolution 423
(1978) primary prerequisites of the restoration of legality in
Southern Rhodesia and the peaceful and democratic transition to genuine majority rule and independence. Moreover,
enormous amounts of weapons remain in the hands ofwhite
racists in the Territory and there are tens of thousands of
mercenaries and even regular military units and security
forces in Southern Rhodesia who are fighting there in the
interests of white minority power and against the enjoyment
of the legitimate rights of the people of Zimbabwe to real
freedom and independence.

111. In the final analysis, the Lancaster House agreement
can be viable only if it is effectively and fairly implemented.
A grave responsibility lies with theadministering Power, the
United Kingdom. It is our expectation that the agreement
signed today will be fair!i and faithfully implemented by the
United Kingdom so that the people of Zimbabwe may
proceed to genuine independence and sovereignty.
112. In addition, an immediate task of the administering
Power is the expulsion of a!! South African forces in Southern Rhodesia along with the mercenaries currently rem&ning in the Territory.
It is apparent from recent
pronouncements that the uparrheid regime of South Africa
will seek through every device to frustrate the achievement
of genuine independence and majority rule in Zimbabwe.
Constant vigilance is therefore required to ensure that these

118. At the same time, we still hardly know what will be
the outcome of the agreements signed in London. For the
time being it is hardly clear that they will becomplied with in
a manner which would truly be in keeping with the vita!
far-reaching interests of the people of Zimbabwe. There are
no guarantees that the reactionary forces will not use a!! the
II

means remaining to them to undermine the decoionization
process and to maintain-perhaps
under a new banner-’
heir colonial and racist domination in the country. Nor
should we forget the position of South Africa in this regard,
which openly ‘threatens that it will undermine implementation of the agreements which have been achieved. Have not
Prime Minister Botha and other ringleaders of the &rrheid
regime stated repeatedly that South Africa is prepared to
undertake military intervention in Rhodesia on behalf of
the i!!ega! regime if the course of events in that country is
not in keeping with their interests? Everyone understands
that the interests of South Africa are not in fact furthered by
a just solution to the problem of Southern Rhodesia.

126. The achievement oftoday would not have been possible had it not been ‘for the sacrifice-the enormous
sacrifice-of the front-line States. My delegation would like
to express its appreciation and admiration to those frontline States for the enormous sacrifices made by their peoples
and Governments and, indeed, for their conviction in the
justness of the cause that has enabled them to withstand
brutal attacks from the rebels as well as the economic,
political and social upheaval which resulted from those
attacks.
127. My delegation would also like to pay a tribute to al!
African States as well as to other Members of the United
Nations whose combined efforts generated political and
moral pressure on the administering Power.

119. The Czechoslovak delegation, which has consistently
favoured and continues to favour the most rapid and
genuine independence for the people of Zimbabwe, believes
that the Council should at this stage be exceptionally vigilant and should take such an important step as the lifting of
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia only when a!! prerequisites are fulfilled for the establishment in that country of
genuine majority rule.

128. One should also pay a tribute to the United Kingdom, which, on this particular question-as opposed to the
question of Palestine-has maintained pressure on the reb
els in order to make them see reason. They eventually gave
in not because of any unexpected display of generosity, but
because they saw no alternative.
129. In this respect, one should also pay a tribute to the
United Nations, which has maintained the heat on the illegal
regime in Zimbabwe. It is also fitting to express sincere
gratitude to the United Nations staff in the Secretariat,
whose dedication to the cause ensured the implementation
of Security Council resolutions.

120. The Czechoslovak delegation decided, however, not
to vote against the draft resolution contained in document
S/13699, bearing in mind the position taken on this issue by
interested African countries.
121. In conclusion, the delegation of Czechoslovakia
would like to express its conviction that, in spite of a!! the
difficulties facing the people of Zimbabwe, it will finally
achieve genuine independence and freedom.

130. We express the hope that very soon independent
Zimbabwe will join the family of nations, which has long
awaited it, as a Member of the United Nations. We also
express the hope that the independent State of Palestine will
join the family of nations.

122. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): The other day I spoke of
Christmas presents. Today I think that the agreement
arrived at this morning could constitute an acceptable
Christmas present.

131. Let us say with hope that al! is we!! that ends well. We
hope that there will be no more bloodshed, no more devastation and no more brutal raids. The people of Zimbabwe
and the people of the front-line States have had enough of
those brutal raids.

123. We have come to the end of a long odyssey that
spanned 14 years of history. Before continuing to express the
views of the delegation of Kuwait, I should like to express my
gratitude and thanks-and I am sure I can speak for Ambassador Clark of Nigeria also-to the delegation of Bangladesh and particularly to Ambassador Kaiser for his
thoughtfulness and the sentiments which he expressed in his
statement.

132. I should like, in this respect, to commend the Patriotic Front and its leaders and freedom fighters for the successful outcome of their war of liberation. A!! of us are
indebted to the martyrs who fell on the battlefields. Without
their sacrifice, without their blood, the result of today
would not have been possible. The leaders of the Patriotic
Front showed statesmanship, for which we admire them.
They have proven that in a struggle, blood conducts diplomacy. Diplomatic efforts alone would not have brought
about this conclusion. In Kuwait we say: “Freedom has a
door that does not open unless a bleeding hand bangs on
it”. We say that emphatically in my country, and the Patriotic Front has acted in accordance with that saying. We
congratulate Mr. Nkomo and Mr. Mugabe on their statesmanship and diplomacy and on their daring spirit on the
.battletie!d.

124. Kuwait voted in favour of the resolution just adopted
by the Security Council in line with its traditional policy of
endorsing and supporting the policies of African States on
southern Africa. Kuwait has observed scrupulously the
sanctions imposed on the illegal regime in response ‘to
resolutions 232 (1966) and 253 (1968). Since the African
States believe that the continuance of those measures -is no
longer necessary in view of the recent developments and’the
signing of the cease-fire agreement, my delegation joined
with others in voting in ‘favour of the resolution.
l?S. ‘No matter what changes have taken place, the aim
should remain the same: that is, the genuine independence
of Zimbabwe on the basis of free, fair and credible elections,
,supervised by an impartial body. We hope that there will
indeed be an impartial mechanism that ensures the genuineness of the elections.

133. Ir. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Repubiics) (interpretation from kus$an): ‘In connexion with
the resolution adopted today by the Security Council, in the
vote on which the Soviet Union abstained, we should like to
reaffirm the principled position of the Soviet Union on the
12

parties concerned. We are therefore happy to pay a tribute to
those who were directly ‘instrumental in bringing the London talks to a successful outcome: to the Commonwealth,
countries, whose initiative during the last summit conference of heads of State and Government at Lusaka laid the
basis for the Lancaster House talks; to the British Govern:
ment, which fully assumed its responsibilities as the admmis- : .’
tering Power and which steered the conference SO skilfully
during the past three months, at times through extremely.
adverse circumstances, with the determination to bring
about, come what might, a democratic solution to the problem of Southern Rhodesia; to the Patriotic Front for, its
co-operation and noteworthy decision to participate in the
elections, thereby accepting that these will determine who in
the near future will be the legitimate representative of the
people of Zimbabwe; to the Government at Salisbury,
which agreed to step down in order to facilitate the prospects
of an internationally accepted solution; last but not least to
the front-line States, which had to face enormous hardships
and to undergo untold human suffering for 14 years, but
whose leaders all along showed a statesmanlike attitude,
making a very positive contribution to bridging the gap
between the two sides.

question of the Rhodesian settlement. In accordance with’
that position, the Soviet Union has consistently supported,!
and continues to support, the selfless struggle of the patriotic forces of Zimbabwe for freedom and independence in
their country, a struggle which has been waged over many
years under the leadership of the Patriotic Front, recognized by the United Nations as the sole legitimate representative of the people of Zimbabwe. The Soviet Union is
firmly in favour of ensuring the inalienable right of the
Zimbabwe people to self-determination and independence,
and the transfer of power in that country to its legitimate
representatives.
134. As is well known, the Security Council has adopted
numerous resolutions designed to make it possible for the
people of Zimbabwe to enjoy its right to self-determination
and independence, including resolutions which imposed
mandatory sanctions against Southern Rhodesia. The
Soviet Union has scrupulously observed those resolutions
of the Council.
135. In this connexion, we cannot fail to condemn the
decisions of the United Kingdom and the United States
unilaterally to terminate observance of sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia. As emphasized in the letter sent today
by the Permanent Representative of the USSR to the President of the Security Council [S/13702], the aforementioned
unilateral actions taken by those countries constitute a flagrant violation.of the United Nations Charter, since only the
Council can terminate the effects of the decisions which it
has taken. Only by a decision of the Council can the mandatory sanctions against Southern Rhodesia imposed by the
Council be rescinded. No unilateral actions in this regard
can be considered lawful or valid, inasmuch as they violate
the clear and unambiguous provisions of the Charter.

139. All these efforts combined have led, we are pleased to
note, to the agreement on a constitution for a free and
independent Zimbabwe, providing for genuine majority
rule and enabling the exercise by the people of that Territory
of their right to self-determination, in accordance with the
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
and in conformity with the objectives laid down in General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV).
140. In this connexion, I should like to quote a passage
from a communique issued on 19 December by the Office of
the Prime Minister of my country:

136. With respect to the current question, the Rhodesian
settlement, the Soviet Union has some serious doubts
whether, during the course of future events in Southern
Rhodesia, the genuine independence ofthe people of Zimbabwe will be guaranteed in accordance -with its legitimate
interests. Therefore, we feel that in the present conditions the
lifting of sanctions against Southern Rhodesia is premature
and can play into the hands of the colonialists and racists.
Nevertheless, we acknowledge and well understand the position of the African countries as regards the resolution just
adopted by the Council.

“Portugal, after having defined its relationship with
Africa on a new basis, has never accepted partial or
discriminatory solutions to this problem and has instead
upheld the principle of a genuine majority rule which
would contribute to the firm establishment of a govemment, in accordance with the freely expressed wishes of its
people. At the same time, Portugal has underscored the
negative effects of the situation on southern Africa, in
general, and has condemned the Rhodesian attacks on
neighbouring countries, namely, Mozambique, Angola,
Zambia and Botswana.”

137. Mr. FUTSCHER
PEREIRA (Portugal): For once
we are gathered around this table neither in a sombre mood
nor faced by a situation which constitutes a threat to or a
breach of international peace and security. Indeed, it is
gratifying for the Council to know that the Lancaster House
talks have come to a successful conclusion, which led to the
signing in London today of an agreement on a cease-fire in
Southern Rhodesia.

141. We are confident that the restoration of peace in
Zimbabwe and the establishment of a democratic government at Salisbury will pave the way for a final solution of all
the problems that have been afflicting that region for too
long a time. Southern Africa and its people deserve and
need an extended period free from any kind of tribulations
so that they may have the possibility of shaping their destinies without any undue outside interference and dedicating
the best of their abilities and talents towards the task of
national reconstruction, in a multiracial society, free from
hatred, prejudice and injustice.

138. After 14 long ‘years of bloodshed, violence and continuous suffering &I; the peoples .of Zimbabwe’ and the
neighbouring African countries, peace is finally at hand.
The agreements reached in London show unequivocally
that a peaceful settlement of disputes is possible through
negotiations and direct dialogue. This extraordinary feat
has been’possible thanks to the courageous attitude of all the

142. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese): I
shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of CHINA.
13

southern Africa”. Nevertheless, .we believe that with the
support of the front-line States and all other justiceupholding countries and peoples, the Zimbabwean people,
which .has long experience in struggle, will continue to
strengthen its unity, heighten its vigilance, persist in struggle, frustrate the schemes and trouble-making on the part of
the racist forces of Southern Rhodesia and the South African authorities, firmly get rid of the meddling and sabotage
of all outside forces, including hegemonism, and attain
genuine majority rule and national independence. The Chinese Government and people will, .as always, continue to
give firm support to the just cause of the Zimbabwean
people until it wins final victory.

143. Today in London, the parties concerned formally
signed the agreement on the solution of the question of i.
Southern Rhodesia. This ii an impo&mt successachieved
by the Zimbabwean people through their protracted and
valiant struggle with the full support of the African COII~-;~
tries, particularly the front-line States. It is also a serious
defeat for the racist forces of Southern Rhodesia.
144. Fourteen years ago, a handful of white racists represented by Ian Smith unilaterally declared the independence
of Southern Rhodesia in an attempt to perpetuate the
minority colonialist rule. Over the years, these extremely
reactionary and brutal racist forces have subjected theZimbabwean people to sanguinary armed repression and have
ceaselessly carried out military invasions of and armed
attacks on the front-line African States. At the same time,
they have resorted to all kinds of tricks and engaged in the
fraud of an “internal settlement” in an attempt to
prolong their reactionary rule by a combination of soft and
tough tactics. However, the historical trend is irresistible,
and all their schemes have ended in ignominious defeat one
after another.

148. In view of the recent developments, the Chinese delegation agrees that the Security Council should decide to
terminate the mandatory sanctions against Southern
Rhodesia. But this does not mean that the Council and the
international community should abandon their due responsibilities on the question of Southern Rhodesia. Pending the
attainment of genuine mrtjority .rule and national independence of the Zimbabwean people, the Council and the
international community should follow closely the developments in Southern Rhodesia and urge all the parties concerned to implement the provisions of the agreement
completely, faithfully and unreservedly. The Council
should also ask the authorities concerned to take effective
measures to bring about the immediate withdrawal of all
South African armed forces and mercenaries from Zimbabwe and not allow them tb reenter. Furthermore, with
regard to the downtrodden Zimbabwean people and the
front-line States, which have made great sacrifices in supporting the just cause of the Zimbabwean people, the international community is duty-bound to assist them in
economic reconstruction and rehabilitation, and the United
Nations system should play an active role in this respect.

145. For a long time, the Zimbabwean people have
plunged themselves wave upon wave into most arduous
struggles for genuine national independence and liberation.
In the past decade and more, the armed struggle of the
Zimbabwean people led by the Patriotic Front has started
from scratch and grown in strength, dealing heavy blows to
the racist forces. The Patriotic Front has also been actively
engaged in political struggles, which have yielded great
successes.The just struggle of the Zimbabwean people has
won increasingly wide sympathy and support from the
international community. In the recent negotiations in London, the Patriotic Front once again exerted tremendous
efforts and put forward many positive proposals, making
important contributions to the conclusion of the final
agreement.

149. Based on the above-mentioned position, the Chinese
delegation has voted in favour of the draft resolution contained in document S/13699.

146. The victory won by the Zimbabwean people is also
inseparable from the great efforts exerted by the numerous
African countries, especially the front-line States. In their
struggle, the Zimbabwean people have always enjoyed the
active support of the African countries. It is praiseworthy
that the front-line States have made great sacrifices in rendering full political, moral, material and other support to the
Patriotic Front, thus making positive contributions to the
just cause of the Zimbabwean people.
147. The signing of the London agreement marks the end
of one stage and the beginning of a new stage in the struggle
of the Zimbabwean people. Historical experience shows
that an agreement is merely something on paper. Acute and
complex struggles have to be waged in ,order to translate
something on paper into reality. It can be expected that the
racist forces of Southern Rhodesia will never step down
from the stage of history of their own accord, and they are
bound to resort to various schemes and to carry out sabotage and disturbances in a death-bed struggle. What also calls
for vigilance is that the South African regime has all along
tried to place southern Africa under its long-term control
and has openly subjected the Zimbabwean people to military threats with the clamour to incorporate Zimbabwe in
its ambitious plan of a so-called “constellation of States in

150. I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT
Council.

of the

151. The next speaker is the Minister of State in the Presidency of the People’s Republic of Mozambique, His Excellency Mr. Jose Oscar Monteiro. I welcome him and invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
152. Mr. MONTEIRO

(Mozambique)

(inierprerution

from French): Mr. President, may I express my gratitude to

you and, through you, to the members of the Security
Council, for giving us this opportunity to participate in the
work of this important meeting. It is a matter of great
significance for us that it is the People’s Republic of China, a
country with which we have ties of friendship forged during
our armed struggle for national liberation, which is presiding over the present meeting of the Council.
153. We avail ourselves of this opportunity too to pay a
tribute to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, for
his consistent contribution to the cause of the liberation of
peoples, particularly in southern Africa. His sustained com14

ever more intensive development of the liberation struggle
to bring down the colonial system.

mitment and devotion-of which we have had further proof .
at this meeting-reflect the preponderant role of the United
Nations in the decolonization process, notably in questions ’
concerning the implementation of the right of peoples to
self-determination and national independence enshrined in
the historic resolution 1514 (XV) of the General Assembly.

159. The racist and colonialist enemy, with the support of
imperialism, sought to stop the winds with its hands. It
strengthened repression and increased the number of
arrests, bombings and massacres of Zimbabwean nationalists. It tried to internationalize the war by bringing it to
neighbouring countries, particularly Mozambique, Zambiaand ,Botswana. To.this end, it began the largest repressive
operation ever known in African history against the neighbouring countries. Incapable of halting the powerful development of the armed liberation struggle, it seeks to make us
believe that African countries are committing aggression
against Rhodesia. By raising the scarecrow of subversive
threat and foreign intervention, the racist regime endeavoured to mobilize the most retrograde forces in the world
in the capitalist countries to intervene on its side and thus get
a second wind for a regime condemned by events and
history.

154. We believe that the United Nations contribution to
the question of decolonization-we
can say this on the basis
of our own experience-has had a major impact; it constitutes one of the most beautiful laurels in the wreath of the
Organization. The peoples of the world, the colonized peoples, always expect much of the United Nations; they turn
towards it with eyes of hope. That is why, in our opinion,
nothing should be encouraged or admitted that might lessen
the eminent role of the United Nations with regard to
decolonization.
155. The present meeting of the Security Council is being
held at a decisive phase in the decolonization process of the
British colony of Southern Rhodesia. That it is being held
means that once again the international community,
through the Council, is living up to its responsibility to
analyse the new situation created in Zimbabwe.

160. Politically, the Ian Smith regime was forced to recognize that the wind had changed; that in our time it was no
longer possible to continue to. impose domination by a
minority over the majority of a population. It recognized
that the wheel of history turns, but it tried to -make it turn to
its advantage so as to safeguard the privileges of the settlers.
It tried to prevent genuine independence. To that end it
redoubled manoeuvres that led to the signing of the socalled “internal settlement*‘. With the help of some Africans
who lent themselves to the farce, the racist regime sought to
legitimize the continuation of domination and the privileges
of the minority at the international level. But the international community saw through those manoeuvres and
refused to recognize the legitimacy of any solution that did
not include the liberation movement and did not guarantee
the genuine rights of the majority of the population at the
political and economic levels.

156. We are meeting to analyse the stage of the implementation of resolution 253 (1968). In that resolution the Security Council, gravely concerned because of the existing
situation in Southern Rhodesia where the white settlers in
rebellion against the colonial Power had seized power and
proclaimed an independent racist regime, decided to apply
mandatory sanctions within the framework of Chapter VII
of the Charter. At that time it afftrmed its concern at the
threat which the action of those white settlers constituted to
international peace and security.
157. Given Great Britain’s refusal to use force to bring
down the rebellion of the white settlers, the racist regime was
consolidated. It began deliberate repressive action of striking cruelty in repression of the nationalist movement of the
people of Zimbabwe. Hundreds of nationalist militants
were arrested and imprisoned, and some are still languishing
in prison. Hundreds of patriots were summarily executed.
But the people of Zimbabwe did not bend. It became organized and began an armed liberation struggle. It resisted
intimidating manoeuvres; it strengthened its ranks, consolidated the unity of its movement and brought the armed
liberation struggle to a more advanced stage. It struck
increasingly severe blows against the army of aggression.

161. The dimension of the armed struggle of the nationalist combatants was confirmed as the great force capable of,
defeating treacheries and compromises; it imposed the Patriotic Front as the great force able to lead the people of
Zimbabwe to genuine national independence; The *‘internal
settlement” fell like a piece of rotten fruit. Once again it was
the result of action and vigilance by the people of Zimbabwe, African peoples and the international community as a
whole. It was in that context that the Commonwealth conference decided at Lusaka to hold the constitutional conference on Southern ,Rhodesia in London.

158. The consolidation of the independence of African
countries enabled the liberation movements to consolidate
their rearguards and develop their liberation struggle with
increased vigour. With the defeat on the battlefield of Portuguese colonialism and the proclamation of independence on
the political level by Mozambique, the relations of friendship and solidarity forged during the liberation struggle in
Mozambique gained a new dimension. The unity -of the
nationalist movement within the Patriotic Front, the constant development of the armed liberation struggle, the
support of the neighbouring African countries and of the
international community in general, and the effective application of sanctions were the factors which made possible an

162. The results of the talks held in London, which have
been formally registered in the agreement signed by all the
parties to the conference, in our view embody above all the
victory of the people of Zimbabwe. They enshrine the right
of the people of Zimbabwe to independence, freedom and
democracy. That agreement is the result of the struggle and
sacrifices of the Zimbabwean people and of the best of its
children. It is the victory of thousands of patriots, thousands
of Africans in Zimbabwe and the neighbouring African
countries who have contributed to victory with their lives.
Consequently, it represents far more than the results of
diplomatic negotiations which made it possible. It is an
agreement sealed by innumerable sacrifices. It represents the
15

victory of the African peoples. That agreement-may
I be
permitted to say so-is also our victory, a victory for us, the
people of Mozambique;the people of Zambia, the people of,
Botswana; the people of Tanzania, the people of Angola and
the front-line countries which have assumed their responsibilities for Zimbabwe’s liberation. The agreement is also the
victory of the Organization of African Unity and of ,a11
African peoples in their essential and fundamental commitmeni to the complete liquidation of colonialism and apart-,
heid from our continent. The agreement also embodies the
victory of the socialist countries because of their contribu_ tion to the liberation movement in Zimbabwe in various
forms of support to the political and armed struggle. The
agreement also embodies the victory of the progressive for-,
ces throughout the world, the non-aligned movement, the
solid bulwark of the just cause of the liberation of peoples.

168. We also wish to pay a tribute to the efforts of all those
who have contributed’in the long effort of seeking a negotiated’agreement and a lasting peace.
169. : For our Government and for the people of Mozambique, all problems concerning Zimbabwe are of particular
importance. Peace in our region -is ,closely linked to the
situation in Zimbabwe and in southern Africa in general
Solidarity between our peoples has its roots in the history of
our struggle. During the armed liberation struggle in
Mozambique our liberated areas in the province of Tete
were rearguard bases for the Zimbabwean liberation
fighters.
.;
170. Having attained independence, the people of
Mozambique needs peace to rebuild its country. That peace
is not possible as long as colonialism remains at our doors.
Reality proves that. As long as there is colonialism and
racism there will be massacres. That is why, in its Constitution, the Mozambican people has enshrined the fundamental principle of solidarity with the struggle of oppressed
peoples and why it considers that in order to guarantee
peace on the very threshold of independence the struggle has
to continue. That means creating all the conditions to enable
the people of Zimbabwe to develop their political and armed
struggle within the territory; continuing the struggle, including the complete application of sanctions decreed by the
international community. Continuing the struggle means
also resisting aggression and consqlidating our defence,
ensuring the inviolability of our borders’and the security of
our citizens as well as that of citizens of Zimbabwe who are
refugees in our country. Thus, on 3 March 1976, the President of the People’s Republic of Mozambique, His Excellency Mr. Samora Moist% Machel, declared the immediate
and complete application of the sanctions decided upon by
the Security Council against the racist Ian Smith regime. We
are convinced that that decision made it possible to make
effective the embargo decided upon by the Council.

163. We bow with respect and deep feeling in memory of
all those who have given their lives for Zimbabwe’s
independence.
164. It is fair also, at a time when we are drawing up a
balance-sheet of this struggle, to say that there were those,
although not too many, who in a sustained and consistent
manner violated sanctions and sought by every means possible to support Ian Smith. There were those who with their
passivity encouraged support for the Ian Smith regime,
either through mercenaries, or through the actions of companies that violated sanctions, and were responsible for the
high-and to a certain extent avoidable-cost that the Zimbabwean people and the other peoples of the region have
had to pay for Zimbabwe’s independence. Every gallon of
oil illegally supplied to the Ian Smith regime, every helicopter, every piece of ammunition, every trade manipulation
and violation of sanctions, every mercenary meant that
more lives were lost, that there were more aggressions and
that there was more destruction. Those who are responsible
must be identified.

171. Allow me to recall that, for the People’s Republic of
Mozambique, the application of economic sanctions against
the British colony of Southern Rhodesia’is not merely the
halting of trade relations between two countries.

165. But it is no longer they who make history. Their
struggle is a rearguard action to hamper the irreversible
movement of the liberation of peoples and the building of a
new world. That is why we consider it to be a victory of the
United Nations that, despite sabotage and open or clandestine violations, the sanctions worked effectively and assisted
in the liquidation of the Ian Smith regime.

172. The colonial economy of Mozambique was largely
turned towards rendering services to neighbouring countries. A major part of our resources and our foreign
exchange came from these economic reiations. This situation has repercussions on the strictly internal level. As an
example, it suffices to say that, with the application of
sanctions, railway communication between Maputo and
Beira, two of our main cities, was interrupted, since in the
past such communication
had taken place through
Rhodesia.
.I
173. When the enemy realized that the application of sanctions by the People’s Republic of Mozambique marked the
beginning of the end, it reacted brutally. Tbeenemy’s “international irresponsibility*’ led it to start operations through
which it tried to occupy parts of our territory. It destroyed
bridges, railways, telecommunications
systems; it assassinated our farmers and destroyed our harvests. It pitilessly
bombed defenceless refugee camps and killed hundreds of
refugees. Nyazonia, Doroi, Tronga and so many other pla-

166. As they progressed, the talks clearly showed the firm
will of the Zimbabwean fighters to win peace and freedom
for their people. The negotiations proved that the Zimbabwean people wants nothing less than complete freedom
and independence. Let this be a warning to those who in the
following phase will try to sow discord and to create pretexts
to prevent the Zimbabwean people from attaining genuine
independence and making their own choice in complete
freedom.
167. The negotiations have also shown that the Patriotic
Front was able to represent the interests of both the entire
people of Zimbabwe and the international community. In
Zimbabwe, it is the Patriotic Front that represents the objectives of liberty and independence, for which the international community has been striving.
16

*:,

.I

$150 million to %200 million-.‘We .make these references’
because we believe that the Security Council should know in
detail all the effects of the application of sanctions. ..J
.’
179. On several occasions, the‘council has taken measures
with a view to helping our country to compensate for’the ’
effects of the agreed sanctions and to establish programmes
aimed at minimizing the effects of aggression and organizing
support for the hundreds of thousands of refugees in our
country.

ces are milestones in our common struggle fertilized by ‘the
blood shed by the peoples of Zimbabwe and Mozambique.
174. It is clear that the application of sanctions repre-,
sented a heavysacrifice for our country. The Security Council has already had an opportunity to learn of the effects of
the application of sanctions and of the aggressions against
our country and to record the heavy price our country has
had to pay to assume its international responsibilities. In its
resolution 411 (1977), the Security Council requested all
States to give immediate and substantial material assistance
to enable the Government of the People’s Republic of
Mozambique to strengthen its defence capability in order to
safeguard effectively its sovereignty and territorial integrity.

180. At this time we should like once again to emphasize
how important the support and encouragement of the international community have been, for they strengthened our
conviction that the peoples of the world were behind us and
that we were in the vanguard of the international community in its support for the struggle of the people of Zimbabwe. Nevertheless, it must be said that actual contributions
were far below the real needs identified by the missions sent
by the United Nations and that, in practice, many of the
contributions pledged never materalized.

175. In this respect, we wish to express our appreciation
for the support we received from the socialist and Nordic
countries both in our economic and social development and
in reinforcement of our defence capacity and assistance for
refugees.
176. The Council also.requested all States, regional organizations and other appropriate intergovernmental organizations to provide financial, technical and material assistance
to Mozambique to enable it to overcome the severe economic loss and destruction of property brought about by the
acts of aggression committed by the illegal regime.

181. We believe that the international community must
more resolutely provide assistance to countries such as ours,
which have had to bear, at a critical stage in their development, the weight of international decisions.

177. Nevertheless, enemy aggression continued unabated.
It even became more intense. In 1977 the enemv was
equipped and received from its allies matbriel that enabled it
to continue its aggression, such as Bell helicopters and
Mirage aircraft. Offices for the recruitment of mercenaries
were set UD in several Western countries. The enemv undertook new forms of territorist and subversive action aimed at
the political destabilization of our State. Violent raids were
carried out against productive areas; technicians, including
foreign technical assistance personnel, were assassinated in
the provinces of Manica, Tete, Gaza and Sofala. The
national telecommunications network was attacked for a
second time in September 1979, with helicopter operations
against the Mont Chiluvo station, delaying by two years at
least restoration of the network. In thhprovince ofManica
alone, more than 800 homes were destroyed and burned.
The destruction of railway bridges on the Beira-Moatize line
has for three months paralysed exportation of one of the
main resources of our country, coal. At Gaza, the destruction of the Macarretane Dam in September has jeopardized
production in the major agro-industrial
complex of
Chokwe. Hundreds of heavy tractors were destroyed.

182. The accession of Zimbabwe to indepedence will
surely mark the beginning of a new development for that
country. Recent history proves that an independent people
can do far more for the development of its country in a few
years-and this despite transitory difftculties-than
colonialism was able to do over the centuries.
183. Mozambique and Zimbabwe are bound by their past
and are linked by a common struggle. They are linked
physically and geographically; the natural access routes to
Zimbabwe pass through our country. We are aware of the
responsibility incumbent upon us as a country of transit for
neighbouring land-locked countries, and we assume that
responsibility. Our economy and our means of communication, which, in the past, were in the service of colonial and
racist interests, must take on a new role. The international
community must assume its responsibilities with respect to
the development of Zimbabwe so that the independence it
has won will end in concrete results which will benefit the
whole of the people of Zimbabwe.
184. This action cannot be viewed in isolation. Zimbabwe’s development implies strengthening its routes of
communication
with the sea. Further, the reopening of
borders raises real problems. Our railway lines from the
centre and the south, which connect with those of Zimbabwe, have for years been paralysed in their stretches near the
border. With regard to the Chicualacuala line in the south,
the enemy destroyed bridges, railway stations and damaged
long stretches of the railroad, which must be repaired immediately. Many locomotives were destroyed or damaged. The
immediate repair of the roads and railways and reequipping and reorganization of the ports require urgent
and immediate investments, estimated at $30 million, as well
as international technical assistance.

178. To illustrate the situation we shall give a few figures.
The cost of the destruction during the four years of 1976,
1977, 1978 and 1979 of equipment, buildings, infrastructure
and other economic elements reached $45 million, of which
$25 million applies to the last two years. A detailed descrig
tion of these facts and an indication of the losses may be
found in the memorandum our Government is submitting
to the United Nations [S/Z3706J. The report of the United
Nations review mission sent to Mozambiaue3
makes refer.
ence to some damage sustained and estimates the resulting
annual deficit in the balance of payments at approximately
3 A/34/377.

17

185. The agreement signed in London makes it possible, in
our opinion, to crush the, rebellion and to guarantee that:
Great Britain will assume its responsibilities as colonial
Power. Basically, the agreement creates the necessary condi- :
tions so that the people of Zimbabwe may choose its own.
future in complete security.

act of rebellion against .British authority. As such, it was of
immediate concern to the Government of the United Kingdom. The Council responded swiftly the day following the
unilateral declaration of independence by condemning it. It
called upon all States to refrain from rendering any assistance to the illegal regime.

186. The signature of the Patriotic Front on the botton’
line of this agreement means for us that the fundamental
objectives of the armed struggle, whose legitimacy was’+
ognized by the Security Council in its resolution 253 (1968),
have been attained. Thus this agreement makes it possible to,
achieve peace. In this way, we believe that the .essential
objectives of the application of sanctions have been
achieved.

194. But the act of a unilateral’ declaration of independence was an act aimed by the white racist minority at
denying the majority of the African population of Zimbabwe its legitimate rights to freedom and independence. It
was an act that fed on the colonial h,istory of the Territory. It
was an act that, in its totality, constituted a threat to intemational peace and security. As such ,it was of concern not only
to the Government of the United Kingdom, but to the
international community as a whole. Thus, in 1966 the
Council imposed selective mandatory sanctions on Southem Rhodesia. In 1968, as the racist illegal regime had continued its defiance of the international community, the
Council, by its resolution 253 (1968), imposed comprehensive mandatory sanctions against’ the colony of Southern
Rhodesia. To all of us, the Council’s action represented a
step towards stopping the racist illegal minority regime from
robbing the majority of the people of Zimbabwe of their
inalienable right to self-determination-and independence in
accordance with resolution 1514 (XV). It represented a
definitive stand by the Council in support of human freedom and against the seed of instabihty. Tanzania, therefore,
welcomed the enforcement measures and undertook to
implement the Council’s decision. We did so out of a desire
to contribute to the efforts spearheaded by the people of
Zimbabwe themselves to bring about a settlement and the
freedom of Zimbabwe under majority rule. We did so also
because the Council’s action, the decision contained in resolution 253 (1968) was obligatory upon all Member States as
set out in Article 25 of the Charter. .;.,

187. Now that the conditions have been met, it is up to the
body which decided to impose sanctions to decide to lift
them. We cannot but regret the position of certain countries
which decided unilaterally to lift sanctions, thus infringing
the authority of the Council and setting an unacceptable
precedent for the international community.
188. The independence and freedom of peoples and the
exercise of their fundamental right to self-determination are
basic principles and one of the pillars on which our intemational organization-the
community of States itself-rests.
This is why we believe that the Security Council must continue to follow closely the situation in Zimbabwe. Victory
must not lead to a relaxation of vigilance. Threats already
visible on the horizon which are aimed at influencing the
election results, such as threats by the South African regime,
must be vigorously repulsed by the international
community.
189. The final phase in the process of accession to independence of the British colony of Southern Rhodesia turns a
new page in the heroic struggle of African peoples against
foreign domination. The chapter of slavery, colonialism and
racial humiliation on our continent is about to close.

195. Earlier today an agreement was signed in London by
parties to the Lancaster House conference which paved the
way to a negotiated settlement. More precisely it is an
agreement that establishes peaceful processes through
which the people of Zimbabwe will ach,ieve their independence through majority rule. It is thus an agreement that
essentially establishes a new environment paving the way for
the genuine independence of Zimbabwe.

190. The liberation of Namibia will brook no delay.
Racism and apartheid are about to crumble under the combined assault of interior and exterior forces. Let us
strengthen the fight and support for the just struggle of the
peoples still oppressed in Namibia and South Africa. The
struggle goes on.

196. Tanzania has welcomed this agreement. In doing so,
we commend specitically the Patriotic Front for its statesmanship and perseverance in the Lancaster House talks and
its singular contribution that made ‘possible the London
agreement. Without a doubt, this is a great moment for the
people of Zimbabwe, who have suffered a great deal and,
under the leadership of the Patriotic Front have made the
ultimate sacrifice for freedom and for peace.

191. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfi~~
Chinese): The
next speaker is the representative of the United Republic of
Tanzania. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement,
192. Mr. FOUM (United Republic of Tanzania): Mr. President, I wish first of all to thank you and other members of
the Security Council for affording my delegation the opportunity to participate in the debate on the item under consideration, namely, the question of Southern Rhodesia.

197. It is imperative to record that the signing of the
agreement in London today represents, at this stage, the
result of arduous efforts. For the history of the colony of
Southern Rhodesia is a history of stru~le by the people
against domination and tyranny both colonial and racist.
The people of Zimbabwe, desirous of achieving their liberation, have made every effort to acquire their legitimate goal
of freedom. They embarked on a political struggle against
British colonial rule and resistance against racist tyranny

193. When the white racist minority led by Ian Smith
unilaterally declared independence on 11 November 1965,
the United Kingdom, as the colonial Power,came before the
Security Council to seek the international community’s condemnation of the act and its support in ending the rebellion.
Indeed, the unilateral declaration of independence was an
18

-

when this was possible. It was only when all avenues to
peaceful resistance and political struggle were blocked that
they embarked on a legitimate armed struggle- which has
now forced the racist minority to accept a negotiated settlement and majority rule.

which had been decided upon by &&Council. This unilat-.
em! decision was formally confirmed ‘in a document Circulated by ..the United Kingdom [S/13688]. This L&S, also,
restated by the representative of the United Kingdom this
afternoon.

198. Indeed, even at the height of the armed struggle the
people of Zimbabwe, under the leadership of the Patriotic
Front, continued to explore ail available avenues for peace.
It is in this context that we:recall their willingness to participate in the Geneva and Malta talks as well as the talks held
at Dar es Salaam during the Anglo-American consultations.

203. We reject this submission. We believe that the action
of the United Kingdom not only was unfo’rtunate and illadvised, but was also in clear contravention of the decisions
of the Council-decisions
which the United Kingdom itself
was instrumental in having adopted. We consider the action
ill-advised because, to be quite candid, it has served only to
create feelings of suspicion and give rise to questions about
the motives of the United Kingdom at a time when what is
urgently required is collective action and collective goodwill
on the, part of the international community. We regret it all
the more because many of our countries had been actively
involved in promoting a genuine negotiated settlement on
Zimbabwe. Consequently, in the light of the London agreement, all of us would have preferred to act collectively at the
Security Council in order to promote effectively the implementation of that agreement. The unilateral move by the
United Kingdom has clearly undermined what would otherwise have been a consensus spirit. All other unilateral
action, including that of the United States and France
among others, should be viewed in a similar light.

199. By its action this afternoon, the Council has decided
to lift the sanctions imposed against the colony of Southern
Rhodesia by resolution’ ,253 (1968). From what I have
already stated, it is clear that my delegation accepts that the
present situation regarding the colony of Southern Rhodesia
allows the lifting of those measures. For that reason we
welcome the Council’s collective decision.
200. It is important, nevertheless, that the Council focus
on certain important factors concerning its earlier decisions
on sanctions, as indeed on the actions of certain States in
respect of those decisions:
201. There is, on the one hand, the effect of the situation in
the colony of Southern Rhodesia on the region prior to the
Council’s action this afternoon. Because of the nature of the
racist and minority.rigime
at Salisbury, neighbouring independent States-Zambia,
Mozambique and Botswanawere a constant target of aggression. These fraternal States
have borne a great burden because of their natural desire to
assist the people of Zimbabwe to achieve their genuine
independence. And these fraternal States have borne a great
burden in implementing the decisions of the Council as
regards the observance of sanctions. Implementation by
Zambia, Mozambique and Botswana of the sanctions decision has been possible only at great cost to their own development efforts. My delegation is therefore gratified that the
Council bas taken cognizance of the sacrifices made by the
fraternal States and has included in the decision just adopted
provisions for action aimed at alleviating some of the consequences of the imposition of sanctions. We are most encouraged that action towards that end will be speedily taken, as
the Secretary-General said in his statement before the Council today.
; ,.
202. On the other hand, the Council must also focus on the
actions of certain States unilaterally to abrogate the Council’s measures adopted through resolution 253 (1968). The
obligation of Member States to comply with enforcement
measures adopted by the Council is clear and unequivocal.
No State or combination of States has the right to adopt
unilateral action in contravention of these decisions. Nor
can the Council accept individual interpretations concerning such an obligation, because if such a state of affairs is
tolerated then the very fabric of international intercourse
and international law ,will be placed in serious jeopardy. In
this context, we’ were greatly surprised and disappointed
when we learned of.the unilateral measures taken by the
United Kingdom, the administering Power of the colony of
Southern Rhodesia, to terminate enforcement measures

204. I believe I need not emphasize that the consequences
of a breach of the Council’s mandatory decisions are far
reaching and very serious. The implications are graver still
when such a breach of mandatory decisions of the Council is
implied, or put into effect, by some permanent members of
the Council. For such an action sets a bad precedent, represents a cynical use of the Council and renders future decisions subject to being ignored.
205. This debate therefore reaffirms that, since the Charter
is an international treaty, all must abide by mandatory
decisionsreached under its provisions. And sincedecisions
of the Security Council are binding by virtue of Article 25of
the Charter, any unilateral lifting of sanctionswould contravene that provision.
206. And what is the effect of all this?The answerwaswell
provided by the National Bar Association of the United
Stateswhen arguing the caseagainst the unilateral recognition by the United Statesof the so-calledinternal settlement
and its consequent lifting of sanctions. It said:
“A unilateral breach of sanctions would voice to the
world that the United StatesconsidersmeaninglessCharter provisions binding United Nations Members to
comply with mandatory economic sanctions-the most
important peace-keepingaction which can be undertaken
by the Security Council barring the use of force-and
thereby would undermine the ability of the United
Nations to fulfil one of its most important functions.“4
That position was reaffirmed by the African Group in its
letter rS/Z3693] to you, Mr. President,with reference to the
-United -Kingdom letter.
’ A/34/279,

19

annex,

sect. 1. part

D.

207. Finally, we urge Britain to go ahead now with the
difficult but important job of implementing the London
agreement. The United Kingdom as the colonial Power
bears great responsibility not only to the people of Zimbabwe but also to the international community. It is our belief
that the London agreement will be implemented scrupulously and fully.

countries and peoples; then, the validity and etfective application of resolution 253 (1968), which imposed mandatory
sanctions against Rhodesia; tinally,, the responsibilities of
the administering Power scrupulously to apply General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV),, and the role which the
Security Council can play regarding. respect of its decisions
by Member States.

208. In that connexion, the Government of the United
Kingdom should ensure speedily that South African troops
and other mercenaries withdraw from Southern Rhodesia.
They should not be allowed to meedle any further in Rhodesia’s affairs. This meeting of the Council should also constitute a solemn warning to the apartheid regime of South
Africa that the international community will not tolerate
interference in the affairs of Zimbabwe and will remain
vigilant against any threat to the integrity or security of that
country.

213. The inalienable right of the people of Zimbabwe to
self-determination,
freedom and independence implies
recognition of the legitimacy of the struggle which it is
waging to enjoy those rights. It also implies the establishment of majority government and requires the implementation of resolution 1514(XV) by.the administering Power
with respect to Zimbabwe. We believe that at the present
stage of our deliberations no one can validly challenge those
principles because they constitute the very foundations of
our actions towards decolonizatiorrand the indispensable
conditions of a just and lasting settlement.

209. The London agreement is the beginning of the end.
May I end here by quoting Lord Caradon, then Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, when he spoke in
the Security Council on 29 May 1968, just after the Council
had adopted the resolution which imposed sanctions on
Rhodesia. Lord Caradon quoted the words of a famous
Englishman, Sir Francis Drake:

214. It is not our intention to dweil uselessly on the past.
But it is our duty to recall certain ,specific facts which justify
the position taken by the African Group on the lifting of
sanctions, and on the modalities and scope of individual or
collective measures envisaged in that context.
215. The Council will recall that the sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia were imposed because, on the one hand,
the administering Power was unable to exercise its responsibilities and to bring the white Rhodes,ian minority to accept
a peaceful transition towards majority -Government and
self-determination on a democratiobasis and, on the other
hand, the Council considered, in view of the persistence of
the rebellion, that the situation in Rhodesia was a threat to
international peace and security.

“Grant us to know that it is not the beginning but the
continuing of the same unto the end until it is thoroughly
finished which yieldeth the true glory.” [142&h meeting.
para. 63.1

I hope that Lord Soames and other representatives of the
Government of the United Kingdom will heed those words
of wisdom in the case of Rhodesia.
210. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom
Chinese): The
next speaker is the representative of Madagascar, who
wishes to make a statement in his capacity as Chairman of
the African Group of States for the month of December. I
invite him to take a-place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

216. From the chronology of events, we see that it was in
its resolution 232 (1966), in paragraph 1, that the Council
noted that the situation in Southern Rhodesia constituted a
threat to international peace and security. In paragraph 2of
its resolution 253 (1968). the Council called upon the administering Power to take urgently ail effective measures to
bring to an end the rebellion in Southern Rhodesia, and
enable the people to secure the enjoyment of their rights as
set forth in the Charter of the United-Nations and in conformity with the objectives of General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV). Finally, in paragraph 1 of .its resolution 314
(1972), the Council reaffirms its decision that “‘the present
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia shall remain fully in
force until the aims and objectives set out in resolution 253
(1968) are completely achieved”.

211. Mr. RABETAFIKA
(Madagascar) (inrerpreration
from French): Mr. President, first of all, as Chairman of the
African Group for the month of December I should like to
express to you my sincere gratitude for the privilege you
have accorded me by authorizing me to take part in this
debate. It is significant that it is held under your presidency,
Sir, because we have learned to trust your qualities as a keen
and wise diplomat. We also know of your commitment and
that of the country which you represent, the People’s
Republic of China, to the African nations when it is a
question of bringing about the triumph of right and of
promoting a future for our peoples characterized by.progress and justice.

217. It is clear from the foregoing that the objectives of the
sanctions were to put an end to the rebellion, which constituted a threat to international peace and security, and then
to enable the people of Zimbabwe to exercise its right to
self-determination.

212. When the General Assembly took a decision on
Rhodesia a few days ago, it emphasized three fundamental
points: first, the reaffurnation of the inalineable right of the
people of Zimbabwe to self-determination, freedom and
independence, in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter and the objectives of General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) on the granting of independence to colonial

2 18. The agreement signed in London has certainly put an
end to hostilities in Zimbabwe and to the rebellion, but the
resulting situation is not in all respects in accord with the
objectives set out by the Council in resolutions 232 (1966)
and 253 (1968), namely, the elimination of any threat to
20

international peace and security in that area and the enjoyment by the Zimbabwean people of their rights as recognized in the Charter and in resolution I514 (XV).

make a statement on behalf of the current Chairman of the
Organization of African Unity. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

2 19. Indeed, as we have emphasized in the letter addressed
to the President of the Security Council on 14 December
1979 [S/13694, we consider that a colonial situation still
exists in Southern Rhodesia, a situation which the United
Nations must settle in the light of the principles set out in the
Charter and reaffirmed in resolution 15 14 (XV), in order to
ensure a return to peace and stability in Southern Rhodesia.,

227. Mr. TUBMAN
(Liberia): Mr. President, I wish first
of all to thank you and the members of the Council for
giving me this opportunity
to address the Council this
evening.
228. Once again the situation in Southern Rhodesia is
claiming the attention of the Security Council.
229. Fourteen years ago, when there was a usurpation of
power and a turning away from legality in Zimbabwe, the
Council was the logical and natural place to turn for the
invoking of appropriate measures within the framework of
the Organization to defend the inalienable right of the
people of Zimbabwe to self-determination,
freedom and
independence. The Council, mindful of its responsibility
under the Charter, decided then to impose sanctions
because it was convinced that the continuance in time of an
illegal minority racist regime in Zimbabwe constituted a
threat to international peace and security.

220. Furthermore, if the South African forces and mercenaries in Southern Rhodesia are not removed, they will continue to represent a threat to international peace and
security.
221. It follows that the consideration of the question of
Southern Rhodesia implies that we take these two elements
fully into account. That is why it seems appropriate to us
that the administering Power, in the exercise of its responsibilities, should be called upon to guarantee full respect for
and implementation in good faith of the Lancaster House
agreements and urgently to take the necessary measures to
carry out paragraph 7 of the resolution just adopted by the
Council.

230. Today, 14 years later and with more than 20,000 lives
sacrificed in an unnecessary war, the Council’s determination and decisions have been, most sadly, vindicated. So
heavy a loss of life, with the attendant human suffering and
the destruction of property in Zimbabwe and in the surrounding new and struggling African countries, has been
nothing short of a calamity. This is to be greatly deplored,
and we wish to pay a tribute today to those who have died in
this war.

222. At a time when the Security Council has taken a
decision to lift the sanctions, we are pleased that it has called
upon all Member States to continue to provide urgent assistance to the martyred people of Zimbabwe for reconstruction purposes and to facilitate the repatriation ofall refugees
or displaced persons so that they may be able to participate
in deciding their future. In this connexion, we cannot forget
the fate of the 20 members of the African National Congress
who fought at the side of the Zimbabwean people and who
are now in prison.

231. But today is not the time to talk of vindication; and
while we cannot yet speak of victory we are here today
looking forward and not backward. We have not come to
lodge new complaints. Rather, speaking on behalf of the
current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, we
approach the Council this evening because the successful
conclusion of the Rhodesian constitutional conference in
London having ended the war in Zimbabwe and our erstwhile warring brothers in Zimbabwe having today in London turned their hands from fighting and their eyes towards
peace, the stage has been set for the exercise by the people of
Zimbabwe of their right to self-determination, freedom and
independence.

223. The front-line States, to which the African countries
as a whole pay a highly deserved tribute, have suffered
immense human and material losses as a result of their
support of the Zimbabwean liberation movement and the
Patriotic Front and because they applied sanctions. They
are entitled to organized and sustained international assistance to enable them to overcome the economic and social
difficulties which they face.
224. Finally, we hope that the Secretary-General will exercise his full authority with Member States and will show the
diligence which, happily, we have come to expect from him,
so that paragraph 5 of the resolution can be urgently and
appropriately implemented.
225. The lifting of sanctions is not the end of the decolonization process in Rhodesia. The Council remains seized of
the development of the situation and we continue to believe
that the return to peace and stability in that Territory can be
guaranteed only by granting real independence and by the
effective exercise of power by the majority through its
genuine representatives.

232. The time has come to welcome Zimbabwe back to
legality and for all States, predicated on the Council’s
action, to terminate the measures taken against Rhodesia
pursuant to various resolutions of the Council under Chapter VII of the Charter. These measures have now been
adjudged no longer necessary. Thus we have come full circle
in Zimbabwe today. There is no victory yet in that country,
but with legal administration at last restored there, this is a
day of victory for justice and for the Security Council. For
this_ step forward the Chairman of the Organization of
African Unity is grateful, and he has requested that his
congratulations and thanks be conveyed to the Council.

226. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese): The
next speaker is the representative of Liberia, who wishes to

233. The leaders of Zimbabwe of all parties and persuasions who have signed in London today the agreement
21

reached at the Lancaster House conference also deserve
praise and congratulations for the patience, sacrifice and
statesmanship which they have shown. Our British friends,
renowned throughout the world for their dogged determination and sense of fair play, were able under the leadership of
Lord Carrington during 14 long weeks of the most difficult
negotiations to remind the world of the many sterling qualities which made their country great. There will be ample
opportunity for those qualities to be demonstrated in the
coming months. During those critical months we the
members of the international community would not serve
the cause of peace if we were satisfied merely to be critics and
spectators. On the contrary, ,we must do everything within
our power, by any statements which we may feel called upon
to make or actions which we may take, to encourage all.
parties to the London agreement to adhere to that agreement strictly and to implement it fully and faithfully.
234. The United Nations has already done much for Zimbabwe, but in view of the great work of reconstruction
required to be undertaken in the light of the tragic destruction which has occurred there and in the front-line States,
the United Nations and the specialized agencies must
urgently step up efforts to bring economic aid and other
forms of assistance to that war-weary region. We know that
we can depend on the Secretary-General and his able colla- borators to give this matter the urgent attention which it
deserves in keeping with the resolution just adopted by the
Council.
235. We the States of the Organization‘of African Unity,
which are duty bound to help sustain the reconciliation
among our heretofore divided brothers in Zimbabwe, are
pleased on this occasion to express profound gratitude to all
those States which by their support of the decisions of the
Council, and in other ways, helped to bring about the
welcome events of today. The material and moral support
from these States for the gallant people of Zimbabwe will be
greatly needed if that country is to move forward quickly
from its present difficulties to a brighter future. We in Africa
know only too well that the support by many Governments
for sanctions would not have been sustained but for the
strong solidarity shown to the people of Zimbabwe and
Africa by many private individuals and groups in many
countries. For such solidarity we Africans are grateful. It is
no secret, for example, that the unhappy events in Zimbabwe have alreadly done much to strengthen the ties of
brotherhood
between Africans and Afro-Americans.
Peopie of African heritage and people of goodwill everywhere welcome this development, because it can only lead to
a greater awareness of Africa and a fuller understanding of
African problems and aspirations, thereby making a worthy
contribution to achieving world peace.

238. Mr. TLOU (Bostwana): Mr. President, may I thank
you and your colleagues in the Council for affording my
delegation the opportunity to participate in this important
debate on the affairs of our neighbour, Zimbabwe. It is
especially pleasing that you, a man of immense diplomatic
skill and a representative of China, a country with which
Botswana enjoys very cordial relations, are presiding over
these deliberations. The decision just taken by the Council
attests to your great leadership.
:
239. With the signing by all parties concerned of an agreement providing for a peaceful transition to genuine majority
rule in Zimbabwe, the long, tragic history of bloodshed and
misery brought about by the refusal of a merciless, racist
minority to yield power to the overwhelming majority may
be at an end. The agreement, if fully and scrupulously
implemented-and
we urge all those concerned to work to
that end-could herald the beginning of a new era in Zimbabwe, an era in which the people of that country will be
enabled for the first time to choose, in a free and fair
election, those they want to govern them.
*
240. Botswana welcomes the announcement of the signing
of the agreement at Lancaster House and will certainly
watch with keen interest the implementation of that agreement. Botswana, on its part, will give full co-operation,
when ‘that is called for, to make the implementation of the
agreement possible. We congratulate all the parties concerned in the negotiations that led to the agreement. We
note with satisfaction that after many decades ‘of neglect,
Great Britain has now assumed its responsabilities in its
colony of Southern Rhodesia in order to guide ,it to full
independence.
:
241. May I take this opportunity to pay a special tribute to
the people of Zimbabwe who, under the leadership of the
Patriotic Front, sacrificed their lives in order to free their
country from one of the most onerous systems of oppression in the annals of Africa’s colonial history;’ In the long
history of the struggle which was made inevitable by the
recalcitrant racist minority’s refusal to yield power to the
majority, the cream of Zimbabwe’s youth fell. To them we
pay a special tribute, for they chose to face death rather than
be perpetual slaves in their own country; they chdse to die so
that their fellow men might be free.
5.
242. Ultimately it was those sacrifices on thd’part of the
people of Zimbabwe, led by its liberation movement, the
Patrotic Front, that made the Lancaster House conference
possible. Without the pressure mounted by the Patriotic
Front fighters, the illegal minority regime which faced eventual and inevitable defeat, would not have -voluntarily
moved to the conference table, for it is not in the nature of
colonialists voluntarily to surrender power. It is in that
sense, then, that we are saying the sweat and blood of the
people of Zimbabwe paved the way for fruitful negotiations. The Patriotic Front is to be congratulated on ifs
tenacity in the war that wasforced upon it by the oppression
of the racist minority and on its statesmanship in the negotiations just concluded.

236. Even though there is no victory yet in Zimbabwe, let
all of us, during this season of peace and goodwill, indulge
the hope that the agreement that was signed in London
today will lead to a new day of reconciliation and peace, not
only in Zimbabwe, but for all of southern Africa.
237. The PRESIDENT (inrerpretationfrom
Chinese): The
next speaker is the representative of Botswana, whom I
invite to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

243. What has happened in Zimbabwe shoufd serve both
as a warning and as a guideline to those who continue to
22

.

oppress their fellow men in the other minority-ruled States
of southern Africa-a
warning because an oppressed
people will inevitably rise to fight for its freedom, as happened in Zimbabwe; and a guideline, because negotiations
if undertaken in good faith and with seriousness can bear
fruit. The minority regimes in South Africa and Namibia
had better take heed of this truth as history inexorably
marches on. They must.know also that just at the international community backed the people of Zimbabwe in their
struggle until an agreed solution was found, so will it support the other struggling peoples in southern Africa. Botswana will certainly continue unflinchingly to support those
who are denied freedom and justice.

.-

the thousands who had to flee their motherland because of
the war. Botswana, Mozambique and Zambia will also need
international assistance to rebuild their economies and
resume vital projects which have been shelved as a result of
the diversion of funds to security needs. To this end, we were
pleased to note the statement by the Secretary-General earlier in this meeting, concerning assistance to our countries,
as well as to Zimbabwe, as requested in the resolution
adopted today. Botswana will give the Secretary-General all
possible assistance in the discharge of his responsibilities in
this regard.
.
248. Even though it may be premature to talk of a free
Zimbabwe at this juncture in view of the formidable task
ahead, on can dare to hope that the final objective appears
to be within reach. Botswana hopes that free and fair elections will be held in Zimbabwe, and just as we unhesitatingly
backed the just struggle for genuine freedom in Zimbabwe
we shall scrupulously abide by the freely expressed verdict of
the people of Zimbabwe, who alone are entitled to choose
their rulers.

244. The signing of an agreement on Zimbabwe-indeed,
a very important and historic step on the road towards
majority rule-does not of itself ensure that all will be well.
As we all real&, a very trying and difftcult period lies ahead
of us. The realization of the good intentions outlined in the
agreement depends on scrupulous adherence to what was
agreed. More importantly, conditions should be created on
the ground to ensure that an atmosphere of confidence,
reconciliation and fair play exists so that free and fair
elections can be conducted. All disruptive elements, such as
mercenaries and South African military personnel, should
be weeded out. One cannot be oblivious of the reported
threats by South Africa to intervene in Zimbabwe’s affairs.
We urge the administering Power to attend to those serious
matters with .the urgency they deserve, for failure to do so
could plunge Zimbabwe into even greater chaos.

249. We look forward to the emergence of a free and
independent neighbour so that, together and in cooperation with the other sister States in the region, we can
develop our respective countries and our region. Together
we can form an even stronger front for the liberation of our
subregion.
250. We believe that with the conclusion of the Lancaster
House talks and the signing of the agreement, conditions
now exist for the Security Council to take a decision regarding the lifting of the mandatory sanctions which it had
previously imposed-for
it alone has the legal authority to
reverse its decisions. The Council has now acted on this
matter, thus reaffirming its authority.

245. For years now our region has been-and it still ispoised on a very dangerous precipice. Many lives have been
lost and a lot of property destroyed in Zimbabwe itself and
in the front-line States, in particular Botswana, Mozambique and Zambia. Millions upon millions of scarce resources have been spent by our Governments on security and
defence measures forced upon us by the aggression of the
racist minority regimes, and in this particular case the rebel
regime in Southern Rhodesia, in a vain attempt to prevent us
from supporting the struggle of our fellow men. Some of our
peoples’ basic needs have gone unattended owing to that
diversion of!scarce resources. These were necessary and
worth-while sacrifices in the interest of justice and freedom.

25 1. The decision taken today will enable the many States
which had refrained from unilaterally lifting sanctions to .-.
take appropriate action in conformity with their own laws.
My delegation was greatly concerned at the hasty way in
which some Member States unilaterally lifted sanctions while the Security Council was seized of the matter. Such actions-with due respect for the sovereignty of Member
States-should be avoided in future as they can only erode
the authority of the Council, this vital instrument charged
with the responsibility of keeping the peace in our troubled
world.

246. Botswana is proud to have contributed in its own
humble way to the struggle of the people of Zimbabwe. The
principles of freedom for which it fought are an article of
faith as far as Botswana is concerned. That is why the
possibility of a new era of freedom in Zimbabwe raises
hopes that, at last, at least one of the problems of southern
Africa may be finally solved. We are aware that even more
difftcult times lie ahead in South Africa and Namibia; nevertheless, a fre& Zimbabwe will enhance the ability of our
peoples in the region to co-operate both to improve their
quality of life and to contribute to the liberation of our
continent.

252. My delegation is pleased to note that, although the
Council has formally lifted the sanctions as of now, it has
decided to remain seized of the matter of Southern Rhodesia
until the problem in that Territory has been satisfactorily
solved.
253. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom
Chinese): The
next speaker is the representative of Cuba, who wishes to
make a statement on behalf of the current Chairman of the
non-aligned movement. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

247. One hopes .that just as the international community
backed the struggle for liberation in Zimbabwe, with the
possible emergence of a free Zimbabwe, those same friendly
forces will assist the young State which has been devastated
by many years of war in its reconstruction efforts. Immediate assistance will be required to resettle and rehabilitate

254. Mr. ORAMAS (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish):
It is in its role of current chairman of the non-aligned
23

movement that my delegation has asked to speak at this
meeting of the Security Council, which is considering the
I
lifting of the sanctions that were adopted against the illegal
racist Rhodesian Government under Chapter VII of the
Charter.
255. At their sixth summit conference, held at Havana, the
Heads of State or Government of the non-aligned countries
referred to the talks that were to be held in London and
affirmed that those talks would not receive international
acceptance or recognition unless they paved the way
towards authentic majority Government and independence
to the satisfaction of the fighting people of Zimbabwe and in
accordance with the resolutions of the Organization of African Unity, the non-aligned movement and the United
Nations.
256. For our countries the decisions of the Patriotic Front,
the sole legitimate representative of the Zimbabwean
people, represent the will of that people, and we offer it our
firmest support in the armed struggle for independence and
now commit ourselves to continuing our support in the new
stage that is now beginning. A few days ago this firm
support of our movement was once again expressed when
the General Assembly voted on the question of Rhodesia;
the draft resolution that was adopted won a very broad
sponsorship from Africa and the countries members of the
non-aligned movement.
257. The negotiating process known as the Lancaster
House talks was the result of long, hard and risky battles
waged by the Zimbabwean people and its vanguard, the
Patriotic Front, to achieve the so much yearned for independence. Let it be clearly on record that the tight that was
waged for 14 years is what made it possible for the colonial
Power and its allies to be compelled to accept a negotiating
process that has put an end to the illegal racist regime and
provided for acceptance of the majority will of the Zimbabwean peopleLet no one now try to camouflage that historic truth, which is the result of the sweat and the blood of
that people and the international solidarity that it earned in
its struggle.

ordered by the Security Council, which have been ended
today.
260. It is essential that the Security Council and all
Member States remain vigilant concerning the threats of the
racist Pretoria regime to intervene militarily in Zimbabwe.
We have no doubt that such intervention would inevitably
be defeated by the Zimbabwean people.
261. In this decisive hour, when new pages are being written in the history of the struggle against colonialism, the
non-aligned movement, as was agreed at its sixth summit
conference, reiterates its unswerving solidarity with the
people of Zimbabwe, its vanguard, the heroic Patriotic
Front, and the front-line States.
262. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
just received a letter from the representative of Kuwait
[S/1370J1, which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that an invitation be
extended by the Security Council under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Clovis Maksoud,
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States to the
United Nations, to participate in the Council’s historic
deliberations on the item ‘Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia’.‘*
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees
to the request.
It was so decided.
263. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese): I
invite His Excellency Mr. Clovis Maksoud to take a place at the Council table and to make a statement.
264. Mr. MAKSOUD:
I should like, on behalf of the
.League of Arab States, to thank you, Mr. President, for this
kind invitation and the Security Council for having
acquiesced to our request.
265. On behalf of the Arab Group of States and the
League of Arab States, I should like on this occasion to
share the international consensus in acclaiming the Lancaster House agreement and the Council’s resolution lifting the
sanctions.

258. The non-aligned movement wishes to draw attention
to the need to remain vigilant so that the administering
Power will offer the Zimbabwean people and its vanguard,
the Patriotic Front, all guarantees that the process begun
will be scrupulously respected and that no subterfuge will be
used to disturb the elections or to prevent the people from
freely expressing their aspirations so that they may have
truly representative government.

266. The Arab States have consistently lent their unequivocal support to the valiant struggle of the people of Zimbabwe. On this occasion I should like, on behalf of the Arab
League, to submit the following observations.

259. We must bear in mind that the front-line States,
complying with the sacred duty of assisting in the liberation
of their brothers in Zimbabwe, were the victims of innumerable aggressions by the Rhodesian racists. We must mention
that they suffered enormous losses in human lives and that
the cost of the destruction of the economies and infrastructures of the front-line States ran into millions of dollars.
When considering the reconstruction
of Zimbabwe, we
.must also take into account that the front-line States need to
be included in the plans to staunch the wounds of war and to
compensate for the effects of the application of the sanctions

267. First, this is a welcome development at a moment
when gathering storms of crisis are on the ascendant. The
relief that this positive development brings may be a good
omen to defuse other tensions and undue anxiety.
268. Secondly, the national liberation movement’s resort
to armed struggle is a mechanism of defense, while resort to
military options by colonial and racist regimes not only is
inherent in plans of conquest, colonimtion and racial discrimination but develops into an addiction that renders
sanctions an inevitable and a deterring necessity.
24

272 Sixthly, the League of Arab States realizes that one of _
its consituents, the Palestine Liberation Organization,
shares many of the anxieties, experiences and challenges
which were faced by the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe. It is
our hope that the march forward by the people of Zimbabwe towards the realization of their national and democratic
rights will hasten the arrival of the day when other liberation
movements in southern Africa and Palestine achieve their
national and democratic rights and join the community of
nations in dignity and equality.

269. Thirdly, when the authentic representatives of a h&ration movement acquire a reasonable stake in a diplomatic
process and there is a credible outcome such as independence and democratic rights, then it becomes an incentive
for consequential negotiations.
270. Fourthly, confronting occupation and racist usurpation headlong is a necessary prelude to bringing about a
realization of the futility of their anti-historical posture,
271. Fifthly, it is crucial to realize that this is a transitional
period and that elements in South Africa still plan to circumvent the international consensus and to remain unanswerable ‘to the Charter and the various United Nations
resolutions.

273. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese): The
Security Council has ,thus concluded this state of its consideration of the item on the agenda.
The meeting rose at 8 p-m.

25

,

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES PUBLICATIOSS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIOSS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sent en vente dans les librairies
depositaires
du monde entier. Informer-vous
aupres de votre libraire
i : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes. New Ynrk ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PCBLICACIOKES

DE LAS

Ias publicaciones
de las Xacionrs
Unidss
est;in
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
t!nidas.
Section de Ventas. Nue\s Sark o Gin&m.

Litho

in Uaited

Nations.

New

York

00400

NACIONES

et les agences
ou adresser-vous

UNIDAS

en vents en lrbrerias
a su librero
o dirijase

y casas dietri.
s: Naciones

74-70002-October

1983-2.250
