S/2021/442

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 May 2021
Original: English

Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2391
(2017), in which the Council requested the Secretary-General, in close coordination
with the members of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G5 Sahel) – Burkina Faso,
Chad, Mali, Mauritania and the Niger – and the African Union, to report on the
activities of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and the support
provided by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrate d Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) in this regard. The Council adopted resolution 2531 (2020),
renewing the mandate of MINUSMA and recommending enhanced support to the
Joint Force.
2.
The report provides an update on progress made in the operationalization of the
Joint Force since the report of 2 November 2020 (S/2020/1074), including
international support for the Joint Force and implementation of the technical
agreement signed between the United Nations, the European Union and G5 Sahel
States in February 2018. The report also highlights the challenges encountered by the
Joint Force and the implementation by the G5 Sahel States of a human rights an d
international humanitarian law compliance framework. Finally, as requested by the
Security Council in its resolution 2531 (2020), the report includes an assessment of
the implementation of paragraph 13 of resolution 2391 (2017), including with regard
to the human rights due diligence policy and the prospects of the G5 Sahel executive
secretariat and the Joint Force improving their autonomy and set ting up their own
procurement system.
3.
The reporting period was marked by a deterioration of the security situation in
the Sahel, with continued complex terrorist attacks on positions of national and
regional defence and security forces, especially in th e Liptako-Gourma region, where
the borders of Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger converge. The tri-border area remains
the main hotspot, despite the pressure of counter-terrorism operations and infighting
between the two main terrorist armed groups, Jama’a N usrat ul-Islam wa
al-Muslimin, affiliated with Al Qaida, and Islamic State in the Greater Sahara. An
uptick in attacks against civilians has been registered, including against local
authorities and religious figures. The western regions of the Niger have s een a
growing death toll among civilians in 2021. At least 300 people have been killed in
three major attacks in 2021, including the most recent attack on 21 March in the Tillia
area, in which at least 137 people were killed. The frequency of the use of im provised

21-05408 (E)

120521

*2105408*

S/2021/442

explosive devices against civilians and defence and security forces increased in
December 2020 and January 2021, in particular in central Mali and the south -west
region of Tillabéri in the Niger. Meanwhile, the number of financial extortions of th e
populations has continued to rise, notably in Mali and the Niger. While enhanced
regional military action is aimed at reversing the balance of power in the Liptako Gourma region, the threat of further destabilization and concern over the spread of
the security threat to the south and the West African coast are real.
4.
Intercommunal conflicts continued to add to the complexity of the security
environment in which the Joint Force operates. Often instrumentalized by local armed
groups and terrorist organizations, local conflict dynamics are exacerbated by an
acceleration of resource pressures driven by climate change and demographic
pressures, unmitigated by economic development or adaptation. The compounded
crises are devastating the region, putting millions at risk. The latest available data
indicate that, in 2021, 6.8 million people were food-insecure in G5 Sahel countries.
The threat of famine is now looming in Burkina Faso. Also, since 2018, in the
Liptako-Gourma region, the number of internally displaced people has risen
twentyfold. In G5 Sahel States, close to 2.2 million people were internally displaced
and more than 880,000 people were refugees. Large-scale displacement continued to
have an impact on State service provision and the availability of nat ural resources,
further exacerbating tension and social conflicts.

II. Operationalization of the Joint Force
5.
In Sector West between Mali and Mauritania, the Joint Force reported the
continued presence of armed terrorist groups around the Ouagadou forest. It also
reported sporadic clashes between Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin and
Islamic State in the Greater Sahara. In addition, in that area, deadly clashes between
traditional hunters and terrorist armed groups were reported.
6.
The Joint Force reported activity by armed groups in the southern part of Sector
East located between the Niger and Chad. In the northern part of Sector East, the
situation has reportedly been calmer than in other areas of operation of the Force.
While the two Force battalions in Madama (Niger) and Wour (Chad) have
encountered particular challenges linked to the activities of traffi ckers and elements
of Libya-based armed groups, their patrols have disrupted the flow of illegal
trafficking, including by considerably hampering the mobility of traffickers and other
armed bandits. In Sector Centre between Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger, the Joint
Force reported a certain respite as a result of coordinated actions by the forces on the
ground, namely the Joint Force, national forces and Operation Barkhane, joined by
Task Force Takuba. The Joint Force reported a disruption in the logistica l chains of
armed groups, in addition to attrition in their ranks. However, Sector Centre remains
the epicentre of the activities of armed terrorist groups in the areas of Joint Force
operations. The presence of terrorist armed groups is rapidly evolving i n an area of
action of several thousand square kilometres. It has become the theatre of recurrent
clashes between Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin and Islamic State in the
Greater Sahara. The Islamic State in the greater Sahara, although weakening and no
longer in a position to attack military camps as in 2019, has not disappeared. Jama'a
Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin continues to gain momentum by expanding its
regional influence and consolidating its organization. Currently, the group is
destabilizing the centre and the northern peripheries of Mali, as well as the northern
borders of Burkina Faso, and presents the highest threat.

2/13

21-05408

S/2021/442

A.

Military component
7.
During the previous and current reporting periods, two major operations were
conducted in Sector Centre, in coordination with Operation Barkhane, aimed at
improving the security situation. Operation Sama 2, which started on 1 August 2020
with the aim of consolidating control of the zone secured during Operation Sama 1,
ended on 31 January 2021. It was also aimed at building trust between the Joint Force
and civilian populations, facilitating the gradual return of national armed forces and
local authorities and enabling civil-military projects. However, few State
representatives have returned to the area. The offensive phase of Operation Sama 2
started in the first week of November 2020 and continued until the beginning of
January 2021, strengthened by the deployment of the eighth Chadian battalion in early
March 2021.
8.
During Operation Sama 2, Boulikessi (Mali) came under attack on several
occasions and a major attack took place on 24 January 2021, demonstrating that the
terrorist armed groups, although often disorganized, weakened and losing ground,
remain determined to pursue their fight. During the military campaign, the Joint Force
reported a strong dynamic of power struggles among terrorist armed groups over
influence and territorial control and noted that this dynamic was likely to continue.
In March 2021, the Force launched Operation Sama 3, aimed at strengthening and
consolidating the outcome of Operation Sama 1 and Operation Sama 2.
9.
Despite the challenging security situation, the Joint Force command has
assessed that Operation Sama 1 and Operation Sama 2 have had a notably positive
impact. The operations have helped to keep up the pressure on armed and terrorist
groups and to reinforce trust between the Force and civilian populations. The Joint
Force also reports increased collaboration between its units and the population.
10. The eighth Chadian battalion of the Joint Force, comprising 1,200 elements,
deployed in the tri-border area at the beginning of March 2021. The battalion took up
residence in Téra, 160 km north-west of Niamey, near the border with Burkina Faso.
Téra is also where the future Joint Force logistics base will be located for its
operations in the Liptako-Gourma region. This brings the total number of Joint Force
troops to 5,534 soldiers, 305 of whom are securing the four multinational command
posts. However, the impact of the evolving situation in Chad on the country’s
engagement in the Sahel is to be closely monitored.
11. During the reporting period, the Joint Force and partners, such as Operation
Barkhane, the Malian Defence and Security Forces and MINUSMA, continued the ir
coordination through joint meetings and bilateral exchanges. Operational
coordination meetings have also continued on a monthly basis to share assessments
between all partner forces.

B.

Police component
12. There was slow progress in the operationalization of the police component,
especially with regard to the Special Investigation Units. As far as the provost units
are concerned, 13 gendarmes per unit have been deployed within their respective
battalions, in addition to 11 gendarmes in the second Chadian battalion, and are
operational for the most part. For the latter battalion, specific equipment is on its way
and is in the process of being put in place. During the reporting period, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) participated in
the predeployment training of three incoming provost units, from 25 to 29 January
2021 for those units destined for the two Malian battalions in Goma Coura, Mali;

21-05408

3/13

S/2021/442

from 8 to 12 March for those destined for Boulikessi; and from 29 March to 2 April
2021 for those destined for the Chadian battalion in Wour.
13. During the reporting period, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) and OHCHR continued to assist the Joint Force with strengthening
its police component through the development of a specialized training programme.
Initiated in July 2020, the Joint Force, UNODC, OHCHR, the International Criminal
Police Organization (INTERPOL)/the African Police Cooperation Organization
(AFRIPOL), the European Union and MINUSMA jointly developed a specialized
training programme for the police component, which was validated during a
workshop held in Niamey from 16 to 19 November 2020, followed by the delivery of
the first pilot training programme in Nouakchott from 22 to 26 M arch 2021.

C.

G5 Sahel executive secretariat
14. In order to strengthen the coordination of G5 Sahel activities, each G5 Sahel
member State established a national coordination committee made up of experts from
the governance, development and security sectors. The national coordination
committees operate under the authority of the G5 Sahel executive secretariat with the
main mission of coordinating and monitoring the implementation of the framework
of cooperation between the G5 Sahel member States.
15. UNODC continued to assist the G5 Sahel executive secretariat in its effort to
mainstream gender in the security sector. From 16 to 19 March 2021, a workshop
co-organized by UNODC and OHCHR was held in Nouakchott for heads and senior
officials of security forces from G5 Sahel countries on gender diversity as a driver of
change, in accordance with the G5 Sahel plan of action to increase the number of
women in uniform in the defence and security sectors of the region. OHCHR and
UNODC continue to advocate for the increased nomination of women in senior
military and police ranks, noting their importance in enabling armed forces to
effectively fulfil their mandates, through inter alia, bringing additional perspectives
in operation planning and key decision-making, especially with respect to decisions
affecting civilians, particularly women and girls, as well as greater levels of
community access, thus enhancing the protection of civilians. During the reporting
period, the executive secretariat continued to pursue its efforts to develop a regional
strategy for the protection of civilians in G5 Sahel countries with the support of
OHCHR, including by organizing with the Joint Force a dedicated workshop in Mali
from 23 to 26 November 2020 to inform the future regional strategy for the protection
of civilians and to engage with a wide range of stakeholders, including national
human rights institutions, local and traditional authorities and civil society.

D.

Issues and challenges
16. The Joint Force continued to face major challenges to its operational and
logistical capacities with regard to providing troop supplies, an issue which was
worsened by a lack of suitable means of transport. More generally, equipment
shortfalls remained a daily concern that constrained the efficiency and operations of
troops deployed in garrisons, as well as affecting morale. For instance, while the
arrival of the Chadian battalion of 1,200 troops was an extremely positive sign, the
Chadian soldiers and their equipment had to travel more than 2,000 km, from
N’guigmi to Niamey, during which they experienced logistical difficulties, in
particular related to the supply of fuel and the breakdown of certain military
equipment. Likewise, medical and casualty evacuation capacities continue d to be a
challenge in all sectors.

4/13

21-05408

S/2021/442

17. The Joint Force does not possess air capacity, although such capacity remains
critical to the effective execution of anti-terrorist efforts. Furthermore, the Force
would benefit from a comprehensive intelligence system. In this regard, the
acquisition of sensors and surveillance equipment, such as short-range ground radars
or drones, is envisaged under European Union funding. In order for the Joint Force to
meet its objectives, effective coordination with the various forces on the ground is
crucial, in addition to strengthening local dialogue and intelligence -sharing.
Contingents from different operations must strengthen their intelligence cooperation
in order to reach a common understanding of the situation, especiall y when they are
co-located, as in Gao, Mali.

III. Implementation of the human rights and international
humanitarian law compliance framework of the Joint Force
and the human rights due diligence policy
18. MINUSMA and OHCHR continued to monitor the human rights situation in
relation to operations conducted by the Joint Force. During the reporting period,
several security-related incidents amounting to serious human rights violations were
documented in Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali and the Niger. The direct responsibility of
the Force was established in a number of incidents.
19. During the month of February 2021, the Chadian battalion of the Joint Force
based in Wour arrested 36 individuals, including 27 suspected minors, during routine
patrols. On 13 February, the general staff of the Chadian armed forces handed over
the minors to the Ministry for Women and Childhood Protection. OHCHR in Chad is
following up closely on the case.
20. On 4 March, OHCHR monitored the trials in Néma, Mauritania, of two former
Joint Force soldiers, who were charged with murder and rape, respectively. The
alleged perpetrator of murder was found guilty under article 271 of the Mauritanian
Criminal Code and was sentenced to death under article 280 of the Criminal Code.
The sentence was commuted to life imprisonment because Mauritania has had a
moratorium on the use of the death penalty in place since 1987. Regarding the rape
case, the alleged perpetrator was found guilty under article 309 of the Mauritanian
Criminal Code and was sentenced to four years’ imprisonment.
21. On 28 March 2021, several allegations of sexual violence (including three cases
of rape, one of a minor girl) that occurred between 15 and 27 March, allegedly
involving soldiers of the eighth Chadian battalion of the Joint Force in Téra, the Niger,
were brought to the attention of OHCHR and the Force. The Force immediately
implemented a number of measures, in accordance with procedures for the conduct
of internal investigations, as part of the compliance framework. The measures
included, notably, the establishment of an internal commission of inquiry on 30 March
and the deployment of a delegation on 31 March, led by the Commander of Sector
Centre, to give instructions to the troops in Téra and to meet with departmental
authorities and community leaders in an effort to reassure the local population. The
Human Rights Commission of the Niger also launched an investigation and issued a
communiqué on 2 April confirming, inter alia, the three rapes. On 3 April, th e Force
issued a communiqué confirming the reports of sexual violence and announcing a
series of measures, including the opening of an investigation into the involvement of
Force members and the ensuing disciplinary and legal action against them, as
appropriate, to address the reports. On the same day, a similar statement was issued
by the authorities of Chad. As part of its ongoing support for the Force’s
implementation of its compliance framework, OHCHR continues to support the Force

21-05408

5/13

S/2021/442

with ongoing monitoring; implementing preventive and remedial measures; and
providing other technical assistance to the Force, as needed.
22. With OHCHR support, the Joint Force continued to register progress in the
operationalization of its human rights and international huma nitarian law compliance
framework, including by developing several internal mechanisms that help to enhance
its ability to comply with international law in the conduct of its operations. The
mechanisms include, in particular, the Casualty and Incident Trac king and Analysis
Cell, officially launched in Bamako on 27 January 2021; the practice of sending radio
messages before operations to all intervention units on their obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights law; and monitoring of the c apture,
retention and transfer of detainees.
23. During the reporting period, MINUSMA conducted 28 human rights due
diligence policy risk assessments on requests for United Nations operational support
for the Joint Force, which resulted in a recommendation to provide support. As part
of the risk assessments, a number of mitigation measures were identified, including
with regard to the implementation of the Force’s compliance framework, with a view
to reducing the identified risks and communicating them to t he Force to ensure full
compliance with the principles of the human rights due diligence policy. The
measures included (a) the effective implementation of the standard operating
procedures for internal inquiries, which were launched in respect of the serie s of
human rights violations communicated to the Force (including those in public
reports); (b) the finalization of key framework documents, notably on the use of
brigades during joint operations; (c) the sharing of lists of members of battalions
operating under the Force command for screening purposes; and (d) the sharing of
information on incidents that had an impact on civilians during operations. The
nomination of a focal point by the Force and the systematic submission of the required
questionnaire prior to requests for support made it possible to accelerate the
processing of requests.
24. The ongoing challenge presented by the dual command lines of battalions
seconded to the Joint Force persists. Difficulties in distinguishing between operations
conducted in a national capacity and those conducted under the command of the Force
continue to have negative consequences in determining responsibility for incidents
involving civilians and other cases of serious human rights violations, especially in
cross-border operations. The establishment of a “deconfliction” mechanism involving
the MINUSMA Human Rights and Protection Division, the OHCHR compliance
framework project team, the Joint Force and the commands of the five countries has
been identified as a solution that would allow for information exchange and more
readability. Although most contingents hold sensitization sessions prior to the
deployment of their forces, it was also considered essential to increase tailored
training to build capacity and awareness with regard to international humanitarian
and human rights law before and during the conduct of joint operations, in particular
through the training of trainers.

IV. International support for the Joint Force
A.

Support from the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali
25. MINUSMA continued to provide logistical support to the seven battalions
operating under the command of the Joint Force within the framework of its mandate.
Two requests related to petrol, oil and lubricants and casualty evacuation were
received between 8 November 2020 and 30 March 2021 and were followed by the

6/13

21-05408

S/2021/442

required human rights due diligence policy assessments. In terms of average response
time, MINUSMA was able to adhere to the 14 days prescribed in the technical
agreement between the G5 Sahel, the United Nations and the European Commission,
except in relation to petrol, which required a longer purchasing time because it is
included only in very small quantities in the standard fuel contract hel d by
MINUSMA, and the amount purchased was insufficient to satisfy the demands of the
Force. All requests from the Force have been honoured to date.
Update on requests for life support consumables received by contingents
26. On 10 October 2020, MINUSMA received the Joint Force’s quarterly support
plan for the period from October to December 2020, which included 0.6 million litres
of fuel and lubricants, amounting to $0.7 million; this represents a collection and
consumption rate of 100 per cent of the quarterly support plan. The Mission responded
positively to the plan and to specific requests, which are subject to human rights risk
assessment and due diligence.
27. On 6 January 2021, the Joint Force submitted its quarterly support plan for the
period from January to March 2021. The quantities and pick-up locations for the items
contained in the plan are summarized in the table below.
Pick-up locations and items requested in the quarterly support plan
(January-March)

Location

Combat
ration packs
(packs)

Fuel (l)

Water (l)

Oil 50 (l)

Grease (kg)

Coolant (l)

Bamako

–

474 300

–

7 000

720

720

Gao

–

60 000

–

1 000

120

120

Sévaré

–

80 000

–

1 000

120

120

–

614 300

–

9 000

960

960

Total

Update on the process of identification of contractors to procure and deliver
life support consumables to contingents operating outside Mali
28. Under resolution 2531 (2020), the Mission’s mandate to provide support to the
Joint Force was enhanced and the Mission was allowed to contract private companies
for the delivery of life support consumables to contingents operating outside of Mali
within the framework of Force operations. During the reporting period, MINUSMA
held a series of consultations with the Force and the G5 Sahel executive secretariat.
The consultations provided the strategic direction that guided experts from both
MINUSMA and the Force to gather and organize key information for the preparation
of statements of requirements specifying the details of the services required from
prospective contractors. Contractors should be capable of delivering life support
consumables closer to the area of operations of the Force’s contingents while
managing associated security risks.
29. There was significant outreach to facilitate wide dissemination of the call for
expressions of interest in providing the required services, including through G5 Sahel
countries. The procurement process for life support consumables is currently ong oing.
It is expected that contracts will be awarded by June 2021 and that services would
begin thereafter, estimated to be one to three months. Meanwhile, MINUSMA
continued to support the Joint Force on the basis of the current support model until
new arrangements are in place.

21-05408

7/13

S/2021/442

Update on engineering and casualty and medical evacuation
30. Neither engineering support nor casualty evacuation and transport took place
during the period under review, although the capacity was made available in
accordance with the Joint Force planned operations.
Update on resource mobilization efforts
31. The European Union earmarked a total of 10 million euros for MINUSMA
support for the Joint Force. On 29 December 2020, the European Union disbursed the
second tranche of 5 million euros ($6.1 million). MINUSMA has therefore received
the total amount of 10 million euros (equivalent to $12.3 million).
32. The European Union pledged an additional 7 million euros ($8.5 million) to
cover expanded support for the Joint Force until February 2022. Given that the
contract period will run for a year at the time of signature, and in the absence of any
indication of financial support beyond February 2022, it will be important to ensure
that the funding is aligned with the contract period.
33. The Mission’s operational and logistical support for the Joint Force has so far
relied on European Union funds. While European Union support in this regard is to
be commended, the reliance on voluntary financial contributions continues to raise
issue with respect to the predictability and therefore sustainability of resourcing.

B.

Multilateral support
34. On 15 and 16 February, the seventh Summit of Heads of State of the Group of
Five for the Sahel was held in N’Djamena. The Summit, which fo r the first time saw
the participation of other West African leaders, such as the President of Ghana, Nana
Akuffo-Addo, and the President of Senegal, Macky Sall, welcomed the efforts of
regional defence and security forces. Praising the contribution of Operation Barkhane,
the Summit called for increased collaboration between the G5 Sahel Joint Force and
the Multinational Joint Task Force of the Lake Chad Basin Commission. It also called
for a Chapter VII mandate for the Joint Force of the G5 Sahel and for t he creation of
a dedicated United Nations office to support the Joint Force. The Summit also
welcomed the contribution from Senegal of 1 billion CFA francs ($1.8 million)
towards the operationalization of the Joint Force. On 16 February, on the margins of
the Summit, the members of the Coalition for the Sahel appointed Djimet Adoum of
Chad as the High Representative of the Coalition.
35. On 2 March, the Coalition for the Sahel held a meeting to review the
communiqué adopted at the N’Djamena Summit and to discuss the way forward,
including with regard to the fight against terrorism, the strengthening of the capacity
of the national armed forces and the Joint Force, the deployment of State services and
basic social services, and development actions. On 10 March, the Coalition held a
ministerial meeting to assess the situation in the Sahel. This was followed by a second
ministerial meeting of foreign ministers, on 19 March 2021, during which the
Coalition adopted a road map setting clear milestones for the com mon objectives of
Coalition members in the Sahel, including the operationalization of the “civil and
political surge” called for at the N’Djamena Summit. Members of the Coalition
unanimously hailed the road map as an opportunity to define the “civil and po litical
surge” in practice.
36. On 2 April, the Minister of the Armed Forces of France and her Estonian and
Czech counterparts confirmed the full operational capacity of Task Force Takuba
during a joint visit to Mali. Launched on 27 March 2020 at the initi ative of France,
Task Force Takuba is part of Operation Barkhane and was deployed in its most recent

8/13

21-05408

S/2021/442

major operations, namely Operation Bourrasque and Operation Eclipse. It is made up
of some special forces from European Member States that train, advise an d
accompany Malian units in combat in the Liptako-Gourma region. In Gao and
Ménaka (Mali), Estonian, Czech and Swedish forces were engaged in daily operations
in support of Malian units. Italy began its deployment, and other countries plan to
join Task Force Takuba in the coming months.

C.

Regional and subregional initiatives
37. Since the decision by the Assembly of the African Union, during its thirty -third
session in February 2020, in consultation with the ministries of defence of the
G5 Sahel countries and the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
to develop a framework for the deployment of an African Union force composed of
3,000 troops to reinforce the G5 Sahel Joint Force, efforts have continued towards
finalizing of the concept of operations and troop deployments. The African Union
Commission is conducting consultations with ECOWAS and the countries of the
region. In the meantime, ECOWAS has continued to hold discussions on the adoption
of national strategies to combat violent extremism.
38. On 8 and 9 February, the Special Representative of the Secretary -General for
West Africa and the Sahel, Mohamed Ibn Chambas, chaired a meeting of the steering
committee of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel in a context
characterized by the ongoing coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, as well as
security challenges that have caused delays in programme delivery, while
implementing partners have had to reduce their footprints on the ground. The meeting
provided an opportunity to take stock and highlight progress across various pillars of
work, and reflect on ways and means to improve results on the ground. United Nations
entities will continue to engage regional entities, such as the G5 Sahel, the Lake Chad
Basin Commission, the Liptako-Gourma Authority and others, to align the strategy
with their priorities and plans. Those various elements are reflected in the road map
for the implementation of the strategy for 2021 and 2022.

V. Assessment of the model for the provision of support by the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali to the Joint Force
39. In its resolution 2531 (2020), the Security Council requested the SecretaryGeneral to include in his April 2021 report on the G5 Sahel an assessment of the
implementation of paragraph 13 of resolution 2391 (2017), including with regard to
the human rights due diligence policy and the prospects of the executive secretariat
and the Joint Force improving their autonomy and setting up their own procurement
system. This assessment was conducted by the Secretariat in consultation with
relevant stakeholders and its main findings are summarized below.

A.

Support provided by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali to the Joint Force and
implementation of the tripartite mechanism
40. While MINUSMA support is additional to bilateral support and G5 Sahel
Member States’ direct contributions to battalions, it has contributed to the success of
Joint Force operations. The Joint Force and partners qualified logistical and
operational support by MINUSMA as essential. In particular, the provision of life

21-05408

9/13

S/2021/442

support consumables was deemed to be a critical contributing factor in increasing and
sustaining the Force’s activities. The Force and partners also highlighted their
appreciation for the Mission’s medical evacuations of Force soldiers within Mali. The
Force urged MINUSMA and other partners to continue the current coordination and
pooling of logistical, operational, technical and financial capacities.
41. Nevertheless, several challenges have hampered the provision of logistical and
operational support by MINUSMA. MINUSMA and partners have indicated that, in
some instances, the Joint Force seems to lack the capacity to collect the delivered life
support consumables from the designated collection points within Mali. In other
instances, in Chad and Mauritania, MINUSMA received reports of life support
consumables being delivered and collected but not reaching the battalions, which
indicates the Force’s lack of capacity to travel long distances to deliver supplies.
While it has proved difficult under the support m odel to ensure that support reaches
battalions, the enhanced support model could overcome this, as commercial
contractors will be responsible for directly delivering supplies to the battalions on the
basis of locations agreed and identified by the Force. T his approach would help the
Commander of the Force to ensure that all battalions under his command receive the
support needed to conduct their operations. For example, the Force has contracted a
company in Mali that collects petroleum products from Bamako and dispatches them
to selected locations.
42. The technical agreement signed by the United Nations, the European
Commission and the G5 Sahel on 23 February 2018 and amended on 25 February
2020 requires the Joint Force to submit quarterly support requests for life support
consumables to be procured by MINUSMA, providing detailed projections of the
required quantities for a period of three months. Frequent delays in receiving this
information have rendered the provision of life support consumables by MINUSMA
challenging at times. It is important for the Force to take the necessary steps to
improve its internal planning processes. This issue is all the more important given
that the larger-scale support to be delivered by a commercial contractor under the
enhanced support model requires even more rigorous planning.
43. While resolution 2531 (2020) extends the provision of life support consumables
to contingents operating outside Mali, the Joint Force has expressed the need to
further extend operational support to include engineering support and casualty and
medical evacuations to the remaining four countries, especially considering the high
number of attacks in the tri-border area between Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger.
The Force has taken the view that this geographical extension of the Mission’s
essential support can be achieved only through the establishment of a dedicated,
separate United Nations support office providing full logistical and operational
support, including transport, as well as tactical and strategic support to the Joint
Force.

B.

Implementation of the human rights due diligence policy
44. The human rights due diligence policy was acknowledged as an important lever
for achieving progress in the implementation, by recipients of United Nations support,
of their obligations under international human rights and humanitarian law. The
policy has also been important in placing human rights and the protection of civilians
at the centre of support for the Joint Force, with OHCHR staff in all five countries
tailoring the implementation of the policy to the specificities of the Force and the
high-risk environment in which it operates.
45. Nevertheless, many challenges remain. Overall, MINUSMA and partners also
highlighted that G5 Sahel member States must, when conducting Joint Force

10/13

21-05408

S/2021/442

operations, continue to uphold their obligations under international humanitarian,
human rights and refugee law by employing a more efficient mechanism t o ensure
greater transparency, discipline and accountability in response to grave human rights
violations. MINUSMA and partners noted the lack of information from the Force on
the conduct of operations, including their possible impact on civilians, as well as
information on the pending investigation of or appropriate follow -up on human rights
violations allegedly committed by elements of the Force. G5 Sahel diplomatic and
Joint Force interlocutors noted that operational constraints mainly linked to
limitations in the application of the human rights due diligence policy in counterterrorism operations should be taken into account. Most interlocutors highlight that
the policy, which involved capacity-building of the forces under the Joint Force
command, should be considered a long-term endeavour.
46. The interlocutors made a number of recommendations going forward, including
with regard to the harmonization of rotation plans among Joint Force contingents. In
addition, to further strengthen the capacity of the Force, the troop- and policecontributing countries should continue to prepare their contingents at the national
level, including by conducting adequate predeployment training and screening. In that
regard, the compliance framework project stands ready to e ngage with the national
authorities of the G5 Sahel countries and to provide support in the alignment of their
selection and screening methods, including through sharing proven regional and
global best practices and standards.
47. Further progress in the implementation by MINUSMA of the human rights due
diligence policy would require stronger coordination among partners, alongside
continued efforts to strengthen the capacity of the United Nations to monitor and
implement the policy and the compliance framework on the ground.

C.

Prospects of the executive secretariat and the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel improving their autonomy and setting
up their own procurement system
48. In its resolution 2531 (2020), the Security Council stresses that operational and
logistical support from MINUSMA, as per the conditions set by resolution 2391
(2017), is a temporary measure to allow the Joint Force to enhance its ability to
deliver on its mandate. In addition, the strategic concept of operations of the Force of
8 March 2017 provides that the G5 Sahel countries are responsible for supporting its
forces, through their national logistics chains. This support covers administration and
finance, information and communication systems, equipment, logistical support
(water, fuel and ammunition), medical support, accommodation, infrastructure,
screening and training. While MINUSMA and other partners h ave a role to play, the
provision of support remains the primary responsibility of G5 Sahel countries.
49. The G5 Sahel executive secretariat is tasked with carrying out the administrative
and financial command of the Joint Force, covering personnel costs, the operating
budget and investments. Following the Conference of Heads of State of the G5 Sahel
held on 6 February 2018, a trust fund was created. To date, the fund has received
contributions from Rwanda ($500,000), the West African Economic and Monetary
Union (approximately $867,000), the United Arab Emirates (10 million euros) and
Turkey ($5 million). A second tranche of $500,000 was pledged by Rwanda, in
addition to $100 million pledged by Saudi Arabia and a further 20 million euros
pledged by the United Arab Emirates. The executive secretariat continues to advocate
for the disbursement of the remaining pledged funds and for new pledges.
50. Although placed under the functional authority of the executive secretariat, to
which the role of authorizing officer has been delegated, the trust fund has its own

21-05408

11/13

S/2021/442

staff and a specific internal manual that defines the rules of administrative, financial
and accounting management of the fund. The trust fund mechanism is managed by a
support committee and a control committee. The support committee is a multilateral
body that acts as an interface between the Joint Force and the executive secretariat.
The control committee is in charge of validating financial procedures and its reports
are submitted to the Minister of Defence of the State holding the rotating G5 Sahel
presidency, who exercises authority over the budget, while the Executive Secretary
exercises delegated authority over the budget.
51. G5 Sahel stakeholders and partners confirmed that the support committee ha s
enabled the purchase of equipment for the Joint Force (84 vehicles amounting to
$11 million – 42 general-purpose trucks and 42 fuel and oil tankers) by conducting
the necessary procurement, which was praised as transparent by partners of the
G5 Sahel. Partners pointed to this as a positive indication that the G5 Sahel has gained
autonomy in managing administrative and financial matters linked to the trust fund,
including through an ability to use its own procurement system. It was highlighted
that, while the G5 Sahel executive secretariat, as supported by the support committee,
has the legal and technical capacity for procuring fuel, oil, combat rations and
equipment for the Force, it does not yet have the necessary expertise in regard to
engineering and it therefore does not currently conduct or fund projects related to
premises and infrastructure.

VI. Observations
52. Since the Pau Summit in January 2020, the Joint Force has continued to steadily
grow in strength. I am encouraged by the deployment of the eighth battalion of the
Chadian Army at the beginning of March 2021, which is expected to consolidate the
gains of the Force. While the Force is becoming increasingly operational, it still lacks
the necessary financial and logistical means to become autonomous. Therefore, the
sustainability of the Force will depend on predictable and adequate resources. I
reiterate my call for a more comprehensive solution that ensures predictable funding
of Force operations.
53. I acknowledge the importance of Operation Barkhane in contributing to the
weakening of violent extremist groups and allowing the Joint Force and national
armies to gain strength. In this regard, I take note of the full operational capacity of
Task Force Takuba to support the Malian armed forces in combat. I also note the
growing commitment of the international community and the States of the region to
the fight against terrorism, demonstrated at the Summit of Heads of State of the
G5 Sahel in N’Djamena. I echo the need to continue the str engthening of the Joint
Force and pursue stabilization efforts in Mali while coordinating all initiatives.
54. I express my deep gratitude to my outgoing Special Representative for Mali,
Mahamat Saleh Annadif, and to all MINUSMA colleagues, who have spared no effort
to ensure that the Mission provides support to the Joint Force whenever it is requested.
Nevertheless, the operational and logistical support provided by MINUSMA to the
Force, in particular within the framework of the tripartite mechanism financ ed by the
European Union, continues to face challenges that hamper the implementation of the
Mission’s mandate in this regard. These difficulties highlight the challenges of the
current support model. Echoing the call of G5 Sahel States, some partners have
highlighted that the scale and nature of ongoing challenges in providing logistical and
operational support to the Force are unprecedented and therefore warrant a new
approach, fully backed by the political and financial commitment of the Security
Council and regional partners.

12/13

21-05408

S/2021/442

55. I commend the G5 Sahel member States and all partners for their tireless efforts
to address the security challenges faced by the Sahel region. However, I am
particularly concerned about the continued deterioration of the situati on. We must
enhance our partnerships and redouble our efforts in support of the people and
Governments of the G5 Sahel member States. This is also critical to preventing a
potential spillover of the crisis, as terrorist groups reportedly seek to expand the ir
spheres of influence beyond the Sahel. The United Nations stands ready to further
support the efforts of the G5 Sahel, including through capacity -building support in
areas such as prevention of violent extremism and radicalization, border security
management, cybersecurity and protection of vulnerable targets.
56. I acknowledge the renewed commitment made by the Heads of State of the
G5 Sahel and their partners at their Summit in N’Djamena to the principle that
compliance with human rights due diligence principles remains a prerequisite in the
fight against terrorism and should be the basis for the protection of civilians. The
persistence of human rights violations allegedly committed by security forces while
combating terrorism is, however, of great concern. In that context, with regard to the
serious allegations of sexual violence reportedly committed by members of the eighth
Chadian battalion of the Force deployed in the Niger in late March, I welcome the
prompt reaction of the Force and the authorities of Chad and the Niger and their
commitment to investigating the allegations and prosecuting the perpetrators. These
instances furthermore attest to the progress made by the Force towards the
implementation of the human rights and international humanitaria n law compliance
framework. It is essential that the victims of these and any other human rights
violations committed by security forces receive the justice they deserve.
57. I stress the need to strengthen the trust between civilians and armed forces and
I welcome the efforts of MINUSMA and OHCHR to advocate the inclusion of more
women in force generation. The presence of women officers enhances community
engagement strategies and positively contributes to the protection of civilians which
is central to achieving the mission. Therefore, coordination between civil and military
justice must be strengthened in accordance with international law.
58. Overall, the humanitarian situation in the Sahel is rapidly and significantly
deteriorating because of escalating conflict, rising food insecurity and the economic
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, driving humanitarian needs to unprecedented
levels. The Sahel is one of the regions of the world that is most exposed to disasters
and is a hotspot of climate change. For the Sahel, climate change is not a future
concern, it is a daily reality. Unpredictable weather patterns, droughts, floods and land
degradation are having a severe impact on fragile rural and pastoralist livelihoods,
fuelling intercommunal violence and forcing people to flee their homes.
59. Finally, I welcome the increasing commitments under the Coalition for the
Sahel, which aims to enable coherent action at the regional level, encompassing all
actors involved in the Sahel, whether in relation to security, political or development
issues. I reiterate the importance of providing a collective and united response to the
crisis in the Sahel. I note the growing recognition to shift from a security -centred
approach to one that includes development in parallel to the security efforts. There is
a need for all actors to scale up funding and support to address the root causes of
conflict in the fields of development, service delivery and governance.

21-05408

13/13
