S/PV.8472

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8472nd meeting

Tuesday, 26 February 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ndong Mba. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Equatorial Guinea)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Abrams/Mr. Ordeman

Agenda
The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-05542 (E)
*1905542*

S/PV.8472

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Belize, Brazil, the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Dominica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, Uruguay
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: Exactly a month ago, I briefed the
Security Council on the protracted crisis in Venezuela,
including its political, economic, human rights and
humanitarian dimensions (see S/PV.8452). Since then,
we have witnessed an alarming escalation of tensions.
As I reported in my previous briefing to the Council,
on 23 January the President of the National Assembly,
Juan Guaidó, invoked provisions of the Constitution to
declare himself interim President of Venezuela during
an opposition-led protest. The application of those
constitutional provisions was strongly contested by
the Government.
As part of the actions he has taken since then,
Mr. Guaidó announced that food and medical supplies
would be transported to Venezuela. In response, the
United States and other countries stockpiled food
and medical supplies at the Colombian and Brazilian
borders, as well as in Curaçao. Separately, the Russian
Federation and China delivered supplies to Venezuela
in coordination with the Venezuelan Government, to be
distributed to those in need.
On 22 February, the Venezuelan Government
temporarily closed several international bridges at
2/48

26/02/2019

the border with Colombia, as well as border crossings
with Brazil. It also increased its security presence in
those areas. On 23 February, Mr. Guaidó led efforts
by volunteers and lawmakers to transport food and
medicine that had been stocked in Brazil and Colombia
across the border to Venezuela. Violent incidents
occurred at different points along the borders with
Brazil and Colombia, as the Venezuelan security forces
blocked the aid supplies coming into Venezuela. At
the Colombia border, two trucks were burned as they
attempted to cross the border, with the Government
and opposition accusing each other of burning them.
According to Colombian migration authorities, at least
285 individuals were injured on the Colombian side.
It is our understanding that no aid from this site was
allowed in.
Along the Brazilian border, indigenous groups
supporting the opposition attempted to deliver aid
stockpiled in Brazil and met resistance. According to
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR), between 22 and 23 February four deaths
were confirmed near the Brazilian border, and another
64 individuals were injured, most of them by gunshot.
The OHCHR also received several reports pointing to
the involvement of pro-Government armed elements in
the violent attacks on protesters.
In a statement on 23 February, the Secretary-General
stated his shock and sadness at the recent violence and
loss of life that brought additional suffering to the
Venezuelan people. He reiterated the appeal he had
made to Venezuelan Foreign Minister Jorge Arreaza
on 22 February that lethal force not be used by anyone
under any circumstances. The Secretary-General also
called for calm and urged all actors to lower tensions
and pursue every effort to prevent further escalation.
United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights Michelle Bachelet condemned the violent scenes
that took place at various points along Venezuela’s
borders with Brazil and Colombia. She condemned
the excessive use of force by the Venezuelan security
forces and said the Government must stop its forces
from using it. She also urged the Government to rein in
its proxy groups and arrest those among them who have
used force against protesters.
The Secretary-General is concerned by the serious
humanitarian problems facing the country and their
impact on vulnerable populations. While the lack of
official data is a serious challenge in assessing the
19-05542

26/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

situation, available information depicts a grim reality,
with the economy continuing to deteriorate and with
people dying of preventable causes and leaving the
country in search of assistance. Civil society groups
report that maternal mortality has increased by over
50 per cent since 2017, as has the number of infant
deaths. Dialysis patients among other groups of people
that suffer from chronic conditions have taken to the
streets to protest the lack of medicines and services
they require to stay alive. Data used by the Pan
American Health Organization indicates that measles
is under control, but 80 per cent of hospitals lack the
required medicines, and 30 to 40 per cent of medical
personnel have left the country. New estimates by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the International Organization for Migration place at
3.4 million the number of Venezuelans who have left
the country.
In Venezuela, the United Nations system is working
in cooperation with relevant State institutions and other
actors to support efforts to address these challenges.
Seven resident agencies, funds and programmes and a
non-resident agency have moved from policy-oriented
support to a strengthened, prioritized and coordinated
United Nations effort that delivers assistance closest
to people in need. Since 2018, the United Nations has
been implementing a scaled-up effort that consists of
three pillars of action: life-saving, economic recovery
and conflict prevention and human rights. The scale-up
was developed in the context of the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework for Venezuela.
Delivery of assistance is guided by General Assembly
resolution 46/182 and the principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence. Such
assistance must be free from political objectives and
delivered on the basis of need.
Much more remains to be done to address the
extremely urgent needs of the Venezuelan people. The
United Nations is ready to continue expanding these
efforts. We will continue to act in accordance with
humanitarian principles working with Venezuelan
institutions to assist people in need. The SecretaryGeneral has stressed repeatedly the importance of these
guiding principles and has called on all stakeholders
and Member States to respect them.
As he has repeatedly stated, the Secretary-General
is ready to exercise his good offices if the parties avail
themselves of this option. Venezuelan actors across the
entire political spectrum have the responsibility to put

S/PV. 8472

the interests of the Venezuelan people at the centre of
their actions at this most critical time.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing today.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Abrams (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her very sobering
and comprehensive briefing.
We are here today because of the de facto Maduro
regime’s refusal to allow humanitarian aid to enter
Venezuela on 23 February, which led to deaths,
injuries and violence on two international borders.
Those actions showed once again the true intentions
and nature of the Maduro regime. Armed gangs, thugs
and criminals released from prisons were mobilized to
control the border. Their actions led to the burning of
humanitarian assistance rather than its protection.
And while Venezuelans were shot, beaten and
killed as they tried to bring food and medicine into
their country, Maduro was literally dancing in Caracas.
Four people died, more than 80 Venezuelans were
injured — it may be many more than that — after
vigilantes from the regime opened fire. Protesters,
aid workers and journalists marched to the border to
welcome much-needed aid and were instead greeted by
tear gas and rubber bullets.
The United States and the international community
must support the Venezuelan people as they strive
to reclaim their democracy. We should respect their
Constitution and their sovereignty, which is why we
must support Juan Guaidó’s interim presidency. And
we must address the de-stabilizing results of Maduro’s
corrupt, fraudulent and incompetent reign, which
just this weekend brought instability and violence
to the borders of two other Member States, Brazil
and Colombia.
Maduro, his cronies and some in this body claim
that delivering humanitarian assistance is a political
show and a cover for military intervention, but it is very
clear that only the Maduro regime is using violence,
only the regime has called in both its security forces and
armed gangs, only the regime has betrayed Venezuelan
independence and sovereignty by submitting to the
influence of Cuban officers who permeate the security
and intelligence agencies, and only the regime has a

19-055423/48

S/PV.8472

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

history of using humanitarian aid as both a political tool
for social control and a resource for rampant corruption.
Maduro wants to maintain power in the current
crisis, and he has continued to politicize aid, via
the Local Committees for Supply and Production
programme, providing benefits to his supporters while
rejecting the needs-based focus assistance must, as
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo said, have. Any
additional time Maduro spends in power is additional
time he will use to repress the Venezuelan people. That
has been proven time and again, and this weekend was
yet another example. And when he was brought face to
face with the truth — that contrary to his false claims
that aid was not needed, Venezuelan children were
filmed by Univisión combing through garbage to search
for food — what did Mr. Maduro do? He detained the
journalists, seized their equipment and ordered them
deported. But the truth remains, and the sad plight of
millions of Venezuelans remains unchanged.
We are grateful for the leadership of our partners
in supporting humanitarian assistance for the people of
Venezuela and supporting their demand for democracy.
The European Union, Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Guatemala, Honduras, Panama and Peru all
swiftly condemned the use of violence and called for
the delivery of much-needed humanitarian assistance.
Their words and their actions can make a real difference
in this crisis.
The cure for this misery and tyranny is a free, fair
and transparent election that embraces all sectors of
society and all political parties. That, of course, includes
Chavistas, whose party has been usurped, much like the
country itself, by Maduro. We believe that both Guaidó
supporters and Chavistas can rebuild their country
together and can construct a newly prosperous and
democratic Venezuela. We are also deeply concerned
about the safety of interim President Guaidó upon his
return to Venezuela. It is our duty as Council members
to ensure that interim President Guaidó is able to return
home freely and safely.
Now is the time to strengthen our commitment to
the brave Venezuelan people. We call on the members of
the Security Council to join us in meeting the growing
needs in Venezuela and the region. We call on Member
States to consider what resources and tools they have to
contribute to Venezuelan democracy and to pressure the
illegitimate Maduro regime to peacefully step down.
We ask that others join us in sanctioning those who
4/48

26/02/2019

were involved in the violence over the past weekend and
who are fattened by the spoils of the Maduro regime’s
corruption. We ask that Member States contribute to
addressing the humanitarian situation in Venezuela,
as dozens of nations generously have already done.
We ask that they recognize the nature of the Maduro
regime and question the purpose and likely outcome
of so-called dialogue with someone who would rather
block and burn donated medicine and bread than see
it in the hands of Venezuelan children. Ask Jorge
Ramos of Univisión about the value of dialogue with
Nicolás Maduro.
The people of Venezuela need our solidarity and
our help if they are to prevail against a vicious and
violent regime, emerge into democracy and begin to
rebuild their country. Let us resolve to give them that
help, to give them that solidarity and assistance.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening of this timely meeting and the
important information provided by Ms. DiCarlo.
Peru and the Governments of the region that
make up the Lima Group met yesterday in the city of
Bogotá and adopted a declaration on the serious crisis
affecting Venezuela — which was transmitted to you,
Mr. President, for distribution as an official document
of the Security Council — the main points of which are
reflected in my statement today.
In that declaration, the Lima Group condemns the
violent repression of Nicolás Maduro’s illegitimate
regime, which, ignoring the suffering of the Venezuelan
population and the appeals of the international
community, prevented the entry of basic necessities and
international assistance last weekend. Those deliberate
actions have caused deaths and injuries on the border
with Colombia and Brazil. Those actions have
aggravated the risk to the life, dignity and integrity
of the Venezuelan people, and have affected regional
peace and security.
This situation is compounded by the massive
migration crisis involving more than 3.4 million
Venezuelan migrants and refugees who have fled
tyranny, abuse, poverty and corruption, which has
forced almost every South American country to adopt
emergency measures to accommodate those people
in need.
Today Peru wants to be the voice of the almost
700,000 Venezuelans it has welcomed in its territory in
19-05542

26/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

reiterating its unwavering commitment to democratic
transition and the institutional, economic and social
rebuilding of Venezuela, while expressing our solidarity
with its courageous and resilient brotherly people.
The continuation of this illegitimate regime in and of
itself represents an unprecedented threat to the peace,
security, freedom and prosperity of the entire region:
In the past month, ever since the Council met to
address the situation in Venezuela (see S/PV.8452), we
have observed a rapid deterioration of the humanitarian
and human rights situation in that country. More than
80 per cent of the population is experiencing food
insecurity as a result of the intentional policies of the
Maduro regime, which deprives its people of food and
medicine, as well as access to basic services, in order to
ensure that it remains in power.
We have also seen the use of indiscriminate violence
by armed groups in the service of a regime that has been
accused of the systematic and strategic use of murder,
imprisonment, torture, rape and other forms of sexual
violence, with the aim of terrorizing the Venezuelan
people and crushing opposition to the regime. We
condemn the use of violence by the dictatorship against
its population, which is expressed, among other forms,
in the unjust imprisonment of political prisoners and
arbitrarily detained journalists.
Against the backdrop of the ongoing commission
of those serious crimes with impunity, we renew our
request to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court to initiate a prompt investigation into the crimes
against humanity committed by the Maduro regime
in Venezuela since 12 February 2014. We also call on
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to address the situation in that country, and on
the Human Rights Council to initiate investigations to
bring those responsible to justice.
Peru, together with the Lima Group, reiterates its
conviction that a transition to democracy must be carried
out by Venezuelans themselves peacefully, within
the framework of the Constitution and international
law, and supported by political and diplomatic means,
without the use of force. We therefore back the need for
the prompt holding of free, fair and credible elections
open to the participation of all political forces, with
international support and monitoring, organized by a
neutral and legitimately constituted electoral authority.
That course of action is necessary given the
regime’s repeated and proven lack of commitment to

S/PV. 8472

promoting peaceful and negotiated solutions through
dialogue. Past attempts have been used only to gain
time and then engage in new abuses and violations of
human rights.
Consequently, Peru reaffirms its recognition
of, and support for, the National Assembly and the
interim President of Venezuela, Juan Guaidó, and his
representatives in their efforts to restore democracy,
focus urgently on the humanitarian crisis and rebuild
the economy. In that connection, we join the Lima
Group in calling on the armed forces, the courts and the
justice system in Venezuela to recognize the interim
President, respect his constitutional powers and stop
being used as instruments of oppression against their
own people.
We welcome the growing support of a large
number of States that are committed to democracy and
have recognized President Guaidó. We call on those
members of the international community that maintain
links with the Maduro regime to facilitate the search for
solutions that will allow for a democratic transition and
the holding of elections in Venezuela. The Lima Group
has also called on the Secretary-General, in accordance
with his competencies, to mobilize the United Nations
system to react to events in Venezuela. In the meantime,
we will continue to advocate for addressing this serious
situation in this forum, as well as in the Organization
of American States.
In conclusion, I would like to acknowledge the
courage and determination of the Venezuelan people in
their heroic struggle to regain stability and democracy
in their country, as well as to reaffirm our solidarity
with, and full commitment to, Venezuelans’ right to
live in democracy and freedom.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, for her very
informative briefing on the unrelenting tragic situation
facing the Venezuelan people.
As Venezuela undergoes the most serious
humanitarian crisis in its history and civilians,
especially women and children, are dying for lack
of access to adequate health care and basic needs,
Mr. Maduro’s regime decided on 23 February to
prohibit international aid from reaching the country’s
population. His forces did not hesitate to kill, and
they wounded several hundred people in clashes with
unarmed civilians on the borders. The regime resorted

19-055425/48

S/PV.8472

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

to using armed militias in its pay, known for their
particular brutality. Hundreds of Venezuelan soldiers
preferred to defect rather than attack their compatriots.
Since the beginning of this crisis, France has
affirmed its unfailing support for the Venezuelan people
and their legitimate demands. We are referring to the
women and men who are suffering from shortages in
basic necessities and a health-care system in shambles;
to the women and men who have had to flee their country,
as they can no longer live in dignity and security; and
to the women and men who are calling for the return
of democracy and the rule of law in Venezuela. In that
regard, I would like to stress two points.
First, this political and humanitarian crisis did not
come about by chance. As the European Union High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
and Vice-President of the European Commission,
Ms. Federica Mogherini, recalled on 24 February,
“The origins of the ongoing crisis in Venezuela are
political and institutional; hence, the solution can
only be a political one”.
Accordingly, the crisis is the result of the regime’s
multiple violations of the rule of law and the Venezuelan
Constitution, which, on 20 May 2018, culminated in the
holding of presidential elections lacking in transparency
and credibility and held in oppressive circumstances.
Nicolás Maduro, who claimed to be the winner, enjoys
no legitimacy based on that claim. Many countries,
including France and its European partners, drew the
necessary conclusions. The President of the National
Assembly, Juan Guaidó, became interim President,
not propped up by foreign support but through respect
for the Constitution of Venezuela, in order to organize
the holding of new, free, credible and transparent
presidential elections.
Although the situation seems at a stalemate,
the European Union and Uruguay have launched an
international contact group in which France is taking
part. The group has two clear goals, which France shares.
The first is to encourage a negotiated and peaceful exit
out of the crisis, as the use of force and violence must
be avoided in Venezuela. France especially stresses the
latter point. There can only be a political and peaceful
solution to the crisis, and such a solution involves the
holding of democratic presidential elections as soon
as possible. The second goal is to allow the delivery
of international aid, in accordance with international
6/48

26/02/2019

humanitarian principles, so as to meet the urgent needs
of the Venezuelan people.
In blocking humanitarian aid in the middle of an
unprecedented crisis the regime is acting disgracefully
in the eyes of the international community and its own
people. For several years now, millions of Venezuelans
have faced the greatest challenges in terms of providing
food and caring for themselves, as victims of a severely
corrupt system. In its national capacity and under the
aegis of the European Union, France is committed to
helping those women and men who are in desperate need.
We will pursue our efforts in close cooperation with
the relevant United Nations agencies, with full respect
for the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence. In particular, we must collectively
increase our efforts to help international, governmental
and non-governmental organizations meet the needs of
refugees and migrants from Venezuela.
We call on the Venezuelan regime to demonstrate
humanity and facilitate access for United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations to carry
out their activities in the country aimed at alleviating
the suffering of the Venezuelan people. It is a question
of life or death for thousands of people; each minute
we lose represents lives lost. I commend once again the
courage of those Venezuelans who have stood ready for
several years now to help their fellow citizens. They
deserve our unreserved admiration and full support.
Allow me to conclude by underscoring the
following point. Although today Venezuela is on
the edge of the precipice, our responsibility is not to
substitute ourselves for the Venezuelan people. It is to
provide them once again with a voice and allow them
to express themselves freely to reclaim their destiny
through the restoration of democracy and the rule of
law in Venezuela. That is the direction in which France
is working.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): First of all, we thank you, Sir,
for having convened this meeting. We also thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her detailed briefing on the
recent events in Venezuela.
At the outset, we reiterate what we said in this
same setting exactly a month ago (see S/PV.8452). The
Dominican Republic served as mediator to encourage
dialogue between the opposition and the Venezuelan
authorities, in an attempt to reach an understanding to
resolve the political crisis in the Bolivarian Republic
19-05542

26/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

of Venezuela. Despite initial optimism, neither the
political will nor the maturity needed to reach an
agreement prevailed. We therefore understand that there
is no other possible solution than the holding of free and
competitive elections without delay, with guarantees for
all political groups and actors. Those elections can be
held only in an environment of respect for human rights
and with the support of the international community.
In that regard, we believe that the good offices of
the United Nations are appropriate for building the
trust necessary for the electoral process’ success. We
are increasingly concerned about the tragic situation
experienced by Venezuelans, who are suffering from
a general climate of insecurity as well as a shortage of
goods and basic medicines. As a region we have shown
solidarity with the millions of Venezuelans who have
been forced to leave the country. However, we cannot
ignore the high cost incurred by flows of impoverished
people, which could threaten the stability of host
countries and the region. We cannot lose sight of what
is at stake in the medium and long term.
Before concluding, we would like to make one
important point. In recent days the Dominican
Republic has been prejudicially accused of allowing
its territory to be used for third-country military
actions against Venezuela. Specifically, Cuban and
Venezuelan authorities have claimed that foreign planes
have landed at a military airbase near Santo Domingo
to participate in such manoeuvres. We would like to
make our position very clear: military intervention is
not a solution to the Venezuelan crisis. Therefore, such
claims are absolutely false and continuing to repeat
them will not make them true. We hope that those who
promoted that disinformation campaign will correct the
information and have the decency to apologize. I repeat,
we hope that those who promoted that disinformation
campaign will correct the information and have the
decency to apologize.
Lastly, we deplore the events that took place this
weekend at several border crossings in Venezuela. We
call for moderation on the part of all those involved,
not only in the abuse of force against unarmed persons
but also in the use of inflammatory rhetoric that
escalates day after day. We would like to end with a
call to create the conditions for the unhindered delivery
of the aid needed to alleviate the grave humanitarian
crisis affecting our Venezuelan brothers and sisters.
We reaffirm that the Dominican Republic hopes that
Venezuela will find a democratic and peaceful solution,

S/PV. 8472

in accordance with international law — one that helps
rebuild national trust and cohesion in Venezuelan
society for the future.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): I would like to thank Ms. DiCarlo for
her briefing.
Belgium is of the view that the situation in
Venezuela is a clear threat to the stability of the region.
In order to prevent the situation from deteriorating,
we call upon all members of the Security Council to
work together to promote a peaceful solution to recent
events. We call for violence to be avoided at all costs.
In that regard, I would like to make three points: first,
with regard to an appeal for restraint and de-escalation;
secondly, on the importance of complete humanitarian
access, in line with humanitarian principles; and,
thirdly, about the need to launch as soon as possible a
peaceful political process that paves the way for free
and transparent elections.
First of all, I should like to call on those with
influence on developments in the country to
demonstrate restraint. We call for calm and encourage
all actors to spare no effort to reduce tensions. We
firmly condemn the excessive use of force by security
forces, as well as by pro-Government factions. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights has reported four deaths and more than
300 injured, in particular among the Pemón indigenous
community. Belgium extends its sincere condolences to
the families of the deceased. We call for an independent
investigation and recall the importance of respect for
the rights of demonstrators and the freedom of the press.
Secondly, the regime’s refusal to acknowledge the
humanitarian emergency has led to escalating tensions.
Belgium calls on all actors to authorize the entry of aid
and facilitate the movement of humanitarian workers.
We underscore the importance of humanitarian aid
that seeks to ease the suffering of the most vulnerable,
under the supervision of the competent agencies of
the United Nations and in line with the principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence. It
is unacceptable for irregular armed groups to intimidate
civilians and members of the National Assembly who
have come together to distribute aid.
Thirdly, Belgium calls for the rapid launch of a
peaceful political process, which would pave the way
for free and transparent elections, enable the people
to freely express themselves and lead to reconciliation

19-055427/48

S/PV.8472

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

in Venezuela. The current crisis in Venezuela is
political in nature; the solution must therefore also
be political. The presidential elections held in May
last year were not free, fair or credible, and therefore
deprived the Government of Nicolás Maduro of its
democratic legitimacy. We support Juan Guaidó in his
constitutional duty to organize free, fair and democratic
presidential elections. The European Union established
a contact group during the transition period to support
the process.
The Venezuelan people have already suffered
enough. It is high time to let them decide their own
future. Belgium calls for a peaceful democratic
transition, restraint, de-escalation by all parties and
respect for political and human rights, in the broader
sense. Those are the essential tools for moving towards
lasting reconciliation in Venezuelan society. Belgium
will continue to closely monitor the situation on
the ground.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): First, allow me to thank
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her
briefing to the Security Council.
We have witnessed over recent days a further
escalation of violence and a deepening of the
humanitarian crisis in Venezuela. Hundreds of people
are crossing the borders as we speak, joining the more
than 3 million Venezuelans who have already fled
the country and leaving behind many more millions
inside the country in extremely miserable conditions.
The Council cannot remain idle in face of a crisis that
has such an adverse effect on peace and security in
the region.
We particularly condemn the indiscriminate and
excessive use of force against unarmed protesters
by the Venezuelan security forces and pro-Maduro
irregular armed groups, which has already led to
deaths and hundreds of injuries. We also deplore the
systematic and widespread human rights violations
and abuses committed by security forces and irregular
armed groups. They must stop, and they must stop
now. We call on everyone to refrain from violence,
which can spiral out of control and further complicate
this multidimensional conflict. We call for respect for
democracy, the rule of law and fundamental rights
and freedoms, including the freedom of assembly and
of expression. Because of the political origin of the
conflict, we strongly believe that the solution to it can
only be political. There is no other alternative.
8/48

26/02/2019

We reiterate our recognition of the National
Assembly and its President, Mr. Juan Guaidó, as the
only legitimate power in Venezuela with a democratic
mandate, won in free and fair elections, in line with the
Venezuelan Constitution. We join President Guaidó’s
call for the urgent holding of free, transparent and
credible presidential elections in accordance with
international democratic standards. It must be heard by
Venezuelan authorities.
The oppressive regime of Nicolás Maduro has
led to an unprecedented migration and humanitarian
crisis that has an undeniable impact and tremendous
consequences on the situation in neighbouring Latin
American countries. No matter how eloquently and
passionately representatives of Nicolás Maduro deny it,
the humanitarian catastrophe in Venezuela is real and
its citizens are in dire need of urgent humanitarian aid.
It is Maduro’s policy that has led to it, and it is Nicolás
Maduro who is further exacerbating the crisis by not
allowing foreign humanitarian aid and deliberately
hurting his own citizens. Let us stress that this is a
human-made humanitarian crisis.
It falls to regional organizations to play a special
role in diffusing this crisis. We believe that the genuine
efforts of the Lima Group and the International
Contact Group to de-escalate and find a way to move
forward should be recognized. In line with the common
European Union approach to the recent events in
Venezuela, Poland excludes the use of military force
and calls for talks leading to a durable, peaceful and
democratic solution.
In conclusion, I would once again like to underline
that the demands of society cannot be left unanswered.
People have massively called for democracy. Their
voices shall not and cannot be ignored.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We are grateful for the
informative briefing provided by the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo. We also welcome the Minister
of the People’s Power for Foreign Affairs of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Mr. Jorge Arreaza.
The Security Council is the principal organ charged
with maintaining international peace and security. Yet
today we are witnessing the Council being divided on
the internal affairs of a State Member of the United
Nations, with some even threatening to use force against
the territorial integrity and political independence of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, a fellow Member
19-05542

26/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

of the United Nations. That is inconsistent with the
purpose of the United Nations, which was founded
to maintain international peace and security among
nations, based on the principle of the sovereign equality
of all its States Members.
It is important to note that the Charter of the United
Nations and international law proscribe the threat of
force. For us in South Africa the threat of force sets
a very bad precedent. We on the African continent
have suffered a great deal, as external forces used
undemocratic tools of regime change to solve problems
on our continent. In principle, we are strongly opposed
to that way of solving any problem. That approach takes
away the basic rights of the people of the country to
determine their own future.
Let the people of Venezuela decide their future. All
that we can do is help them, but the decisions remain
Venezuelan. We recognize the democratic processes
followed by Venezuela in choosing a President, but
we also recognize that Venezuela is currently facing
humanitarian challenges. South Africa draws from its
experience in overcoming one of the most repressive and
insidious racist regimes through dialogue, and believes
that internal, inclusive dialogue remains the only viable
and sustainable path to ending the political crisis in
Venezuela. Political dialogue should seem obvious and
the first logical port of call, yet the actions of some in
the international community have not been conducive
or encouraging to that approach. Isolating and vilifying
one party and calling for a specific, prescribed course
of action that would preclude dialogue will only foment
possible recourse to armed conflict. I reiterate: that is
inconsistent with the purpose of the Security Council.
While South Africa does not believe that the
situation in Venezuela poses a threat to international
peace and security, the efforts of the Security Council
in confronting the situation in Venezuela should be
framed by Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter, in
that parties are encouraged first of all to seek a solution
through negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration and judicial settlement, or other peaceful
means of their own choice. Forcing the parties to accede
to and accept a prescription to resolving their own crisis,
including through ultimatums, will only encourage
further antagonism and division. We therefore call on
the Council and all those truly interested in the peaceful
resolution of the crisis in Venezuela to consider the
question: What is the alternative to dialogue? The
alternative — as we have seen in other cases where

S/PV. 8472

dialogue was ignored by some in the Council — will be
a prolonged crisis and possible military entanglements.
That will only be to the further detriment of the people
of Venezuela.
South Africa is deeply concerned about the
humanitarian crisis in Venezuela. We are alarmed at the
unrest and loss of life over the past weekend. Instead of
assisting the people of Venezuela, the politicization and
weaponization of humanitarian assistance has served
to aggravate tensions in Venezuela, which can lead
only to violence and confrontation. It is of the utmost
importance that support for the people of Venezuela
does not serve as a focal point for increased tensions
and antagonisms or become a tool in the political
dispute that is being stoked by some external parties
and actors. We believe that humanitarian aid should not
be used for the political ends of parties to the crisis, but
should be delivered through the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in order
to ensure its neutrality and impartiality.
The Council cannot predetermine the will of the
people of Venezuela. The international community
should therefore promote a framework of inclusive
internal dialogue in order for the people of Venezuela
to determine their own destiny.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I wish to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, for her briefing.
At the outset, I would like to emphasize our
commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations when dealing with issues on the
Council’s agenda. We also emphasize the importance of
preventive diplomacy in addressing disputes and crises
at an early stage through peaceful ways and means and
dialogue. In that regard, we stress the pivotal role played
by regional and subregional organizations in ensuring
preventive diplomacy and mediation efforts with a
view to maintaining international peace and security,
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
We have followed with concern the accelerated
events of recent days in Venezuela, which have resulted
in the death or injury of a number of victims. We
stress the importance that those responsible for these
deplorable acts be held accountable, as well as of
respecting people’s rights to freedom of expression and
peaceful demonstration, as guaranteed by international

19-055429/48

S/PV.8472

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

law, including the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, and in accordance with the national
laws governing those rights.
We call on the parties concerned to respect all
principles of international human rights law, the interests
of the Venezuelan people and the future of their country
above any other interest. We share the international
community’s concern about the humanitarian situation
in Venezuela, which in recent years has caused the
displacement of hundreds of thousands of Venezuelans
to neighbouring States. It has been a tremendous
challenge for the host countries to provide safe and
secure shelter to those people, constituting a threat
to regional security and stability. In that regard,
we are grateful to a number of Latin American and
Caribbean countries for hosting those large numbers
of displaced persons. We call on all stakeholders to
cooperate and take the necessary measures to ensure
that humanitarian assistance reaches those in need,
in accordance with accepted humanitarian principles,
without discrimination or distinction.
The crisis in Venezuela requires all relevant
stakeholders to give priority to national interests
above personal or partisan interests and to commit to a
comprehensive political dialogue in order to address the
current crisis. We urge all parties to exercise restraint,
reduce tensions, renounce violence and make every
effort to prevent further acts of violence. In that regard,
we support all efforts of the Secretary-General to reach
a political solution to ensure the stability of the situation
in Venezuela as soon as possible, while preventing the
region from descending into a humanitarian crisis and
a cycle of violence and instability.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): One month ago, we
reminded delegations of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and said that there were blatant violations
of the Universal Declaration (see S/PV.8452). Yet here
we sit, one month later, and the situation continues.
The Maduro regime has become even more cynical,
and I refer to the example that the representative of the
United States used in his statement, in which he said
that Maduro is dancing while children and people were
dying and suffering because they do not have anything
to eat or any medical supplies.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for putting
this on the Council’s agenda today. I disagree with my
South African friend — I think that this issue belongs
on the Council’s agenda. It is a threat to international
10/48

26/02/2019

peace and security for two reasons. First, as I mentioned
last time, there are 3.4 million refugees across the
border, now living in the border areas of Brazil,
Colombia and Ecuador, affecting stability, wealth and
conditions in those countries. The representatives of
those countries will speak later to confirm that having
all of those people fleeing Venezuela to their territories
is a threat to them. Secondly — and I thought we would
have agreed on this — human rights are not solely an
internal affair, but rather, and I quote from the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, “a common standard of
achievements for all peoples and all nations”. I would
have thought that, given South Africa’s background, it
would have supported the view that it is very important
to respect human rights and that if human rights are
blatantly violated, then we must look to address that.
The Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, gave
a terrible description of the current situation in the
country. I predict — as my Polish colleague has also
predicted — that the representative of the Maduro
regime will deny what is happening and say that they are
not oppressing, that there are no arbitrary detentions,
that there are no irregular armed groups and that there
is freedom of speech. But they must look into our eyes
and say that they know that there are children dying
as a result of not having any nourishment; that there
is maternal mortality, as the Under-Secretary-General
stated; and that there are many people dying from
preventable causes.
The most important thing now is to ensure the
delivery of humanitarian assistance into the country. I
do agree with my South African colleague and others
that we must prevent any politicization of the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. That will not lead to anything
positive and undermines the safety and security of
humanitarian workers. This is a historic moment for
Venezuela and we must not leave its people to feel
alone. Humanitarian aid must get there, in accordance
with the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence.
Let me briefly turn to the political situation. I
simply want to echo what my French and Belgian
colleagues said earlier. The European Union, through
its International Contact Group, stands ready to provide
support. There can only be a political solution and we
reject the use of force. We also support the declaration
made by the Lima Group, which I wish to quote, “for
19-05542

26/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

a process of peaceful transition through political and
diplomatic means without the use of force”.
We therefore renew our call for the restoration of
a democratic process and constitutional order through
free, transparent and credible presidential elections,
and we support Juan Guaidó in conducting that
process towards a lasting peace, based on democratic
values and respect for the rights and freedoms of the
Venezuelan people.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): First of all, I wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
I also welcome His Excellency Mr. Jorge Arreaza,
Minister of the People’s Power for Foreign Affairs of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
We have been closely following the situation and
the escalation of tensions in Venezuela, and we deeply
regret the loss of lives resulting from recent events. We
cannot afford to witness another loss. We fully support
the Secretary-General’s statement calling for calm and
for violence to be avoided at any cost, and we appeal to
all of the parties involved, both within and outside the
country, to make serious efforts to substantially reduce
tensions and avert any escalation of violence.
Indonesia believes that dialogue, reconciliation
and negotiation must be the preferred options for the
resolution of any issue. It is our strong conviction that
there will always be a negotiated solution based on
dialogue among all those involved, including the option
set forth in Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations, which provides us with various tools to be
utilized in addressing the situation. We therefore urge
all parties to follow that path, while taking into account
the safety and prosperity of the people of Venezuela.
In that connection, we welcome and support the
Montevideo Mechanism, which seeks to preserve peace
in Venezuela based on the principle of non-interference
and the peaceful resolution of conflicts.
Indonesia has always been consistent in upholding
and respecting the principles of non-interference,
sovereignty and the territorial integrity of all countries,
including Venezuela. At the same time, we are
cognizant of the fact that the humanitarian situation
in Venezuela is increasingly concerning and requires
proper attention. We therefore encourage the delivery
of all humanitarian aid for the people of Venezuela
through a proper channel of the United Nations, in
close coordination with the Venezuelan Government.

S/PV. 8472

We strongly believe that the Council has an
important role to play — based on the Charter of the
United Nations — in assisting Venezuela to return to
normalcy. To that end, it should speak in unity. Indonesia
hopes that the Security Council can promote avenues
that create the environment conducive for all relevant
actors to commit to inclusive and credible political
dialogue. The Council must also be able to insist that
all relevant parties promote national dialogue and
accept the Secretary-General’s good offices in order to
help resolve the crisis. It is high time for the Council to
play its pivotal role in avoiding the exacerbation of the
situation in Venezuela. We hope that Venezuela will be
able to peacefully overcome this crisis, while ensuring
security, stability and prosperity for its people.
I would like to end my statement by quoting Herbert
Hoover: “Peace is not made at the council table or by
treaties, but in the hearts of men.” Let us all use our
hearts and minds for the people of Venezuela.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to welcome the convening of this
meeting and commend Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her
comprehensive briefing.
Côte d’Ivoire has been closely following the latest
developments in Venezuela and deplores the sad events
that have taken place in recent days at the Venezuelan
border with Brazil and Colombia, resulting in the loss
of human life and extensive material damage, which
we of course regret. Côte d’Ivoire therefore wishes to
extend its condolences to the bereaved families and its
best wishes for the speedy recovery of the injured. We
also hope to see humanitarian assistance reaching those
who need it, regardless of where it comes from.
In underscoring the need to maintain a climate of
peace and stability, my delegation calls on all parties
to show restraint and encourages them to seek a
peaceful political solution through inclusive dialogue
in confronting a problem that is essentially political and
institutional in nature. We believe that the role of the
Secretary-General is useful and urgent in that regard.
The parties to the conflict in Venezuela would benefit
by availing themselves forthwith of his support in order
to save a population that they claim to love and for
whom they claim to be ready to spill the very last drop
of their blood.
Convinced of the fact that there is no military
solution to this crisis, my country urges all parties to
use all legal and peaceful means to find appropriate

19-0554211/48

S/PV.8472

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

solutions to the institutional and political conflict. My
delegation therefore calls on all stakeholders to engage
resolutely in a process of negotiation to seek consensual
solutions to the root causes of the crisis.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire urges the international
community, including regional actors, to support the
Venezuelan people in their efforts to emerge from this
crisis by supporting all peaceful initiatives that may
help to reduce tensions.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and welcome
the Minister of the People’s Power for Foreign Affairs
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Mr. Jorge
Arreaza, to the Chamber.
I fully agree with my German colleague that the
topic of today’s meeting should have been “Threats
to international peace and security”, given the threats
to Venezuela posed by a number of States. In fact, I
think that the topic should be different. We should not
be discussing the situation in Venezuela, but rather
that surrounding Venezuela. Today, we find ourselves
forced to attend the next episode of the United States’
spectacle with regard to Venezuela. For those who have
been unable to follow the entire story, I will provide a
brief recap of previous episodes.
In a sovereign Latin American country, an
impostor suddenly appeared. He began proclaiming
himself President of the country and was immediately
recognized as such by the United States of America.
A number of European and Latin American countries
hesitated at first before they too recognized him as
President. According to that group of countries, the
legitimate leader of the country, Nicolás Maduro,
won the elections last spring in an unfair manner,
owing to the opposition boycotting those elections.
The fact that Washington, D.C., itself had encouraged
opposition leaders to withdraw from that election is, of
course, not mentioned. I believe that those now talking
about due constitutional process and the legitimacy
of the authority of Juan Guaidó on the basis of the
Venezuelan Constitution understand that their claims
are hypocritical, null and void of any legal basis and
simply absurd.
What we are now witnessing is the abuse of
constitutional law. Are they not ashamed to speak in
this manner? Do they not realize that it is abundantly
clear to all of us? Do they not understand that no selfrespecting lawyer or judge would subscribe to that
12/48

26/02/2019

mockery and disregard for the law? They should at least
read the conclusions of the German Bundestag and its
legal service, which has clearly pronounced on all this.
At the same time, we are hearing moans and groans
over the terrible economic situation in Venezuela, its
starving citizens and skyrocketing prices, among other
problems. We are told that Venezuela must be saved
at any cost, for the sake of its citizens. The fact that
United States sanctions have been imposed against
that country since 2013 — which many believe to be
the cause of the current economic situation — is, of
course, kept quiet. The fact that the overall damage to
the country’s economy as a result of those sanctions is
estimated at $345 billion is, of course, ignored.
And now, in a situation in which Venezuela has
reached the boiling point, Washington, D.C., blames
Nicolás Maduro for all of the country’s troubles
and organizes an operation it calls “the delivery
of humanitarian assistance”. This culminated on
23 February, when an unverified and uninvited American
cargo arrived in Cúcuta, Colombia. Attempts were
made to illegally smuggle the cargo into neighbouring
Venezuela, using the civilian population as human
shields. The legitimate Venezuelan authorities, in
fulfilling their duty to protect the national border,
mobilized their security forces with the sole objective
of ensuring the inviolability of the country’s border.
The video footage clearly shows that people coming
from Colombian territory behaved aggressively and
initially provoked the Venezuelan military and police
officers on duty.
At that moment, the first victims among the
demonstrators also appeared. People in uniform drove
a car from the Venezuelan side and rammed a barrier
on the Colombian side at high speed. This insane act
was captured on videos posted on social networks that
leave no doubt that it resulted in injuries and perhaps
even deaths. The media immediately began trumpeting
about victims dead at the hands of the bloodthirsty
regime. The purposeful ramming of people anywhere
in the world means only one thing, terrorism, but in
Cúcuta it is proclaimed as the heroism of deserters
challenging the authorities, while Juan Guaidó
approvingly slaps the so-called “heroes” on the back.
The so-called humanitarian workers on the Colombian
side of the border very quickly turn to violence, with
stones and Molotov cocktails flying at the defenders of
the Venezuelan border. I think Council members can
19-05542

26/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

agree that a scenario like this is reminiscent of almost
anything but the delivery of humanitarian aid. By the
way, the protesters themselves later set fire to one of the
trucks with one of the Molotov cocktails. In the pictures
that have flown around the world one can clearly see one
of the demonstrators on the Colombian side, whether
accidentally or on purpose, throwing a lighted bottle
into a truck that never got to cross the bridge.
So on 23 February, by all indications, we observed
an attempt to illegally cross a State border in order to
bring in an unknown cargo. I would like to ask Council
members which of their countries would have acted
differently in this case. One country even wants to build
a huge wall along one of its borders to prevent illegal
entry. At this point, how can we not recall 1986, when
humanitarian aid for Nicaragua turned out to be a batch
of weapons for the contras? That episode is giving us
some déjà vu today.
Let us call a spade a spade. This is not humanitarian
aid. If the United States really wanted to help the
people of Venezuela, it would be acting through any
of the United Nations agencies accredited there, as
other countries are successfully doing. For example,
last week we delivered 7.5 tons of medical supplies
to Caracas through the World Health Organization
and encountered no obstacles, especially since the
Venezuelan authorities are willing to accept the
humanitarian technical assistance that the country
needs. In order to make this process work, all that
has to be done is to unblock Caracas’s ability to
make the payments for supplies of essential food and
medicine. But the Americans and their allies do not
want to do things lawfully. They have another goal.
Calling it humanitarian is a travesty. What happened
on Saturday was more like what is called force feeding
here in the United States than aid. If anyone does not
know what that is, it is a kind of torture. Apparently,
having trained on their prisoners at Guantanamo, the
American authorities have now decided to force-feed
an entire country.
If anyone believes that the United States and
its allies had the right to act this way, take a look at
General Assembly resolution 46/182. It established
the normative legal framework for international
humanitarian assistance. Just now my colleague the
Permanent Representative of Germany listed almost all
the principles of humanitarian assistance but forgot one
very important one. The resolution clearly states that in
the provision of humanitarian assistance,

S/PV. 8472

“The sovereignty, territorial integrity and
national unity of States must be fully respected in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.”
It goes on to specify that
“the affected State has the primary role in
the initiation, organization, coordination and
implementation of assistance” and that “humanitarian
assistance should be provided with the consent of the
affected country and in principle on the basis of an
appeal by the affected country”.
Was there any such appeal? No.
At this point I would like to thank all our colleagues
from United Nations agencies and their partners in
major humanitarian organizations for refusing to
support this act of political provocation. We demand an
end to these violations of General Assembly resolutions
and respect for the borders, sovereignty and national
unity of the people of Venezuela, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations.
Instead of a hypocritical attempt to import
$20 million worth of so-called aid, it is vital that the
frozen Venezuelan state enterprises’ accounts in
American banks be immediately unblocked in order
to free up $11 billion allocated by the Government for
the purchase of medicines, food and essential goods.
And what about the $7 billion in assets of Petróleos de
Venezuela? And the $1.2 billion in Venezuelan gold in
the United Kingdom? Washington and London have
just recently robbed the Venezuelan people of a total of
$30 billion in oil and banking assets. Let us call a spade
a spade. A sovereign country is being blatantly robbed
before our eyes. They are trying to reduce it to penury
so that within the framework of the humanitarian
intervention and the responsibility to protect, concepts
unrecognized in international law, they can change a
regime they do not like. One might then ask why Russia
and other countries against such noble concepts. The
answer is staring us in the face. Have there been so few
examples of this — and in the history of Latin America
alone? Let me cite an American historian, Harry Stout.
He says, “I have charted 280 military interventions ...
outside the United States on every corner of the globe”.
He goes on to say,
“the American consensus consists in America’s
faith in the institution of war as a divine instrument
and sacred mandate to be exercised around
the world.”

19-0554213/48

S/PV.8472

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

I appeal to the countries supporting the selfproclaimed President Juan Guaidó. Are they really so
naive as to believe that they are immune to this kind
of thing? Have they not heard the American leaders
declaring that Cuba and Nicaragua are next? Do they
imagine that they will not come for them? But this
warning is not only for them, it is a warning to all, to
anyone who refuses to play by Washington’s rules. And
those who support Washington in this are complicit in
violating the Charter and international law, and perhaps,
heaven forfend, in an armed intervention, which they
claim to categorically reject. We especially do not
understand why Venezuela’s neighbour Colombia,
instead of resolving its own numerous internal
problems in implementing its Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace, has decided to throw itself into helping to
organize a reckless venture against its neighbour. That
is particularly disappointing considering that Colombia
itself has only recently emerged from a protracted civil
war whose consequences will take a very long time to
overcome and for which sustainable peace is still not
guaranteed. Incidentally, when times were hard for
Colombia, its neighbour Venezuela opened its borders
to more than 5 million refugees, many of whom still
live there.
This is a warning against taking reckless steps to
implement a military scenario in Venezuela, which we
are hearing about more and more often. They could have
the worst and most unpredictable consequences for both
the region and the whole world. We urge all the States
of the region, regardless of their political preferences,
to express their firm support for the Charter of the
United Nations and for refraining from the threat or use
of force and from massively blatant interference in the
internal affairs of a sovereign State. We have said it
before, and we will say it again and again. Any solution
to Venezuela’s problems is the exclusive right, remit
and responsibility of Venezuelans themselves, and
they must be able to own that without any provocative
interference from outside. The international and
especially the regional assistance should be aimed at
finding a formula that can put an end to the turmoil
within this country in full respect for its sovereignty
and territorial integrity. We therefore welcome the
goals expressed and pursued by Mexico, Uruguay,
Bolivia and the countries of the Caribbean Community,
the participants in the Montevideo Mechanism. For our
part, we are ready to assist in the quest for a mutual
understanding between all of the constructive and
14/48

26/02/2019

patriotic forces in Venezuela, especially since the
Venezuelan authorities are calling for and insisting on
the imperative of an intra-Venezuelan dialogue.
Rather than discussing the possibilities of dialogue
and national reconciliation, National Assembly
President Juan Guaidó is calling on States to keep the
military option open. It is difficult to describe such
appeals as the responsible behaviour of a politician who
cares about his country and his people. The humanitarian
show put on by Washington on 23 February ripped the
masks off those who usually remain backstage. They
were all out there, taking centre stage.
It is now perfectly clear that Washington’s sole
aim in Venezuela was neither to resolve Venezuela’s
problems nor to care for its people, but to achieve
regime change and to threaten to do so via military
intervention. The fact that this is being done in
contravention of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and civilized norms is of no concern
whatever to its perpetrators. Unfortunately, disrespect
for these core principles of international relations has
long been the norm for the United States. It scarcely
pays attention to them.
Let me conclude with a little experiment. On
21 February, the United States delegation proposed a
text of a Security Council press statement on the events
in Haiti, which all members of the Security Council
unanimously supported. If I may, I will read out this
brief document:
“Members of the Security Council expressed
concern about violent demonstrations and the
death of innocent civilians and urged all citizens to
express themselves peacefully.
“Members of the Security Council reaffirmed their
commitment to working with the people and the
Government of Haiti towards a more secure and
prosperous future.
“Members of the Security Council underscored
that it is important for all actors to demonstrate
a willingness to engage in good faith in efforts to
address Haitian political and socioeconomic issues.”
My question is as follows: Are our American
colleagues willing to adopt, as a Security Council press
statement, a similar text regarding Venezuela? It is hard
not to notice that we are touching on a virtually identical
situation. The difference lies solely in the fact that, with
regard to Haiti, Washington, D.C., decided to side with
19-05542

26/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

the legitimate authority — at least for now. For some
reason, we have no doubt what the response to this will
be, but we would still like to hear it directly from our
United States colleagues. We will circulate this press
statement among members of the Security Council.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo for her briefing. I welcome the Minister of
the People’s Power for Foreign Affairs of Venezuela,
Mr. Jorge Arreaza, to our open meeting today.
China is paying close attention to the current
situation in Venezuela and supports the efforts of
the Venezuelan Government to safeguard State
sovereignty, independence and stability. The affairs
of Venezuela should be up to the Venezuelan people
themselves. China calls on the Venezuelan Government
and opposition to seek a political settlement, within
constitutional and legal frameworks, through dialogue
and consultation.
China notes that, recently, the Venezuelan
Government has remained calm, exercised restraint
and shown dedication to upholding domestic peace
and stability. China maintains that all countries should
abide by the basic principles of international law
and international relations. China opposes foreign
interference in the internal affairs of Venezuela,
military intervention in Venezuela and using the issue
of so-called humanitarian assistance for political
purposes to destabilize or create turbulence within
Venezuela and the neighbouring region. That does not
serve the interests of any party.
China calls on the international community to take
measures that are truly beneficial to the stability and
economic development of Venezuela and that improve
the lives of its people. We hope that the international
community will, on the premise of respecting
Venezuela’s
sovereignty,
provide
constructive
assistance to Venezuela in order to facilitate a smooth
resolution of the relevant issues.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Rosemary DiCarlo for her informative and
timely briefing and by thanking the United States for
requesting this meeting.
Let me also begin by saying that I agree with
everything that the German Ambassador said today, in
particular about the importance of the Security Council
addressing this issue. I note that the agenda for today’s

S/PV. 8472

discussion does not mention the situation in the region
or wider threats to international peace and security.
The agenda item, to which we have all agreed, is the
situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Years of misrule and corruption have wrecked
the Venezuelan economy. The actions of the Maduro
regime have led to economic collapse, which threatens
the peace and security of the region. Over 3.5 million
Venezuelans have left their country for other countries
in the region. This is one of the greatest migrant crises
ever faced by Latin America. It has placed huge strain
on the social services of nations of the region. That is
why, together with the human rights situation mentioned
by my German colleague, it is completely appropriate
that the Council continues to address the issue.
I was disappointed to hear the Russian Ambassador
attempt to ridicule what he called moans and groans
about the humanitarian situation in Venezuela. No
one on the Council should belittle the suffering of
the Venezuelan people. I also note that the Russian
Ambassador asked all of us a question, which I will
attempt to answer. He asked which of us on the Council
would have acted any differently, faced with unwanted
attempts to deliver humanitarian assistance. Well, let
me tell him that we would have acted differently and,
looking around the Council today, I think a majority
of Council members would have acted differently. We
would not have used live fire against civilians attempting
to deliver aid. We would not direct paramilitary thugs
to attack civilians. We would not arrest and detain our
political opponents and we would not have mismanaged
the country through years of misrule and corruption,
causing economic collapse and a humanitarian crisis.
I hope that goes some way to answering his question.
The United Kingdom joins other members of the
Council in condemning the violence that took place
on Venezuela’s borders with Colombia and Brazil
at the weekend. Maduro’s use of deadly violence
against his own people and other concerning acts of
aggression to block the supply of desperately needed
humanitarian aid are simply repugnant. The Maduro
regime’s oppressive policies affect all sectors of the
population, from the innocent civilians — including
women and children — who lack access to essential
medical and other basic supplies, to journalists whose
work is censored by the regime. As we heard from the
United Nations, just yesterday the renowned journalist
Jorge Ramos was reportedly detained in the Miraflores

19-0554215/48

S/PV.8472

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

26/02/2019

Palace, later to be released and deported while his
team’s equipment was confiscated.

for Foreign Affairs of Venezuela, among us at this
important meeting.

As with the lack of freedom given to journalists,
other essential freedoms — such as democratic
ones — are simply not present in Venezuela. Only a
democratic solution will resolve this crisis. The United
Kingdom thanks the Lima Group and the Organization
of American States for their clear words and strong
action towards that goal. It is important that the region
continue to take the lead. We stand with these regional
bodies and with Juan Guaidó in pursuit of our shared
goal to bring peace and stability to Venezuela.

Today, we meet again after our meeting a month ago
on the situation in Venezuela (see S/PV.8452), which
the delegation of Equatorial Guinea has been watching
with great attention and enormous concern. Last month,
we expressed our concern that the momentum of events
taking place in Venezuela could reach levels that would
generate greater suffering for the population. It would
seem that this situation is becoming more and more
worrisome. We therefore urge all parties involved to
refrain from any initiative that could lead to further
acts of violence — clashes that could result in the loss
of human life.

The only way to achieve peace and stability is by
democratic transition through free and fair presidential
elections, as demanded by interim President Guaidó
and the National Assembly in line with the Venezuelan
Constitution. Until this is achieved, the current
humanitarian crisis caused by the Maduro regime’s
corrupt policies will continue. The United Kingdom has
committed to giving $8.6 million dollars in emergency
aid to treat malnourished children and provide
vaccinations and clean water to the most vulnerable
communities affected by the crisis.
We encourage our partners in the international
community and on the Council to consider what more
can be done to send a clear signal to the Maduro regime
that nothing short of free and fair presidential elections
will do. This includes considering additional sanctions
against individual members of the Maduro regime who
have benefited from their corrupt policies. This should
not negatively affect the dire humanitarian situation,
which is solely the responsibility of the regime.
The world cannot stand by in the face of this manmade crisis. The Venezuelan people deserve a better
future. They have suffered enough at the hands of the
Maduro regime. Free and fair presidential elections are
the only solution. The Council and the international
community should do our utmost to support this aim.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Equatorial Guinea.
I thank Ms. DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, for the
enlightening briefing she has just given to the Security
Council on the current situation in the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela. We welcome the presence of
Mr. Jorge Arreaza, Minister of the People’s Power
16/48

We believe that today’s meeting is a fitting
occasion for us to reflect on a possible political
solution to the situation in Venezuela, which, as far
as we are concerned, should be a solution negotiated
among the Venezuelans themselves, with the mediation
of a neutral party, such as the United Nations, as we
proposed in our statement on 26 January. As we have
heard in various interventions this afternoon, nearly the
entire international community is opposed to a military
solution to the issues that Venezuela is currently facing.
Given that this is a national matter, the politicians
of the country must sit down to negotiate and reach
agreements on the points of contention that are causing
the problems threatening the stability of the country.
We believe that any international approach must
provide peaceful initiatives that do not go beyond
this framework of negotiations, which provides an
assured means of resolving conflicts and prevents
further suffering for the population. In this sense,
it falls to the Venezuelan Government — with the
support of the international community — to pave the
way for facilitating this inclusive dialogue. Here, the
national interest must be prioritized so that satisfactory
agreements can be reached among all parties and so
that peace and social harmony can be restored in the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Finally, I would like to express our gratitude for
the support provided by Venezuela’s neighbouring
countries and others that receive thousands of
Venezuelan migrants on a daily basis. In this regard, we
commend the solidarity of the humanitarian agencies
that have supported the Governments of these host
countries in serving the displaced. We therefore call
19-05542

26/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

on the international community to bolster the efforts of
these countries to assist the migrant populations.
I conclude my statement by reiterating our
suggestion that, in the light of the fact that the sole
viable alternative to resolving the crisis lies in inclusive
dialogue between Venezuelan political actors, the
United Nations — through Secretary-General António
Guterres — should be involved in the organization and
facilitation of such negotiations, with the support and
coordination of initiatives such as the International
Contact Group on Venezuela and the Montevideo
Mechanism. The fact that we are discussing this matter
in the Security Council for the second time in the
space of one month is, in itself, a clear indication of
the important role that the United Nations must play in
resolving this conflict.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the of the United States has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Abrams (United States of America): I
would like to respond briefly to the remarks of the
representative of the Russian Federation.
I think we are all aware of efforts that are being
made — far away from here, in Hanoi — over the
next couple of days to solve some problems that arose
during the Cold War. But that is not the rhetoric that
we heard in the Council today. We heard a lot of Cold
War rhetoric — the kind of rhetoric that we used to hear
when that sign said not “Russian Federation” but “Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics”. It is a bit surprising.
First of all, what the United States did in providing
aid or attempting to provide aid was done at the request
of the legitimate Government — the legitimate interim
President of Venezuela, Juan Guaidó, who requested
such aid from the international community. The Russian
representative said that his country delivered aid, but I
wonder how much of that aid will get to the people of
Venezuela, because it was not delivered to the people.
It was delivered to the regime, which will take it, and
we will never know how much of it was sold through
corrupt practices and how much of it was simply given
to supporters of the regime.
Then we heard a good deal about the freezing of
accounts and about gold. Here, I think we get to the
heart of the matter, which is that a lot of money is owed
to Russia and it is no doubt worrying whether that

S/PV. 8472

money is going to be repaid. Well, my answer is — not
if this economy is driven further into the ground. The
only way the debts that are owed by Venezuela will ever
be repaid is if the economy can once again grow and if
this terrible period of decline, which has impoverished
what was once the richest country in Latin America,
can be brought to an end.
Finally, I would just say that I reject
completely — from start to finish and from top to
bottom — accusations of military intervention from a
country that is occupying the territory of Georgia and
Ukraine, in South Ossetia and Abkhazia and in Crimea,
respectively. We do not accept such accusations in this
situation; I reject them completely and I am amazed to
hear them in the Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the Russian Federation has asked for
the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I did not intend to engage in polemics with
my United States colleague. However, given that he has
taken the floor, I should like to make one remark and
pose one question.
With respect to whose rhetoric aligns more
closely to the Cold War, I have my own views on that.
Mr. Abrams was an active participant in the Cold War
and in a number of underground operations conducted
during the era of the Cold War, so we are not going
to discuss this issue. I think that Mr. Abrams has yet
to hear the views of other members of the Security
Council today, which will in one way or another align
with what I have said.
For some reason, he is under the impression that
the only thing that Russia is concerned about is the
money that it will not be able to get as a return on the
investment it has made in Venezuela. Why does it not
occur to him that we might have other considerations
besides commercial interests? We do not tolerate
the blatant, arrogant trampling of the principles of
international law and intervention in the domestic
affairs of other sovereign countries. We do not allow
anyone to take such liberties aimed at us or at other
countries, and yet we hear many accusations regarding
Russia’s intervention in the affairs of other States,
including the United States of America. Given what the
United States is doing in Venezuela, the accusations of
the former are simply comical.

19-0554217/48

S/PV.8472

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

I do not wish to engage in rhetoric, because I am
aware of the unfortunate fact that we will not find
common ground on this issue. However, I want to
reiterate the following question: Does the United
States delegation stand ready to support elements to
the press on Venezuela using the wording proposed
by the Russian delegation, based on Security Council
elements to the press made with respect to Haiti?
The text is exactly the same; “Haiti” has simply been
replaced with “Venezuela”. We will circulate the draft
text among Council members.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister of the People’s Power for Foreign
Affairs of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Arreaza (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting to be
frank with the delegation of the United States. This
meeting once more affords us an opportunity to speak
the truth about what is happening in the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela. Confronting Western
intervention, imperialism, interference in domestic
affairs and colonial arrogance, which we thought had
disappeared from the Security Council, has been an
exercise in patience.
First of all, we extend a greeting from the
constitutional President of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, Mr. Nicolás Maduro Moros, and from
the Venezuelan people, who are being subjected to
international aggression. It is only fitting that we
should discuss this here in the Security Council.
When powerful countries and other countries that are
subordinate thereto — I am referring to the United
States and Colombia — organize aggression against
the sovereignty of a free people, such as that of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, we are talking about
an issue that is undoubtedly a threat to the peace and
security of our region, which in turn affects international
peace and security, and that is a clear violation of the
Charter of the United Nations in its entirety.
With all due respect, allow me to say that the briefing
by Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo was
biased. She sought to disseminate information coming
from one source. Furthermore, again with all due
respect, that information does not correspond at all to
what we discussed in the three meetings we held with
Secretary-General António Guterres. We denounce the
United States Government for organizing, financing and
18/48

26/02/2019

leading this gross act of aggression against Venezuela,
which in effect began many years ago. In some countries
scandals are created by saying that some other country
interfered in their electoral campaigns. Intervention
by United States Governments has been taking place
in Venezuela since the Bolivarian revolution came to
power on 2 February 1999 — every day, every hour and
every minute of the 20 years that have elapsed.
We would also like to take this opportunity to
denounce here — according to information provided
to us by friendly countries, such as Cuba and the
Russian Federation — the mobilization of troops in
the Caribbean and the purchasing of weapons from
Eastern Europe intended for the radical opposition in
Venezuela in order to foment intervention. When it
comes to Venezuela, there have always been calls from
the United States and Western power centres for the
politics of death.
A well-orchestrated operation to violate the sacred
sovereignty of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
took place over the weekend. Our national armed and
police forces were able to contain it without using any
kind of deadly force, and that is why you saw tear gas
used at the two main bridges between Venezuela and
Colombia — between Venezuela’s Táchira state and
Colombia’s North Santander department — as well as
progressive and varied methods. And where did the
aggression come from? It came from Colombia. As
to the outlaws who are said to come from the Maduro
regime? They come from Colombia. Whether they are
Colombians or Venezuelans I do not know, but I do
know they were attacking Venezuelan law enforcement
personnel abetted and protected by Colombian police.
This photograph shows a man setting fire to
humanitarian vehicle with a Molotov cocktail — an
image widely disseminated by the press. Here is the
burning truck, which when inspected was found to
contain not only food and medicines but also tools for
putting up barricades and wire and nails for making
weapons of a type we in Venezuela are used to seeing
being used by the radical opposition. The proof right
here; members can see the videos. That truck was
burned on this bridge.
Here one can see Molotov cocktails being thrown
to burn the humanitarian aid. But there were also
some injured. Most of those injured — lo and behold,
the media did not get the news on this — are officers,
19-05542

26/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

enlisted men and law enforcement personnel from
Venezuela’s security forces. I have the report here.
This photograph shows a bus on Venezuelan
territory, making this an internal matter. The “masked
thugs” who burned it are not Chavistas. They are from
the Venezuelan opposition who, as in 2014 and 2017,
left our country in flames, including over a period of
four months in 2017. There was no condemnation from
any of those other countries.
Here they are on the Colombian side of the
bridge — we can see Colombian migration — protected
by Colombian security forces. There they are.
Here we can see the use of the Red Cross emblem,
without authorization from the International Red
Cross and Red Crescent Movement or the International
Committee of the Red Cross. That happened in
Colombia and was denounced by the Red Cross.
This is under one of the bridges, where we see
homemade bombs and Molotov cocktails being — by the
way, with gasoline from Venezuela that was smuggled
into Colombia. This is the reality, unfortunately.
Here we see security forces. And note where the
Venezuelan barrier is. The truck was burned here, and
they were throwing Molotov cocktails over there.
But how easy it is to say that Maduro is massacring
his people and burning the trucks with humanitarian
aid. Some have even gone so far as to say that we are
in violation of the Geneva Convention with respect
to international humanitarian law. My God, is that
hypocrisy. This is what was in the truck: nails and
wire. When the security forces inspected the burned
truck, that is what they found. What was it for? To set
up barricades in the state of Táchira and set Venezuela
on fire.
This is the last photograph. I would like to ask
the representative of the United Kingdom: What is
this warship, which arrived last Saturday, doing just a
few miles off one Venezuela’s Caribbean islands? My
goodness, what a coincidence. What is it doing there?
Why did the Commander of the United States Southern
Command meet with the head of the Colombian armed
forces in Bogotá to talk about humanitarian assistance
in Venezuela? Since when do the military personnel
of other countries meet to discuss humanitarian
assistance? It should be humanitarian organizations,
whose be all and end all is precisely such work, that
meet, not military personnel.

S/PV. 8472

What about all the messages that were sent by
Mr. Trump, Mr. Pence, Mr. Bolton, Mr. Pompeo,
Mr. Marco Rubio, Mr. Duque and Mr. Guaidó? That is
the chain of command, in that order, for the intervention
against Venezuela, the purpose of which is to incite the
Venezuelan military to rise up and break their oath to
the Constitution. How many have there been? I have
lost count of how many tweets Mr. Bolton has sent out
using gangster-like language to attack the dignity of
our military, our people and our revolutionary forces. It
is truly incredible. But, as I said to Mr. Elliott Abrams
at our most recent meeting here in New York (see
S/PV.8452), the coup d’état failed. The last chapter in
the coup d’état occurred on Saturday. Here they like to
say, “read my lips”.
(spoke in English)
It failed.
(spoke in Spanish)
Now is the time to return to our senses and respect
international law and Venezuela’s Constitution. We
are waiting to see the members of the Venezuelan
opposition — Mr. Guaidó or anyone else; they will
decide — sit down with the constitutional Government
of Venezuela. Then, among Venezuelans, we can craft
our own solution without intervention or interference
from anyone, especially the United States. We can only
hope that the White House will give Mr. Guaidó and
the Venezuelan opposition the authorization to sit down
with the Government so that we can find a solution
through dialogue and negotiation to each and every
political circumstance that may arise in Venezuela.
Mexico, Uruguay and the countries of the Caribbean
Community have proposed the Montevideo Mechanism.
Here we sit; tell us when we should go to Mexico,
Montevideo or Bridgetown, and we will sit down at the
table without any agenda and with our Constitution in
hand. Hold elections? Perhaps. Are other solutions a
possibility? Perhaps. That is why we have such a rich
Constitution.
The European Union and some Latin American
countries have also come up with a mechanism they
call the International Contact Group. Welcome. We met
with them for four hours — I personally for two hours
and then subsequently along with the Vice-President
and a delegation they sent to Caracas last week. We
hugged them and said thank you. Also, yesterday we
agreed upon a mechanism for technical humanitarian
assistance from the European Union through the United

19-0554219/48

S/PV.8472

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Nations to Venezuela, but that was not reported in any
news outlet anywhere. As several Council members
have said, however, the Contact Group wants to impose
the outcome of the dialogue. It wants to impose one
solution only. By the way, I found it strange to see
some European Union countries disagree with High
Representative Federica Mogherini, who characterized
that supposed humanitarian assistance as politicized
and said that the European Union would not become
involved until humanitarian agencies ensured that
aid adhered to the criteria of humanity, impartiality,
depoliticization and independence. But they have not
been able to do so, and they will not.
We must also denounce the use of Colombia’s
territory to launch aggression against Venezuela. This
is painful for us, given that 200 years ago the liberator
Simón Bolívar and Venezuelan plainsmen were crossing
the Andes and sacrificing their lives to fight for the
freedom of New Granada, or what is now the Republic
of Colombia. And they succeeded — without looting
or taking territory or anything else, before returning to
Venezuelan territory.
The Security Council is not here to make war
or establish conditions for others to make war. The
Security Council is not here to endorse violence or
breaches of the Charter of the United Nations. Rather,
the Security Council is here to maintain international
peace and security and preserve future generations
from the scourge of war. Let us preserve Venezuela and
the present generation from the scourge of war, for the
threat is here and now.
As the Ambassador of the Russian Federation
has made a proposal, we would ask the Security
Council — more than that, we would almost demand, and
do so — to agree on and adopt a draft resolution. What
do we want it to include? That it reject the threat or use
of force against the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela;
that the option be ruled out once and for all. Mr. Trump,
Mr. Pence, Mr. Bolton, Mr. Pompeo, Mr. Marco Rubio,
Mr. Guaidó and Mr. Duque are putting that on the
table. I have here a quotation where Mr. Pence is saying
“all options are on the table”, as well as others where
Mr. Bolton and Mr. Rubio say the same. Look at this:
here are 40 tweets from Mr. Rubio against President
Nicolás Maduro. Could this man be representing the
people of Florida? Are these the values of the people
of the United States? Calling for the assassination of
a President? Given the context, that is clearly what it
means. And he does it, and nothing happens.
20/48

26/02/2019

And the famous President of the National Assembly,
Juan Guaidó, said that last Saturday’s events
“compel me to take a decision: formally tell the
international community that we should remain
open to all options to ensure the liberation of this
nation, which is fighting to be able to continue
to fight”.
What does he mean by “all options”? He is saying: we
want a military intervention. Against my own country.
He must not have any family or friends in his country,
because, when the bombs fall in Venezuela, they will
not differentiate between who is a Chavista or not, or
between who is rich or poor. We have already seen that
in Iraq. We have seen it in Afghanistan. We have seen
it in Libya. We have seen it in Syria. And we have seen
it in how many other countries? Wherever the United
States goes, it leaves a humanitarian crisis behind. Who
assumes responsibility in the aftermath?
It was said that President Maduro was celebrating
on Saturday. That is absolute cynicism. The United
States destroys countries. The United States invades
them, alleging that there are weapons of mass
destruction. Millions of people die in the country, and
they celebrate it. The United States watches as a Head
of State, Muammar Al-Qadhafi, is lynched alive, and
then its Secretary of State celebrates and laughs about
it. Is that not cynicism? How many people have died
in Venezuela? They were expecting a tragedy. And it
was planned, as happened so many times over the past
20 years, including in 2002 when the United States
and the opposition used paid snipers to justify the
coup against President Hugo Chávez. It is all planned.
It was all a show to produce fatalities and then blame
President Maduro. It did not work out. However, they
blame Maduro, as Ms. DiCarlo did. “Yes, some people
died in Santa Elena de Uairén; we are investigating the
facts”. In fact, it was a group of armed persons from the
opposition who were attempting to overtake a military
unit. They were contained through the use of progressive
and varied measures and the tools of the police, with
a view to maintaining public order. What happened?
How did those people die? “We are investigating all
the facts.” Yet they have already accused and judged.
They already have autopsies in hand. That is something
really shameful.
Allow me to continue. What are we asking for
in that draft resolution? We ask that the threat or use
of force against Venezuela be rejected. That might
19-05542

26/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

even be enough. But, in line with the United Nations
Charter, they should reject the blockade and pillaging
of Venezuela’s funds and resources, which is making
the Venezuelan people suffer but which is being ignored
here. From August 2017 to date the cost has been
$30 billion. There is also the $15 billion lost because
of the confiscation of Citgo, which they stole from us
through United States imperial pillaging. There is the
$1.2 billion in Venezuelan gold held in the Bank of
England. There is the $1.4 billion being held by a Belgian
intermediary, Euroclear. And that is in addition to the
tens of billions of dollars blocked in banks. We have to
pay war-risk insurance to be able to bring imports into
Venezuela today. Is nothing happening in my country?
People are working in Venezuela. People are going to
school. People are going to university. They are going
to the beach. There are carnivals. Service provision is
better than last year and the year before. On prices, yes,
we have a problem with inflation. But we are starting to
see the light at the end of the tunnel, with the exchange
rate beginning to stabilize, as well as some prices. But
no, every day it is said here “the situation is worsening
dramatically” and “we have to intervene in Venezuela”.
The Council is starting off with lies, and the United
Nations cannot stand for that.
We resolutely say that what we saw last Saturday
was a case of propaganda. Would it be too much to ask
all the members of the Security Council to at least agree
and adopt a draft resolution rejecting the use of force
against the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela? Or do we
have to help the United States leave “all options on the
table”? Or help President Trump eventually win Florida?
For we too are a product of domestic politics. They
use us in American domestic electoral politics. They
need the Cuban-American vote. And how do they pull
in those votes? By attacking whom? Cuba, Venezuela
and Nicaragua. They ideologize foreign policy so that
Mr. Trump can secure Florida, should he succeed in
being a candidate, which he intends to be. They have to
attack Nicolás Maduro. And if it goes quite badly in his
campaign and there are many scandals that compromise
his integrity as President, then perhaps they will decide
to launch a military operation against Venezuela. And
some countries here are standing behind them. They say
so openly. Mr. Bolton has said repeatedly that it is about
oil. Mr. Trump himself has said that they will have to
get spoils when they intervene — we cannot just kill
people and seize political control over the Government;
no, we need to hang on to territory and resources, as
wars used to be. So in the case of Venezuela it is about

S/PV. 8472

oil. And Mr. Bolton has already said that United States
companies will go and produce oil and take Venezuela’s
oil. My God.
Venezuela was attacked. Some spokespeople,
including from the United Nations system, claim that
we were the aggressors last weekend. That is painful
to hear. Our national Bolivarian police, national guard
and armed forces, in a gesture of stoicism, restraint
and proportionality, were able to contain the madness.
However, it is easier to say, “Maduro massacred”,
“Maduro burned” and “Maduro killed”. Is that not
easier? Is that not better for the script justifying war?
Mr. Trump has threatened migrants that if they
reach the southern border of the United States they
will be shot at. Is anyone saying anything about that?
Mr. Trump declared a humanitarian crisis in the south of
the United States so that his contractor friends can build
a racist wall. Well, what would happen if there truly
were a humanitarian emergency and Cuba, Venezuela
and Nicaragua were to arm a convoy and try to force
it through the southern border to get humanitarian
assistance to the population in the south of the United
States, where according to its Government one in fact
exists? What would happen? What would happen to
those who tried to do so? Council members should ask
themselves that question. There is a lot of hypocrisy,
cynicism and arrogance at play here. That is what the
Security Council should underscore.
Let us take a look at the injuries. Major Ribero
Quevedo Iván Alfredo with a contusion to the temple;
and a Second Sergeant with an irregular tibia fracture.
Injured civil servants. A Third Sergeant. A civilian
chief, Jennifer Yulente, with a fracture to the wrist.
Indeed, our people were injured. And who talked about
that. Where was it in the media? Who here mentioned
it in their statements today? It is as if we did not exist,
just like the almost 10 million Venezuelans who voted
to elect Nicolás Maduro last year do not exist. Just as
Chavism does not exist, which in fact accounts for more
than half the country. It is easy to try to erase history,
but attempts to do so will be unsuccessful.
There was a false-flag operation in which members
of the national guard were paid as much as $20,000
to desert. They are also after diplomats to get them to
defect. They went after the people, almost killing them,
including a Chilean journalist who was covering the
events. Did anyone here denounce that here? No one.
They were received as heroes by Mr. Duque, Mr. Guaidó,

19-0554221/48

S/PV.8472

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Mr. Piñera and others, and the President of Paraguay,
whose name I cannot remember at the moment.
Also on the subject of false-flag operations, they
face two challenges in Colombia, regrettably, as the
Council will know — and this is the truth, it cannot
be denied — cocaine production and “false-positives”
operations. That is what is being endorsed here.
I want Venezuela to be left out the domestic debate
and electoral campaign in the United States. It cannot
be that they have to attack Venezuela to win the state of
Florida. Is it not just shameless? But it is clear; they say
it. Where did Mr. Bolton go to make a few important
announcements? To Miami. Where did Mr. Pence go to
meet with the Venezuelan community and others to make
some important announcements? To Miami. Where did
Mr. Trump go last week to announce sanctions against
Venezuela? To Miami. And the former Governor of
Florida and its senators were there, already preparing
the ground for the elections. They use Venezuela. They
use Cuba. They use Nicaragua. That cannot be allowed.
Where does the Charter of the United Nations say that
can be allowed? That is not possible.
The coup d’état failed. Yesterday Mr. Pence,
Mr. Duque and Mr. Guaidó called on the cartel
group of countries against Venezuela — which is
called the Lima Group, even though Lima is a very
beautiful Bolivian country; it should instead be called
the Washington Group. We have information that
in that debate many countries — and they should
be acknowledged — opposed the use of force and
military intervention proposed by those gentlemen to
attack Venezuela militarily. The Secretary-General
must pronounce himself in that regard. Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, whom I hope to see in a few hours, must do the
same. Or are we going to leave unaddressed the fact that
there is an intention to invade a country militarily and
nothing is being done preventively using international
law — not bombs, but international law? We think it is
high time to do so. We therefore underscore the need
for a draft resolution in that regard.
How are institutional crises resolved? And we can
indeed call it that in our case; I would even go so far
as to say that one of the five branches of Government
in Venezuela is in conflict with the other four. We
are prepared to sit down and craft solutions with
Mr. Guaidó, Mr. Henry Ramos Allup and anyone else
who wants to sit down with us. However, they do not
want to sit down with us. They say, “the time is up
22/48

26/02/2019

for dialogue”, “Maduro has to go”, “the regime has
to change”, “Venezuela has to be invaded”. Why is
there not a call to the Venezuelan opposition from the
Security Council and the various spokespersons of the
United Nations? They are the ones who do not want to
sit down; we already have.
They say we are wasting time. We were in
negotiations called by President Maduro from 2017 to
2018. The President appointed me Foreign Minister
on one day, and the following Saturday I was in
the Dominican Republic speaking with President
Danilo Medina Sánchez and Foreign Minister Miguel
Vargas Maldonado, from where we called on former
Spanish Prime Minister Rodríguez Zapatero and
Mr. Julio Borges to sit down at the negotiation table. We
negotiated throughout November, December, January
and February. When everything was ready and agreed,
the Venezuelan opposition received an order not to sign
what was agreed upon and made us waste our time,
the time of the international community lose time and,
worst of all, the time of the Venezuelan people. And yet
it is said that Maduro is wasting time in the dialogue.
We cannot countenance so many lies.
I am deeply indignant at this. I love my country.
We love our people. How can you here say we want our
people to die, when the Bolivarian revolution saw social
investment on a scale unparalleled in Latin America.
The Venezuelan people did not know what investment
from oil meant until Hugo Chávez came to power.
In spite of the blockade, difficulties, aggression and
attempts to isolate us, President Nicolás Maduro has
not sacrificed a cent of that investment. We continue to
deliver housing. No schools or universities have been
closed. We continue to promote the social services
for Venezuelans free of charge, as far as we can. We
continue to provide subsidized food. We have deployed
1,000 different tools to redistribute the profits generated
by oil and our national wealth and to be able to contain
international aggression. But nobody sees any of that.
I should like to conclude by thanking the
Ambassadors who are here from many countries
across the five continents, because a group has been
created at the United Nations which saw 60 delegations
present at its most recent meeting. The spirit of that
group is to defend the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations — peace and security. It is not to
defend Venezuela — although in this case it is to defend
Venezuela, but if Nicaragua were in need tomorrow, it
would be Nicaragua; and if the day after that, for some
19-05542

26/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

reason, it were Indonesia, it would be Indonesia. To
recover the principles of the Charter; to recover the
principles of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
we have agreed on the need to put a stop to this. As
the Ambassador of South Africa said at a meeting of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries: “Today it is
Venezuela. Who will it be tomorrow?”
(spoke in English)
Who is going to be next?
(spoke in Spanish)
It could be anyone, if we do not put a stop to the
madness of the United States and its pretensions. To
our friends in Europe — I would show the German
Ambassador that I have here a report from the Bundestag
research services division. Regarding recognition of the
supposed Government of Mr. Guaidó, the report states:
“There are therefore important reasons to hold the
view that the recognition of an ad interim Head
of State in the present case involves interference
in the internal affairs of other States. Thus the
question of whether interference in internal affairs
in the present case should be defined as unlawful
interference continues to be appropriate”.
The report continues:
“Such recognition must not be premature, that is, it
must not take place before the new Government has
been definitively inaugurated”.
That is something that will never happen.
It goes on:
“Premature recognition of itself does not turn a
Government into a legitimate Government”.
It therefore has not effect on international law.
In addition, such recognition constitutes a
violation of the legitimate Government whereby those
who recognize,
“... bear criminal responsibility under international
law. It also raises serious questions about the
maintenance of peace”.
Did it not matter to the German Government that
the Bundestag’s legal unit issued such information? Ask
the Bundestag now, because it turns out that Mr. Guaidó
made an interpretation of Article 233 of the Constitution
supposedly to determine that President Maduro was

S/PV. 8472

nowhere to be seen — President Maduro disappeared.
The ground swallowed him up; he vanished into thin
air. He does not exist. The 10 million Venezuelans
who voted for him do not exist. The other branches
of Government do not exist either. Then, faced with
this total absence, the utterly unconstitutional illegal
interpretation here is that Mr. Guaidó could become
President of the National Assembly to undertake the
presidency of the Republic for 30 days, during which
elections would have had to be organized and held.
Those 30 days were to be just for that. But what
do we have 30 days on? We have a gentleman from the
National Assembly who illegally approved something
called a transition statute, claiming that those 30 days
can be renewed as many times as they want. Where
is that in the Constitution? President Maduro was in
charge of the presidency when Comandante Chávez
died. Elections were held in 35 days, not 30, because the
National Electoral Council requested five more days
and the Constitutional Chamber, the Electoral Chamber
of the Supreme Tribunal of Justice, granted five extra
days for the organization and holding of elections.
Therefore, this transition statute means that
Mr. Guaidó has now assumed executive powers,
legislative powers, citizen’s powers, electoral powers
and legal powers. But it turns out that Europe and the
United States have recognized an absolute dictator.
Fortunately, this Government is a fiction. It is like
the Government of Narnia — it does not exist. But it
poses a risk, for it opens the doors to this international
intervention. If it were not so dangerous, it would be
funny, but we cannot laugh. It is a total risk. I call on
the Council to reflect on this.
Please excuse my tone, but I speak as someone
who is outraged because he loves his country and its
people and its peace. I have heard so many groundless
statements here that are so biased it hurts to listen
to them, because one would hope that the United
Nations and multilateralism are what would halt the
unilateralism that the United States and the dictatorship
that the United States intends to impose upon the world.
I am sure that will be the case. I call on the Council to
reflect on behalf of my people, on behalf of President
Nicolás Maduro.
At one of our meetings, I gave Mr. Elliott Abrams
a book: Free Peoples Defeat Powerful Empires. It is
possible — we have done it — but we do not want war
in our country. We do not want a war in Venezuela; we

19-0554223/48

S/PV.8472

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

must prevent war in Venezuela. Read it. There is even
a quotation from Mr. Thomas Jefferson. I swear that I
will close with this, because I know that I have spoken
for a while, but the history of Latin America and the
United States must be understood. This is from one of
the founding fathers — incidentally, President Duque
thanked the founding fathers the other day for having
helped win the independence of our republic. That is
false. In 1786, Jefferson said the following:
“Our confederacy must be viewed as the nest
from which all America, North and South, is to
be peopled. We should take care to not to think it
for the interest of that great continent to press too
soon on the Spaniards. Those countries cannot be
in better hands. My fear is that they are too feeble
to hold them till our population can be sufficiently
advanced to gain it from them, piece by piece.”
That was in 1786 — before the Monroe Doctrine,
before Manifest Destiny, before the Roosevelt Corollary
and before the current imperialist doctrine of President
Trump. That is the history of Latin America. With our
people, with our dignity, with our peasants, with our
indigenous peoples, with our communes and communal
councils, we — with the Venezuelan people and with
our Government — will always triumph.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Plurinational State
of Bolivia.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks the
presidency for having organized this meeting and for
allowing us to participate in it. We also welcome the
presence among us of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, His Excellency
Mr. Jorge Arreaza.
We will not tire of repeating that Latin America and
the Caribbean is a peace-loving area that has ratified
its commitment to the pacific settlement of disputes in
order to forever banish the use and threat of the use of
force in our region, as well as strict compliance with its
obligations not to intervene — directly or indirectly — in
the affairs of any other State. That includes observing
the principles of national sovereignty, equal rights and
the self-determination of peoples within the framework
of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and of international law.
24/48

26/02/2019

The situation that Venezuela is experiencing
demands the attention of the Security Council, not
because that country constitutes a threat to international
peace and security, but because the actions that have
been taken against Venezuela indeed pose a very
serious threat to peace and stability within our region.
During the past weekend, an operation directed
by the United States Government was deployed, with
the aim of using humanitarian aid as a Trojan Horse
to achieve its political objective: regime change in
Venezuela. Despite ideological bombardment and the
massive media campaign deployed around the so-called
“delivery of humanitarian aid”, neither the United
Nations nor the International Committee of the Red
Cross nor the Catholic Church allowed themselves to
be instrumentalized in such a way, because that socalled help violates the principles of independence,
impartiality, neutrality and humanity. Today, as
reported by the media, the Deputy Secretary-General
of the United Nations indicated:
“we have very clear principles regarding
humanitarian aid and, in the case of Venezuela,
there have been attempts to politicize it”.
The debate we are having today is important and
timely, especially when various officials of the United
States Government have spoken about the situation
in Venezuela and are constantly repeating the slogan
that “all options are on the table”. We, and the Council,
should pay a lot of attention to those words and gauge
their gravity. My region and the world have suffered the
tragic consequences of “all options being on the table”.
How many massacres do the countries of Latin
America have to take when all the options are on the
table? How many invasions such as those suffered by
the Dominican Republic, Nicaragua, Panama or Haiti
must be endured when all the options are on the table?
We remember Operation Condor, the School of the
Americas, the forced disappearance of persons, torture,
murder when all the options were on the table. The
Iran-Contra affair in relation to the war in Nicaragua
also comes to mind. In this regard, let me read what the
ruling of the International Court of Justice in Nicaragua
v. United States of America of 27 June 1986 says:
“The Court ... decides that the United States of
America, by training, arming, equipping, financing
and supplying the contra forces or otherwise
encouraging, supporting and aiding military and
paramilitary activities in and against Nicaragua, has
19-05542

26/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

acted, against the Republic of Nicaragua, in breach
of its obligation under customary international law
not to intervene in the affairs of another State.”
When all options are open, when “all options are on
the table”, what comes to mind is the Monroe Doctrine,
the National Security Doctrine and the internal enemy
doctrine. What also comes to mind is the unconditional
support of the United States to the dictators Somoza,
Stroessner, Pinochet, Videla and Banzer. Let
me digress — a result of those situations whose
consequences we still support is the rise of caravans of
migrants and refugees fleeing Central America.
The dramatic story that is unfolding before our eyes
is the new version of many others. In this case, not only
is the macabre script of interventionism and policies of
regime change being repeated, but some of the most
important actors in the aggressions against Nicaragua,
Guatemala, Honduras or Iraq are the same ones that are
playing a leading role in this tragedy.
It is possible that we are being told that we are
bringing to the Security Council issues from an outdated
past and that we are only motivated by resentment we
have not gotten over. Let us talk about what happened
in this century. Does the illegal aggression against Iraq,
based on lies, and leading to a million deaths and the
destabilization of an entire region for decades, not haunt
the conscience of humankind and the Council itself?
Have we forgotten so quickly the 500,000 dead in Syria,
a situation also caused by a policy of regime change?
Via Twitter, the Venezuelan Foreign Minister
has shown photographs from the United States of the
assassination of Muammar Al-Qadhafi, which is very
revealing gesture of its intentions. Libya is a matter
of debate on a regular basis in the Security Council.
I have a few questions about that country. How was
humanitarian aid delivered in Libya? Where are the
billions of dollars in Libyan international reserves?
Who benefits from Libya’s natural resources? Is it the
Libyan people? Is there peace, democracy and freedom
in that beautiful country?
We do not want Venezuela to suffer the same
fate as Libya. We do not want the Venezuelan people
to suffer what the Libyan people are suffering today.
Furthermore, we do not want South America or Central
America endure what the Sahel region is enduring
because of the policies implemented against Libya.
The Security Council has an obligation to prevent this
from happening.

S/PV. 8472

Given its history of having organized, financed
and promoted coups d’état in my region, it is clear that
the motivation of the United States is not the defence
of democracy, nor is it freedom, human rights or the
prosperity of Venezuela. In addition to geopolitical
control and the punishment of those that are not aligned
with their plans, the true motivation of this onslaught
is oil. The invasion of Iraq was for the same reasons.
The hostility towards Iran now is for the same reasons.
I am sure that all of us understand that Venezuela’s oil
reserves are vast as those of Iraq and Iran combined.
If it is true, as the Charter of the United Nations
says, that we are determined to preserve succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, then not all
options are on the table. If the effort made to uphold
the Security Council and the United Nations as a whole
is of any use, then not all the options are on the table.
If we support multilateralism rather than unilateral
actions, if we prefer international law to barbarism, if
we defend peace rather than war, then not all options
are on the table.
In this regard, Bolivia salutes the efforts of the
Montevideo Mechanism based on the principles of the
Organization, as well as the Lima Group declaration
and statements by several members of the Security
Council specifically referring to the use of peaceful and
diplomatic methods, without the use of force. However,
the country that made the threats has not yet ruled out
the use of force. To resolve this critical situation, our
options are in the use of all diplomatic resources and in
the primacy of policy.
If we truly want to support the Venezuelan people
we must, first, respect the principles and purposes
of the United Nations Charter; secondly, lift all
unilateral sanctions as being contrary to international
law, including the financial and economic blockade;
depoliticize and demilitarize humanitarian aid;
eradicate any possibility of a violent output to this
crisis; and support the initiatives to promote a process
of dialogue by and for the Venezuelans, in respect of
their sovereignty and self-determination.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I am grateful for the opportunity to address
the Security Council and to express Mexico’s opinion
on this issue, which has the highest attention of my
Government. I am also grateful for the information that

19-0554225/48

S/PV.8472

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo has provided to the membership
on the situation on the ground and the vision of
the Organization.
Mexico is a country that is deeply respectful of
international law and the rules governing coexistence
among States and is also a firm promoter of peace and
the peaceful settlement of disputes. That is why we have
noted with concern the events that have taken place in
recent days in Venezuela. We urge the parties to the
conflict and the international community to maintain
a position of caution and avoid actions that could
unleash a further escalation of violence. We deeply
regret the loss of human life and respectfully call on
the Venezuelan authorities to avoid the excessive use
of force and to protect and respect the human rights of
the population.
We are aware of the serious difficulties faced by
the Venezuelan people. That is why we believe that the
delivery of humanitarian aid is necessary. But if it is
to reach those most in need expeditiously, it must be
channelled under the coordination and supervision of
neutral and competent international entities such as the
International Committee of the Red Cross or agencies
that form part of the United Nations system and
operate under the principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence.
Secretary-General António Guterres has reiterated
his rejection of any type of violence in Venezuela
and has called for a peaceful and negotiated solution.
Mexico fully agrees with the Secretary-General. It
is precisely in these moments of high tension when
it is most timely to favour diplomacy, dialogue and
negotiation, in accordance with international law and
respect for human rights. In our view, that is the best
way to achieve a legitimate and sustainable solution
to the crisis Venezuela is living through, in strict
compliance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
That is why the Montevideo Mechanism, which
was endorsed by 16 countries of our region, remains a
viable and inclusive option for dialogue as an alternative
to achieve a peaceful, negotiated solution and has
become all the more relevant given the most recent
developments. If the two parties agree to participate
in a dialogue, Mexico stands ready to fully support
it and to immediately deploy the effective diplomatic
mechanisms that we know have been helpful in the past
with the peaceful resolution of conflicts.
26/48

26/02/2019

The Government of Mexico renews its commitment
and readiness to work with all parties in the pursuit of a
peaceful solution in Venezuela for the peace and wellbeing of its people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Ms. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, at the outset, to welcome my brother Foreign
Minister of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to
this meeting.
The Government of the United States, with the
irresponsible complicity of several countries and actors,
staged a dangerous provocation that sought to violate
the sovereignty of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
through the use of pressure and force, which endangered
the lives of thousands of people. The attempt to enter
Venezuela by force, under the pretext of delivering
and distributing supposed humanitarian assistance,
constitutes a serious violation of international law and
of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, and such actions are to be condemned.
The United States continues to try to invent pretexts
for military aggression against Venezuela. It has openly
declared the validity and application of the Monroe
Doctrine, which for the nations of Latin America and
the Caribbean implies the imposition of Governments
designed in Washington, D.C., or totally subjugated to
the will of United States imperialism.
The Cuban Government has already denounced the
escalation of pressure and actions of the Government
of the United States to prepare a military adventure
disguised as humanitarian intervention in the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and called on the international
community to mobilize to prevent that from taking
place. Those actions are aimed at provoking acts with
unpredictable consequences that serve as a pretext for
a military adventure to overthrow the legitimate and
democratic Government of the constitutional President,
Nicolás Maduro Moros. The decision to set a deadline to
force the entry of so-called humanitarian aid constitutes
a serious violation of international humanitarian law,
reveals the political manipulation of that aid and lays
bare the pretext for launching a foreign intervention
in Venezuela.
We reiterate that the United States is laying the
groundwork for military action under a humanitarian
pretext. The Presidents of Costa Rica, Guatemala
19-05542

26/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

and Peru and the Vice-President of Brazil declared
yesterday that the solution to the current situation is
not military intervention. The Foreign Minister of
Spain and the High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Federica
Mogherini, among others, also echoed that sentiment
over the past few hours.
Nevertheless, Vice President Mike Pence said the
following yesterday in Bogotá:
“As we continue to bring economic and diplomatic
pressure on the Maduro regime, we hope for a
peaceful transition to democracy, but as President
Trump has made clear, all options are on the table.”
I wish to emphasize that we have heard the phrase
“all options are on the table” repeated over and over
again in recent weeks by various senior officials of the
Government of the United States. Similar behaviour
and pretexts were adopted by the United States in the
prelude to the wars it launched against Yugoslavia, Iraq
and Libya.
Numerous United States sources have detailed
how the coup is to be coordinated in order to put into
power in Venezuela a Government at the service of
Washington. In addition, a great communications and
political operation is under way — generally a prelude
to actions of greater magnitude by the Government
of the United States, which are possible only with the
complicity of the large corporate media.
We strongly condemn the attempted coup d’état in
Venezuela and the attempt to impose on that country a
Government at the service of the United States. We also
condemn the recurring calls to the Bolivarian military
to join this onslaught and attempts to infiltrate the
Embassies and Consulates of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela abroad, in violation of the Vienna
Convention on Diplomatic Relations.
United States military transport aircraft have
conducted flights from their bases at United States
military installations that house special operations
forces and marine infantry units used to carry out covert
actions, including against leaders of other countries.
The mode of operations of the White House National
Security team and various State Department officials
and United States Embassies is well known. That
Government is exerting overwhelming pressure against
other countries in an attempt to force them to recognize
the so-called President, self-appointed and proclaimed

S/PV. 8472

by Washington, or to call for new elections in the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in open disregard for
the popular will and the institutional integrity of that
country, as expressed in the 20 May elections.
Those who claim to be concerned about the so-called
humanitarian crisis in Venezuela are the same ones
who increasingly apply and strengthen unilateral, and
therefore illegal, coercive economic measures against
the sisterly Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela — by
seizing or freezing its financial assets in third countries;
pressuring Governments that supply Venezuela, the
Venezuelan oil industry and third-country banks to
prevent them from carrying out legitimate financial
transactions, even in third currencies; and confiscating
and stealing the subsidiary of Petróleos de Venezuela in
the United States.
Cuba rejects and condemns the hypocritical calls
for the provision of humanitarian aid by those who
apply measures that violate international law and
international humanitarian law, thus causing hardship
and human suffering and depriving the Venezuelan
people and Government of more than $30 billion.
The accusation made by the representative of the
United States against my country is disgraceful. Our
Government rejects such slander in the most energetic
and categorical terms, while, at the same time, we
reaffirm the duty and commitment to continue providing
our modest cooperation with the brotherly Venezuelan
people, in which more than 20,000 Cuban aid workers
are participating, 94 per cent of them in the area of
health care and the rest in the area of education — just
as we are doing in 83 countries around the world. To
contradict those facts is an offence to the truth and
demonstrates how little respect its Government has for
the Security Council and the United Nations.
Our country reiterates its unshakable solidarity
with the constitutional President, Nicolás Maduro
Moros, with the Bolivarian and Chavista revolution and
with the civil-military union of the Venezuelan people,
and affirms that, in the sisterly Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, we must defend today the tenets of the
Proclamation of Latin America and the Caribbean as a
Zone of Peace. Today we must defend the sovereignty,
independence and sovereign equality of every State in
the region.
Cuba has called on the international community to
act in defence of peace and avoid, by pooling the efforts
of all actors without exception, a military intervention

19-0554227/48

S/PV.8472

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

against the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. Cuba
has called for an international initiative to bring peace
to Venezuela in opposition to war and the military
intervention of the United States, which would harm
the independence, the sovereignty and the interests
of the Latin American peoples from the Rio Bravo
to Patagonia, and in favour of the supreme good for
humankind — peace and the right to life.
Let us not allow a repetition in Venezuela of the
sad and painful history of United States military
interventions, on more than one occasion, in Mexico,
Nicaragua, the Dominican Republic, Haiti, more
recently in Grenada and Panama, and in our own
country, Cuba. Given the urgency of the situation, we
encourage the Montevideo Mechanism, especially the
Government of the United Mexican States, the Eastern
Republic of Uruguay, the Governments of the Caribbean
Community and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, to
continue to spare no effort in moving towards achieving
a solution based on dialogue and absolute respect for
the independence and sovereignty of Venezuela and the
validity of the principles of international law, especially
the principle of non-intervention.
At this moment, as we decide to ensure the validity
of the principles of international law and the Charter of
the United Nations, that the basis of any Government’s
legitimacy resides in the support and vote of its people
and that no foreign pressure can replace the sovereign
exercise of self-determination, in such circumstances,
one can only be for or against war.
We hope that the Security Council will fulfil its
role and responsibility as the primary guarantor of
international peace and security and will not lend its
support to military adventures. We call on Security
Council members to act in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law and not to intervene, directly or
indirectly, in the internal affairs of any other State,
while respecting the principles of national sovereignty,
equal rights and self-determination of peoples in
upholding peace, which is precious for humankind, our
America and the Venezuelan people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this second Security
Council meeting (see S/PV.8452) to address an issue
of the utmost gravity that is severely affecting the
28/48

26/02/2019

region, for which the Council is called upon to play
a fundamental role in the search for ways to find a
solution to this pressing humanitarian and political
crisis. We appreciate the briefing by Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs. She not only provided a summary
of events over the past several days but also, with that
information, a dramatic overview of the humanitarian
situation in Venezuela.
In our previous statement on this subject in the
Council we indicated that Chile promotes democracy
as the central element of its foreign policy and as
the political system that constitutes the appropriate
framework for full respect for human rights. The values
of tolerance, dialogue, equal opportunities and the full
exercise of fundamental freedoms are best guaranteed
within a context within which the rule of law prevails,
there is respect and balance among the powers of the
State and where public institutions operate responsibly.
Unfortunately, in recent days we have witnessed
once again the profound crisis that Venezuela is
undergoing, which is affecting its institutions and
has led to an unacceptable deterioration in the living
conditions and inalienable rights of the country’s
citizens. All of this is happening under an authoritarian
and repressive Government.
With regard to the events of two days ago, under the
leadership of the President of my country, Mr. Sebastián
Piñera, Chile participated in the international and
solidary effort to assemble the humanitarian aid that
Venezuela desperately needs, as confirmed by the
briefing by Under Secretary-General DiCarlo. However,
the distribution of aid through that collaborative effort
was not possible owing to the negative and violent
reaction by the Maduro regime.
Accordingly, the Government of Chile reiterates in
the strongest terms its categorical condemnation of the
violent acts committed by the police and para-police
forces of the illegitimate regime of Nicolás Maduro
in areas bordering Colombia and Brazil, set off by the
attempt to peacefully deliver humanitarian aid, during
which many people tragically lost their lives and many
others were injured.
We join in the condemnation made by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, as those acts of indiscriminate violence affected
unarmed civilians who were only seeking access to the
humanitarian aid that was supposed to be delivered.
19-05542

26/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

There is no justification or explanation whatsoever for
this most recent flagrant and unacceptable violation
of the human rights of all Venezuelans, who are today
overwhelmed by the profound social, humanitarian,
political and economic crisis affecting their country.
For that reason, it warrants the determined repudiation
of the international community.
The Government of Chile renews its full support for
the interim President of Venezuela, Juan Guaidó, and
also conveys to him its most sincere condolences for
those fallen Venezuelan citizens, as well as its solidarity
and wishes for the speedy recovery of those wounded.
We also support the commencement of the democratic
transition process in Venezuela so as to hold new
elections as soon as possible, with the participation of
all political actors and the international guarantees and
standards needed for a process of this scale. We call
for the guarantee of the rule of law, the fundamental
rights of persons and social peace so as to facilitate the
Government’s transition.
Chile is a member of the Lima Group, and
accordingly emphatically reiterates its support for a
political, diplomatic and peaceful solution to the crisis
that Venezuela is going through. In that regard, I wish
to stress that Chile does not, and will not, support
alternatives that run contrary to international law and
the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. That is why, together with other States of the
region, we will continue to work through diplomatic
channels in constant dialogue with the international
community to reach a solution to this prolonged crisis
in our region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Fernández de Soto Valderrama (Colombia)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank you, Sir, for convening
this second meeting on the issue at hand, which is of the
utmost importance to Colombia and my region. We also
thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for
her briefing.
Our presence in the Council is a reaffirmation
of an essential principle underpinning my country’s
international relations — our belief in multilateralism
to uphold the values of the Charter of the United
Nations and the Inter-American Democratic Charter.
Let there be no doubt about that. The meeting of the
Lima Group that took place yesterday in Bogotá is an

S/PV. 8472

excellent example of the validity of multilateral action.
More than 50 nations of the world recognize interim
President Juan Guaidó and the legitimate authority of
the National Assembly and agree on the need to recover
freedom and democracy for Venezuela.
The serious situation in that brotherly country is
one of the most intense in the history of Latin America
and the Caribbean. It is marked by massive human rights
violations, a deep economic recession, an erosion of the
separation of powers and an unprecedented humanitarian
and migration crisis that has spilled beyond its borders
and affected Colombia. According to statistics from the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and the International Organization
for Migration (IOM), food shortages, lack of medicine
and medical supplies have led 3.4 million Venezuelans
to abandon their homes. Likewise, according to the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, in Venezuela the prevalence of hunger almost
tripled between 2010 and 2012 and between 2015 and
2017. An estimated 3.7 million Venezuelans, like those
I just mentioned, were undernourished between 2015
and 2017. Those statistics are from the organizations
I just mentioned and are contained in sobering reports
issued to the world.
Given the increasing flow of migration from
Venezuela to the countries of the region, in September
2018, at the request of the Colombian Government
and convinced about the urgent need to provide the
Venezuelan people with humanitarian aid and the good
offices of the Secretary-General, UNHCR and IOM
announced the appointment of Mr. Eduardo Stein as
Special Representative for Venezuelan Refugees and
Migrants, in order to meet the needs caused by the
mass exodus. As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia noted yesterday,
“with the support of the Lima Group, several
countries made a considerable effort to facilitate
the operation of a humanitarian channel, provide
basic international assistance and alleviate, even
partially, the serious humanitarian situation
affecting so many Venezuelans”.
Since its first declaration in August 2017 — and
not just recently — the Lima Group has pointed out
the need for humanitarian aid and repeatedly asked the
dictatorial regime not to impede the entry and transit
of humanitarian aid to Venezuelans. Those are the
facts. The response of the illegitimate regime that has

19-0554229/48

S/PV.8472

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

imposed the tyranny of fear, repression and violence
as a mechanism of intimidation, and has organized
collectives of armed civilians, is known to all. Despite
the insistent appeals of the international community,
they have blocked access to the assistance offered, even
going so far as burning aid that had managed to cross
the border.
While thousands of Venezuelan citizen volunteers
tried to deliver aid to improve the lives of their families,
the dictator celebrated with indifference to the agony,
anguish and despair inflicted on his people. That
merely reiterated what was already clear to everyone.
The dictatorship stopped thinking about its people
years ago and its actions on the weekend have sealed its
moral and diplomatic defeat.
I have with me the protocols of the operation that
took place on Saturday. I invite the Security Council
to look at the information with us. I would like the
Security Council to delve deeply into the protocols
that clearly reflect what was done hour by hour. An
additional report issued by the General Secretariat of
the Organization of American States, which assisted in
the operation, is also available. It would be very easy
to write a novel about what happened on Saturday. As
one eminent Colombian has said, if you lie and lie some
more, something will stick. I invite Council members
to look at the protocols and compare them to the
information Mr. Arreaza provided here today.
I too have photographs that I could pass around in
the Security Council but, out of respect for colleagues
who have not yet spoken, I will not do so. The facts are
surprising. The entire world saw them. It is very easy
to twist and manipulate the facts, including the memory
of Bolívar, but there can be no doubt about the fact that
Colombia, too, has information about the events as they
occurred minute by minute. We are ready to submit
that information and share it with the Security Council
so that members know that what has been said is the
absolute truth and reality.
The coordination effort of the Lima Group has
shown the usurping regime that its dictatorship is
increasingly isolated as a result of its deliberate actions
against the Venezuelan people. The Lima Group, with
the presence of President Juan Guaidó at its meeting,
will continue with his consent to provide humanitarian
aid, guided by the responsibility of the international
community, use diplomatic and humanitarian means
to support the population in need, achieve democratic
30/48

26/02/2019

transition, call free elections, restore constitutional
order and achieve institutional, economic and social
reconstruction in Venezuela.
That firm conviction is contained in the historic
declaration issued at the 11th meeting of Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of the Lima Group, which states
that the transition to democracy must be spearheaded
peacefully by Venezuelans themselves, within the
framework of the Constitution and international law,
supported by political and diplomatic means, without
the use of force. The members of the Lima Group know
that very well and the international community knows
it too. One fundamental principle is that we decided
to share this experience to strengthen and rescue
democracy for the benefit of the Venezuelan people.
Within multilateral forums, we will of course continue
working to ensure that the relevant resolutions and
sanctions are adopted and complaints lodged following
the events of 23 February.
Colombia has endured violence. We understand
very well the suffering of our people and are working
tirelessly to ease it. The Ambassador of Russia made a
few observations that are truly surprising because, with
the help of the Council and the various organizations
and agencies of the United Nations, we are making
progress with the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia. The President of Colombia has also made
a genuine commitment to implementing and advancing
the goal of stabilization in the peace agreements signed.
Colombia recognizes, and its President has confirmed,
that legality, the rule of law and democracy are the
forms of coexistence that ensure peace and the future
of citizens. The Security Council cannot fail to heed
the demands of Venezuelans who aspire to live with
freedom, well-being and democracy.
Allow me to take a few more minutes, but obviously
the events that have transpired in my country oblige me
to do so. I will address two or three aspects.
The preliminary report to which I referred clearly
indicates that, at noon, four trucks arrived carrying
humanitarian aid, with almost 50 people in each truck.
The Bolivarian National Guard immediately began
launching tear gas towards the convoy, and most of
those affected were on the Columbian side, causing
a temporary retreat. The Organization of American
States directly observed that more than 30 people were
injured, most of them from the organizing entities.
19-05542

26/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

At 1:45 p.m., the first and second aid convoys
were seen ablaze on the Venezuelan side, with no
confirmation of the facts of the incident. Throughout
the day, shots were heard constantly on the Venezuelan
side, and at some point tear gas was launched and
pellets were fired, leading to an undetermined number
of people being injured, in addition to the uneasiness
and fear of the population.
Four trucks with humanitarian aid arrived at the
Simón Bolívar International Bridge and were stuck at the
crossing. They made several attempts to enter, although
that was not possible. In the afternoon, given the order
for the vehicles to return and the bridge to be closed, a
strong opposition was mounted by Venezuelans, who
continued to prevent the implementation of that order
until the publication of this report.
Colombia fully complied with the protocol to receive
the humanitarian aid that it was given. It is very easy to
claim that a novel could be written about what happened
in the span of those days, but I would recommend that
Mr. Arreaza write such a story, because it is nothing
more than fiction — a make-believe story that seeks
to manipulate the truth of what happened. Everyone
can draw their own conclusions about what has been
said here. Colombia is willing to share information in
that regard.
On 21 February, Ms. Mogherini stated that what
is happening in Venezuela is a multidimensional crisis
that is increasingly affecting Venezuelans, and of course
it is the obligation of the international community, as
demonstrated throughout time in the classical theories
on international humanitarian law, to fulfil its duty and
show solidarity by helping to ensure that the people
receive due care and attention.
I will end my remarks on that note. I apologize for
being emotional, but in the defence of the legitimate
interests of Colombia and the region we must always
ensure that we place the proper emphasis so that there
is no doubt as to the reality and the good faith in which
my country has acted.

S/PV. 8472

international community. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs and
Peacebuilding Rosemary DiCarlo.
Argentina believes that the serious political,
economic and humanitarian crisis in Venezuela requires
urgent and concerted international action and that the
Council has an important role to play, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, in order to
prevent the further deterioration of the situation and
an increase in the terrible suffering of the Venezuelan
population. The crisis in Venezuela has deteriorated
at an alarming rate, as evidence by the recent events
beginning on 23 February on the border with Colombia.
Maduro’s dictatorial regime used force to block the
multilateral, peaceful humanitarian initiative to deliver
food and medicine to alleviate the desperate situation in
which millions of Venezuelans find themselves. It did
so by stifling with unacceptable violence the innocent
and unarmed civilian population that was trying to
help the entry and distribution of such assistance. That
deliberate action taken by the Maduro regime, which
violated human rights and international law, left at least
four dead and hundreds injured.
Argentina strongly condemns the fact that the
Maduro regime has prevented the entry of humanitarian
aid into Venezuela and firmly repudiates once again the
repressive and violent actions of the regime against the
Venezuelan people. In view of the recent serious and
deplorable events of 23 February, on the understanding
that indiscriminate violence against civilian populations
and the denial of access to humanitarian aid constitute
crimes against humanity, the Lima Group, of which
Argentina is a member, decided on 25 February to
ask the International Criminal Court to open an
investigation into those events, within the framework
of the proceedings brought by Argentina and other
countries before the Court in September 2018.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.

For all these reasons, Argentina and the other
countries of the Lima Group have come to the unanimous
and resounding conclusion that the continuity of
Maduro and his illegitimate regime in power represents
an unprecedented threat to the security and peace of the
whole region.

Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): I am grateful for the convening of this
meeting to address the tragic situation in Venezuela,
which is of particular interest to my country, the Latin
American and Caribbean region and the rest of the

That grave situation has created a regional
and global migration and refugee crisis. More
than 3 million Venezuelans have had to seek
refuge in other countries, particularly in Latin
America and the Caribbean. Argentina has received

19-0554231/48

S/PV.8472

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

more than 130,000 Venezuelan migrants and refugees,
while continuing to provide humanitarian assistance to
the Venezuelan people through various missions carried
out by the White Helmets Commission of Argentina.
The United Nations cannot remain indifferent to
the crisis in Venezuela, given its gravity, depth and
manifold impacts. We recall that the Lima Group, as
early as October 2017, asked the Secretary-General
to contribute to resolving that serious crisis and the
ongoing human rights violations in Venezuela. We
reiterate that call on this occasion.
It should also be recalled that, in September 2018,
the Human Rights Council adopted resolution 39/1
on the promotion and protection of human rights in
Venezuela, sponsored by Argentina and other countries,
which expresses deep concern about human rights
violations in that country and urges the Government
of Venezuela to accept humanitarian aid to alleviate
the shortage of food and medicine. In that regard, the
Lima Group also decided to promote the appointment
of an independent expert or commission of inquiry on
the situation in Venezuela, in addition to reiterating
its call on the High Commissioner for Human Rights
to take the actions she deems appropriate in fulfilling
her mandate.
Argentina renews its support for the interim
President of Venezuela, Juan Guaidó, and reiterates
its support for the efforts he is making, together with
the National Assembly, to allow the entry of food
and medicine in order to alleviate the suffering that
the policies of the illegitimate Maduro regime have
imposed on the entire Venezuelan population, and to
achieve the restoration of democracy.
Argentina believes that the United Nations system,
in addition to providing support for the opening of a
humanitarian channel, should contribute to facilitating
a peaceful transition to democracy in Venezuela,
without the use of force, led by Venezuelans themselves
through free, democratic, transparent and fully
guaranteed presidential elections as soon as possible.
For my country, that is the only way to solve the
serious crisis that has gripped Venezuela for too long.
A true and lasting peace cannot be achieved through
oppression and at the expense of democracy and civil
and political liberties. Therefore, we make call for the
urgent restoration of the rule of law and full respect for
human rights in Venezuela.
32/48

26/02/2019

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): Let me first
congratulate you on convening this important meeting
at a crucial juncture of the history of Venezuela and the
broader Latin American and Caribbean region.
The events of 23 February were a wake-up call to
the dangers that the international community — most
especially Latin America and the Caribbean — will
face if the crisis in Venezuela is not defused swiftly.
They also confirmed who ultimately sides with the
Venezuelan people. The regime’s actions to block
humanitarian aid that would help feed the hungry
and heal the sick were not only inadmissible by any
reasonable human standards but were brutally cruel and
claimed human lives, including the lives of indigenous
people living at the Brazilian-Venezuelan border.
Ours is a region where the path of democracy and
development has been chosen. The Inter-American
Democratic Charter, alongside several subregional
instruments on the same topic, is a testament to the
strength of that commitment. We are all keenly aware
that the brutal and illegitimate regime of Nicolás
Maduro has taken a regrettable detour from any vision
of a free and prosperous future for its people.
It was only fitting that the president of the
democratically elected National Assembly, the only
legitimate power standing in Venezuela, swore himself
in as interim President of the country. This was done
in strict obedience to the national Constitution since
Maduro rigged elections, suffocated the voice of
Venezuelans and ultimately usurped power. Since then,
a growing number of members of the international
community — 50 countries as of today — have
denounced the regime’s unlawfulness and recognized
Juan Guaidó as the rightful President of Venezuela
until free and fair elections are finally held. Brazil has
added its voice to that call because we hope to see a
democratic and prosperous Venezuela flourish in the
aftermath of this protracted crisis.
Conscious of an escalating situation along our
borders, the Lima Group met in Bogotá just yesterday to
show hemispheric solidarity to our brothers and sisters
in Venezuela and also to help pave the way for the
democratic transition in the country. The Lima Group
does not claim to speak for the entirety of the region,
but our voice carries the weight of a group of nations
that, since August 2017, has been shouldering their
19-05542

26/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

S/PV. 8472

responsibility in finding a way to help Venezuelans in
their struggle against authoritarianism.

Guinea on the excellent conduct of the work of the
Security Council this month.

As stated in the Bogota communiqué, we
condemned the regime’s criminal use of violence and
military force against the provision of humanitarian
assistance and reiterated the appeal to the Venezuelan
Armed Forces to adhere to the legitimate authority of
President Guaidó. The Lima Group conveyed to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) its support for a
request submitted last September that the ICC examine
the humanitarian catastrophe committed by the Maduro
regime against its own people.

The Government and the people of Nicaragua
have continuously reaffirmed — and we reaffirm
today — our full commitment and our absolute
responsibility to comply with the instruments of the
United Nations, including the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as its mechanisms and everything
that represents the possibility and duty of peacefully
transcending conflicts. Our commitment is reinforced
by the outrageous threats that arise from interference
and intervention in the affairs of States, as well as by
any practice, proposal or discourse that seeks to revive
the offensive history of Latin America and that, by
means of intimidation, disrespect and the use of means
and technologies of information, seeks to promote
hatred and separation between peoples and States and
between brothers and sisters throughout the world.

Latin America and the Caribbean is first and
foremost a region of peace. Brazil, its largest country
measured by territorial mass and population, has not
fought a war with its neighbours for the past 150 years.
That is no small achievement and did not happen by
chance. It is the by-product — or rather the direct
consequence — of the determined choice of diplomacy
and an irrevocable preference for peaceful means
to resolve international disputes, as befits those who
remain true to international law and the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.
In that regard, the Lima Group, through its Bogotá
communiqué, decided to encourage the nomination by
the Human Rights Council of an independent expert
or an investigation commission on the human rights
violations in Venezuela, in accordance with Human
Rights Council resolution 39/1 of 27 September 2018.
The Lima Group also requested the Secretary-General
to engage the United Nations system in addressing the
situation in Venezuela.
Brazil calls upon the international community,
especially those countries that have not yet recognized
President Juan Guaidó, to join the efforts for the
democratic transition in Venezuela, recognizing the
legitimate Government of Mr. Guaidó and demanding
that the regime’s violence against its own people
be stopped.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nicaragua.
Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): We recognize the presence among us of our
brother Jorge Arreaza, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. Allow us to
congratulate you, Sir, your team and the people and
the Government of our sister Republic of Equatorial

Nicaragua fraternally summons all those present,
in particular the Governments and peoples of our
America, to defend the Charter of the United Nations,
which embodies the right to live and coexist in peace
and harmony, rejecting speeches and practices that
injure the dignity of peoples, the strength of our
institutions, our laws and above all the Constitution of
each State — the Magna Carta that each State defends
as it defends its honour, its pride, its national rights.
We call on our fellow countries to respect the
will of the people. We call on our fellow countries
to rule out threats and actions that bring instability,
suffering and death to millions of human beings, and
that by denying them peace deny them the possibility
of living with security and well-being. We call on our
fellow countries to cease aggression and hostilities,
which seek to subdue our peoples, condemning us to
poverty, harassment and humiliation while destroying
economies and exposing so many human beings to
misfortune, vulnerability and dependence.
Triggering chaos, instability, violence and
economic strangulation and issuing threats of death and
war constitutes a serious violation of universal human
rights, and alienates countries and peoples that have
been objectified and singled out from the fulfilment
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Sustainable Development Goals, thus increasing
the number of human beings and families living in
exclusion, poverty and insecurity by millions.

19-0554233/48

S/PV.8472

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

In the spirit of brotherhood, and with all the respect
that we owe each other as fellow inhabitants of our
planet, we are called upon to defend — with every
fibre of our strength — peace, respectful relations,
and the right of every country to choose its political,
economic and social model without interference,
threats or coercive actions that contradict the intention
of the United Nations Charter and all instruments of
international law.
We have chosen the path of peace and not of war. At
the summit of the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States, held in Havana in 2014, the Heads of
State and Government in our America and the Caribbean
proclaimed our entire territory a zone of peace, justice
and development, and we must respect — and ensure
respect for — that proclamation.
In this sad, unfortunate hour, which seems to repeat
a historical cycle that we thought we had transcended,
we are called upon in brotherhood to defend peace
everywhere, and at this particular moment in Venezuela,
as well as throughout our America and the Caribbean.
We want peace, agreement and dialogue, with a view to
resolving with all problems, contradictions or conflict
in good faith, so that our peoples do not suffer the scorn
and brutality of war in any of its forms, or the poverty
that snatches away all our rights.
Nicaragua welcomes the efforts that the
international community and the organizations
defending international law are carrying out, and that
we are carrying out, so as to avoid other tragedies that
repeat, as we have said, the history of discord and
the desire of the powerful to dominate and force into
submission peoples of dignity. We have learned — and
must now know — how to choose life with respect, and,
with the strength of our unbending and indestructible
identities, dismiss anything that seeks to ruin the
brave and noble and brave soul of our American and
Caribbean, which emphatically wants peace.
Nicaragua welcomes the Montevideo Mechanism
created by our America and the Caribbean, which,
bringing together Mexico, Bolivia, Uruguay and the
countries of the Caribbean Community, seeks to foster
understanding, agreement, respect and dignity, in order
to promote fraternal and fair solutions in Venezuela.
We salute the heroic and magnificent people of
Simón Bolívar, as well as their President, Comrade
Nicolás Maduro, and in embracing Venezuela, we
embrace all the peoples of our America who proclaim
34/48

26/02/2019

homeland, life, love and hope. War offers us nothing;
we wish to live in peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke
in Spanish): The delegation of Guatemala thanks
the presidency of Equatorial Guinea for convening
today’s open Security Council meeting on the situation
in Venezuela.
Today’s meeting is very timely owing to the events
in recent days and because yesterday the 11th meeting
of Foreign Ministers of the Lima Group was held
in Bogotá, Colombia. Taking part at this meeting
were the President of the Republic of Guatemala,
Mr. Jimmy Morales Cabrera, and our Foreign Minister,
Ms. Sandra Erica Jovel Polanco, which shows my
country’s commitment to restoring constitutional
order in Venezuela. They reiterated our support for the
Interim President of Venezuela, Mr. Juan Guaidó, and
the importance of alleviating as soon as possible the
humanitarian and security crisis that the Venezuelan
people are enduring.
As already mentioned by several member countries
of the Lima Group, our Foreign Ministers adopted
a declaration yesterday supporting the process of
democratic transition and reconstruction in Venezuela,
and condemning the deliberate actions of the Nicolás
Maduro regime, which, without taking into account the
suffering of the population or the insistent calls of the
international community, prevented, on 23 February,
the entry of basic necessities and international
assistance through acts of violent repression that
caused multiple injuries and deaths on the border with
Colombia and Brazil. We express our repudiation for the
violent actions of the illegitimate Maduro Government
that have further worsened the humanitarian crisis
that represents an enormous challenge for millions of
Venezuelans, as well as for neighbouring countries
and for our entire region. We urge that international
humanitarian assistance be allowed to enter without
further hindrance or delay.
We reiterate the urgent call for the immediate
restoration of democratic order in Venezuela through
the holding of free, transparent and fair elections,
called by the legitimate authorities, in accordance
with international standards, and as soon as possible.
These elections must be conducted with appropriate
guarantees and the participation of all political leaders
19-05542

26/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

and with international observation, as well as the
appointment of a new national electoral council.
Keeping Nicolás Maduro and his illegitimate regime
in power represents an unprecedented threat to peace
and security, freedom and prosperity in the region. We
support the interim President, Juan Guaidó, in pursuit
of his efforts to defend and comply with Venezuela’s
Constitution. More than 50 countries around the world
have extended support to him and have recognized the
constitutional authority of the National Assembly and
the interim President Guaidó.
It is important for any democratic order to
fully respect the fundamental rights and freedoms
of all its citizens, which are the conditions needed
for institutional, economic and social rebuilding in
Venezuela. We call upon the United Nations, including
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
to act in accordance with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter for the prompt resolution of
the crisis in Venezuela.
It is important to emphasize that, for Guatemala,
the transition to democracy should be conducted by
Venezuelans themselves, in a peaceful manner and within
the framework of their Constitution. It is important to
reiterate that we reject any military solution or threat
of use of force or any act of provocation that endangers
peace and security in our region. Together with the
countries that make up the Lima Group, Guatemala will
continue to work with the objective of achieving the
restoration of democratic order in Venezuela, peace and
security in the country, respect for the human rights of
all Venezuelans and the recovery of a dignified life for
them, without confrontations and through dialogue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Suriname.
Mrs. Sweeb (Suriname): I have the honour of
speaking on behalf of Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados,
Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Trinidad and
Tobago and Suriname.
At the outset, I welcome the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Jorge Arreaza Montserrat, Minister of
Foreign Affairs of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The countries for which I speak continue to follow
closely the current unsatisfactory and increasingly
volatile situation in the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela. It is with grave concern that we also follow

S/PV. 8472

the highly polarized and polarizing circumstances
surrounding Venezuela at this time, as well as the
deteriorating situation in that country. In all of this, we
are most concerned about, and motivated by, the plight
of the people of Venezuela.
The countries for which I speak do not choose one
side or the other. Instead, we choose principle — the
principle that led to the founding of the United Nations
and the inclusion, in the Charter of the United Nations,
of Article 2, paragraph 4, which calls for Member
States to refrain from the threat or use of force. That
principle gave rise to Article 21 of the Charter of the
Organization of American States, which recognizes
territorial inviolability and the principles of human
rights, international law, the rule of law, the sanctity
of national sovereignty and the pivotal principles of the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the pursuit of peace,
dialogue and compromise to ensure the preservation of
the dignity and worth of the human person.
Those
principles
form
the
root
of
multilateralism — indeed the very foundation upon
which the United Nations was built. Today we reaffirm
our adherence to those principles. Also critical for us
is the maintenance of the area of the Caribbean and its
wider regions as a zone of peace. We remain steadfast
in our view that economic strangulation and military
intervention not only run counter to those principles
but will also exacerbate the already great suffering of
the people of Venezuela.
It is our position that there must be a political
solution that is crafted and owned by Venezuelans
themselves and their leaders. We support and call for
a pathway to peace — forged not by threats but by
dialogue, not by escalating tensions but by cooling
them down, not by marksmanship but by mediation
and not by the suffocation of sanctions but by the tools
of diplomacy.
Those of us who wish for the peace of Venezuela
and the prosperity of its people must actively encourage
dialogue in which both sides sit, talk and listen so that
common ground on which they can move forward may
be found. It is in pursuit of that broad objective that our
heads of Government have offered their good offices
to facilitate dialogue among all parties with a view to
creating a peaceful resolution to the deepening deadlock.
Our countries fully support and endorse the
Montevideo Mechanism, which has four main phases.

19-0554235/48

S/PV.8472

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

26/02/2019

The first phase, the dialogue phase, creates
conditions for direct contact among the actors involved
in an environment of security.

actions undermine the principles of independence,
impartiality, neutrality and consent, which should
govern all humanitarian operations.

The second phase is the negotiations phase,
which provides a strategic presentation of the results
of the dialogue phase, as well as opportunities for the
relaxation of positions, finding common ground and the
identification of potential agreement.

Suriname restates its strong commitment to the
principles of international law as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as in our own
Constitution. Suriname therefore denounces all acts of
aggression that violate those principles.

The third phase is the commitments phase,
which fosters the construction of, and subscription
to, agreements that are based on the results of the
negotiations phase.

Given that international concern should first and
foremost be directed to the welfare of the Venezuelan
people, my delegation rejects the politicization of
humanitarian aid offered without the consent of the
legitimate Government of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.

Finally, the implementation phase sees the
materialization of the commitments assumed in the
commitments phase, with international support.
Four distinguished citizens of recognized
international experience and competence from Latin
America and the Caribbean have been identified for that
purpose. They will act as honest brokers and assist in
actualizing the Montevideo Mechanism by supporting
attempts to bring the contending parties to the table of
dialogue and diplomacy. We urge all parties, inside and
outside Venezuela, to give the Mechanism the time and
space it needs to work for the benefit of the well-being
of the people of that country.
From the painful experience of history, both
ancient and recent, the United Nations knows the
high and awful price of military intervention and the
scourge of war. Ancient and recent history have also
taught us that peace and prosperity are indivisible. The
people of Venezuela have already suffered enough.
They deserve to live in peace. They deserve a future
that offers prosperity. We urge all sides, difficult and
complex though it may be, to enter into a constructive
dialogue and work together to build a pathway to peace
for the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
I would now like to make a few remarks in my
national capacity.
First, we would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing.
The Government of Suriname follows with
increasing concern the situation regarding the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela. Reports of humanitarian aid
efforts aggressively being carried out at the Venezuelan
border, while stability and tranquillity seem to remain
in that country, are particularly alarming, as such
36/48

Suriname reiterates its call for meaningful and
inclusive dialogue, such as the Montevideo Mechanism,
as the only way to reach a peaceful and lasting solution
to the internal conflict that has arisen in the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela. We again implore all the parties
concerned to engage in such a dialogue in order to
secure and sustain our region, Latin America and the
Caribbean, as a zone of peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Paraguay.
Mr. Arriola Ramírez (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): Today is exactly 30 days since the previous
meeting on this issue (see S/PV.8452). We must ask
ourselves why we are gathered here again at the Security
Council. The answer is obvious — the continuation in
power of Nicolás Maduro and the fact that his illegitimate
regime has generated a humanitarian crisis that poses
an unprecedented threat to the security, peace, freedom
and prosperity of the people of Venezuela and affects
the entire region.
On this occasion, we once again express our
concern about the deterioration of the political, social
and humanitarian situation of Venezuela, as well as the
systematic breakdown of the rule of law, democracy and
the fundamental freedoms of the citizens of Venezuela.
On 23 February, we observed the criminal acts of
the illegitimate regime of Nicolás Maduro, who blocked
the entry of international humanitarian aid in defiance
of the demands and suffering of the people of Venezuela
and the call of the international community. We reject
and condemn those violent repressive acts, which left
many dead and injured and thus increased the risk to the
19-05542

26/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

S/PV. 8472

life, integrity and dignity of the people of Venezuela,
who are victims of a cruel and merciless oppression.

presence of the Minister for Foreign Relations of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Mr. Jorge Arreaza.

We ask the International Criminal Court to consider
the petition submitted by a group of countries, including
Paraguay, on 27 September, asking for the Court to
consider the grave humanitarian crisis in Venezuela, the
criminal violence of Maduro’s regime against civilians
and the denial of access to international assistance as
crimes against humanity.

Uruguay is following with deep concern the
escalation in tensions in the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and the regrettable incidents that were
reported this past weekend, which led to the loss of
life and dozens of wounded. We believe that, now
more than ever, we must call for caution and restraint,
which must guide our actions so as to prevent a further
deterioration of the situation at a time when initiatives
are under way that seek to bring the parties together in
order to reach an understanding aimed at a reaching
peaceful and democratic solution to the current crisis.

The presence of President Mario Abdo Benítez in
the Colombian city of Cúcuta, which borders Venezuela,
is a clear display of Paraguay’s firm commitment to,
and solidarity with, the brotherly people of Venezuela
in safeguarding values, ethical and moral principles,
the rule of law, human rights and public liberties.
We recall that Paraguay was the first country to
break off diplomatic relations with the illegitimate
regime of Nicolás Maduro. In that regard, we reaffirm
once again in the Security Council our full support for,
and recognition of, the National Assembly, which was
legitimately elected in December 2015, and Mr. Juan
Guaidó, as interim President of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela. Likewise, we resolutely support the
agreement for the promotion of a national rescue plan,
adopted by the National Assembly on 29 January.
We also reiterate that the process of democratic
transition and the institutional, economic and social
reconstruction of Venezuela must be led peacefully by
the Venezuelans themselves in accordance with their
national Constitution and respect for international law
and supported through political and diplomatic means,
while eschewing the use of force and violence. The
Venezuelan people must be the protagonists in their
own liberation. We urgently call for the holding of fair,
transparent and credible elections.
Lastly, we extend a special greeting to the brotherly
and courageous Venezuelan people on behalf of the
Paraguayan Government and its people, who support
and encourage them and hope that this process will
renew the example that Venezuela provided for us
in the past as a beacon of democracy enlightening
Latin America.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her detailed briefing. I also welcome the

The Montevideo Mechanism and the International
Contact Group are helping search for a peaceful and
negotiated solution to the conflict. The Montevideo
Mechanism calls for creating channels of dialogue that
would provide the conditions necessary for direct contact
and negotiation among stakeholders. The International
Contact Group also proposes a political, peaceful,
democratic and Venezuelan-owned solution. Both the
Montevideo Mechanism and the International Contact
Group held meetings in Montevideo on 7 February. In
that regard, we encourage exploring those pathways
and building others leading to understanding, while
sparing no effort to move forward in the search for a
solution fostering the stability and the well-being of the
Venezuelan people and the restoration of peace.
Uruguay reaffirms its position that there is no
other possible solution to the situation that Venezuela
is undergoing than one which is freely decided by the
Venezuelans themselves. An environment of dialogue
and negotiations, such as the one we are advocating
for, would naturally lead to the holding of free and
credible elections with reliable international oversight.
That will be the best way to safeguard against a
potential scale of bloodshed that we all want to avoid.
My country will continue to make every effort within
its means to encourage dialogue and understanding,
including with regard to the conditions necessary
for the delivery of humanitarian aid on Venezuelan
territory in order to alleviate the situation affecting the
country’s population. We believe that the delivery of
such aid must be carried out in strict compliance with
the principles of humanity, impartiality, neutrality and
independence. To that end, Uruguay will continue to
adhere strictly to the same principles that it has always
abided by in its international conduct, namely, full
respect for international law, the peaceful settlement of

19-0554237/48

S/PV.8472

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

disputes, the sovereign equality of States, the principle
of non-intervention and respect for human rights.
As a democratic and profoundly pacifist country,
Uruguay will always opt for dialogue and concerted
action and will exert its maximal effort to find a peaceful
and negotiated solution to this crisis. In his statement
yesterday at the opening meeting of the fortieth session
of the Human Rights Council in Geneva, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay, Mr. Rodolfo Nin
Novoa, emphasized,
“Uruguay is not willing to contribute to increasing
tensions and polarization with regard to positions,
given the very serious risk of a civilian and military
confrontation, including foreign intervention,
which we reject in the strongest terms”.
We therefore urge all the parties involved to decrease
tensions and renew dialogue and negotiations that will
allow for restoring stability and peace to all Venezuelans
without exception.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines.
Mr. Bynoe (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Permit me to take this opportunity to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Jorge Arreaza Montserrat, Minister
for Popular Power of Foreign Affairs of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, and to express to him solidarity
with the people and the duly-elected Government
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela during this
difficult period.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines fully associates
itself with the statement made by the representative
of Suriname on behalf of the mentioned Caribbean
Community countries.
It has been exactly one month since we assembled
in the Security Council and received a briefing on
the situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
from Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo (see S/PV.8452), UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peace Building
Affairs. On that occasion, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines voiced its concern regarding the disturbing
events unfolding in Venezuela and echoed a clarion call
for adherence to the fundamental principles of respect
for sovereignty, the rule of law, non-intervention,
non-interference and respect for human rights
and democracy, as enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. Today we reaffirm our unwavering
38/48

26/02/2019

commitment to upholding those bedrock principles and
ensuring the continued viability of all the provisions
of international law, which together form the core
of multilateralism.
During the time between the previous meeting
of the Council to address the situation in Venezuela
and today’s, we have witnessed increased tension
in our region, triggered primarily by unilateral
and extraterritorial coercive measures from third
countries. Undoubtedly, economic asphyxiation and
military intervention lead only to severe humanitarian
consequences that blatantly disregard the principles
that the United Nations and all its Member States have
traditionally championed.
We cannot prematurely sacrifice the Montevideo
Mechanism in the search of a quick fix of militarism
or ill-advised unilateral action. Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines remains guardedly optimistic that the
Montevideo Mechanism can serve as a catalyst towards
a political solution for Venezuela that is crafted by
Venezuelans for all Venezuelans, once given the time
and space.
The archives of the Organization will reveal that the
very drafters of grandiloquent resolutions — especially
in the Council — have often discarded the letter and
spirit of those documents before their ink has dried, in
the frantic pursuit of military solutions to every dispute.
As a small, peace-loving nation with a tiny population,
open borders and no standing army, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines owes its continued peaceful existence
as an independent and sovereign nation to the robust
and universally accepted body of international law,
which includes the Charter of the United Nations. We
therefore cannot and will not stand aside while larger
and more powerful nations manipulate and violate
international law or the central tenets of the United
Nations Charter.
As always, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
believes that dialogue based on mutual respect and
adherence to international law is the only path to
peace and progress, however difficult that path may
be. Over the years, our good friend, the United States
of America, has demonstrated commendable restraint,
patience, global leadership and belief in diplomacy
and that is emblematic in its current admirably dogged
pursuit of dialogue in the second bilateral summit with
North Korea. We believe that the same constructive
dialogue approach should be exhibited with Venezuela
19-05542

26/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

to safeguard our region of Latin America and the
Caribbean as a zone of peace and, more specifically,
to ensure the well-being of all Venezuelans. We simply
cannot and must not foreclose on dialogue in our main
Organization dedicated to multilateral diplomacy.
The people of Venezuela have threatened no one
and neither sanctions nor their deleterious side effects
will coerce the heroic people of Venezuela to surrender
their sovereignty or their right to freely choose their
destiny without foreign interference, even across
ideological divides.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for inviting Canada to join today’s debate.
(spoke in English)
Many thanks to Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
for an excellent and sobering briefing.
(spoke in French)
Canada welcomes the opportunity to discuss
Venezuela in the Security Council. Since we last met
on this issue (see S/PV.8452), the situation in Venezuela
has only deteriorated, with grave consequences. On
23 February, regime actors employed deadly force
against their own people instead of accepting the
delivery of aid from neighbouring countries. Canada
offers deepest condolences to the families of the
victims and we reiterate our call, as many others today
have done, for the events to be investigated and the
perpetrators brought to justice.
The Nicolás Maduro regime continues to hinder
access for much-needed humanitarian assistance to
vulnerable people in Venezuela. Let there be no doubt
that Venezuela is under the control of a dictatorship that
would see its people starve rather than cede one iota of
power. Fleeing such conditions, more than 3.4 million
people have left Venezuela since 2015 and neighbouring
countries have generously offered refuge and support.
On 4 February, during the 10th ministerial
meeting of the Lima Group, Canada announced
some $53 million in development, stabilization and
humanitarian assistance to help those affected by the
crisis in Venezuela, including refugees, migrants and
host communities. However, despite the international
community’s efforts, it is clear that the deepening crisis

S/PV. 8472

in Venezuela is having a growing effect on regional
stability and security.
(spoke in English)
The Lima Group, including Canada and now
with the full participation of Venezuela’s interim
Government, met yesterday in Bogotá, where we
affirmed that the continuance of Nicolás Maduro
and his illegitimate regime in power represents an
unprecedented threat to security, peace, freedom and
prosperity throughout the region. We also reiterated
our commitment to democratic and peaceful transition,
based on the Venezuelan Constitution, and our rejection
of the Maduro regime’s illegitimate claim to power.
Let us be clear. The presidential elections in May
2018 were clearly — I repeat, clearly — fraudulent.
When opposition leaders are jailed, placed under house
arrest or forced into exile and when the media is unable
to report freely, it is not a free, fair and legitimate
election. It is a sad travesty; it is a fraud. Even during
his original mandate, Nicolás Maduro demonstrated
a record of repression, corruption and serious human
rights abuses that violated the constitutional rights of
Venezuelan citizens and denigrated their democratic
institutions. The regime’s attacks on democracy
included the establishment of the National Constituent
Assembly, created to usurp the powers of the
democratically elected National Assembly because of
the opposition majority in that body.
It is clear that the Maduro regime has no authority
to govern Venezuela. Together with more than 50
democratic countries around the world, including
most countries of the Americas, we have recognized
Juan Guaidó as the legitimate interim President
of Venezuela. That recognition is based firmly on
Venezuela’s own Constitution.
On 15 January, the democratically elected National
Assembly declared that the presidency had been
usurped by Nicolás Maduro. According to article 233
of the Venezuelan Constitution, in the absence of a
legitimate President Juan Guaidó, as President of the
National Assembly, shall assume the functions of
interim President. The Lima Group supports his agenda
to call free and fair elections as soon as possible in
order to peacefully restore constitutional democracy
in Venezuela.
Let us recall that the democracy clause of the
Inter-American Democratic Charter, signed by then-

19-0554239/48

S/PV.8472

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

President Chávez in Quebec City in 2001, clearly
rejected any unconstitutional alteration or interruption
of the democratic order. In that spirit, we repeat our call
on the Maduro regime to cede power immediately. Tens
of thousands of Venezuelans have taken to the streets
in recent weeks demanding genuine change. The Lima
Group has made it clear that it supports a peaceful
and democratic transition in Venezuela — a transition
that is already under way, based on the Venezuelan
Constitution — and that it rejects the use of force.
We call on all member States that are in
communication with the Maduro regime to urge an
end to violence. Peaceful protesters seeking food and
medicines should not face tear gas and bullets. Until
that time, Canada stands with the people of Venezuela
in their peaceful struggle for democracy, human rights
and the rule of law. It is those principles that we have
expressed in the Ottawa declaration for Venezuela, and
we encourage all those present to endorse that document
to demonstrate their shared commitment.
We will continue our efforts in cooperation with our
partners in the Lima Group, through the United Nations
system and in other multilateral forums. Canada calls
on all members of the international community to
likewise support the Venezuelan people as they seek
to liberate their country from the Maduro dictatorship.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belize.
Ms. Young (Belize): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting of the Security Council
to receive a briefing on the latest developments in the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. Belize also thanks
the Foreign Minister of Venezuela for his participation
in this briefing and for helping to provide balance to
the discussion.
Belize, as a country of the Latin American and
Caribbean region and a member of the Caribbean
Community, as well as of the Community of Latin
America and the Caribbean (CELAC), is desirous that
the international community shall ensure that peace
remains the only option for the people of Venezuela.
Less than five years ago in 2014, at the second
summit of CELAC, the leaders of Latin America and
the Caribbean proclaimed our region as a zone of
peace, based on respect for the principles and rules of
international law, including the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. I wish to recall
40/48

26/02/2019

that in that proclamation, the leaders pledged their
permanent commitment to the peaceful settlement of
disputes with the aim of forever uprooting the threat
or use of force in our region, and reiterated their
pithy commitment to, first, non-interference in the
internal affairs of any State, the principles of national
sovereignty, equal rights and the self-determination
of peoples; secondly, foster cooperation and friendly
relations among themselves and other nations; and
thirdly, fully respect the inalienable right of every
State to choose its political, economic, social and
cultural system as an essential condition to ensure the
peaceful coexistence of nations. Notwithstanding our
differences in the region, that proclamation stands as
ever more relevant today than it was in 2014.
Belize urges the Security Council, which holds the
mandate for the maintenance of international peace and
security, to likewise respect our leaders’ commitment to
maintaining Latin America and the Caribbean as a zone
of peace and so, directly and clearly, to dissuade any
actions that would lead to any military conflagration
in Venezuela.
In recent weeks, the humanitarian plight of the
Venezuelan people has gained worldwide visibility and
many good intentions have been mobilized to render
humanitarian assistance. At the same time, there are
real concerns that such good intentions may in fact
be a mask for nefarious political objectives. It is for
that reason that any humanitarian assistance, when
requested or welcomed, should be channelled through
institutions such as the United Nations agencies set up
for that purpose, or otherwise through other traditional
modes for providing assistance, such as the International
Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement.
The situation in Venezuela is, in plain view, unwell.
Belize, like others in the Latin American and Caribbean
region, feels duty bound to encourage the earliest
steps for dialogue towards a peaceful resolution. We
recall in that regard the Montevideo Mechanism of
11 February, to which the Government of Venezuela
has given favourable consideration. It is Belize’s
considered view that dialogue leading to compromise
and accommodation of political plurality must take
place between the Government and the opposition and,
above all, that it must be done entirely unaccompanied
by the threat or use of force.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
19-05542

26/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke
in Spanish): My country thanks the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea for convening this open meeting to
once again address the deep political, economic, social
and humanitarian crisis in Venezuela. We also thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for the important briefing she
delivered to the Council.
Ecuador reaffirms the right of all peoples of the world
to democracy and the obligation of their Governments
to promote and defend it. Likewise, we reiterate the
constitutional and democratically elected authority of
the National Assembly of Venezuela, as well as our firm
support for the actions taken to request international
humanitarian aid, the release of political prisoners, the
freezing of the assets of corrupt Government officials
and the provision of guarantees to civilian and military
officials who support the restoration of democracy and
the rule of law in Venezuela.
Ecuador’s belief in the urgent need to reach a
political, peaceful and democratic solution to the
crisis in Venezuela has been confirmed by the recent
acts of violence in connection with the blockade of
humanitarian aid shipments. Ecuador rejects the use
of public force and the action of paramilitary groups
against peaceful demonstrators, as well as condemns
that such acts led to the death and injuries suffered
by some of those demonstrators, as was the case of
Venezuelans from the indigenous community of Pemón.
Independent information gives an account of
the urgent needs of a good part of the Venezuelan
population for medicine and food, and of the suffering
resulting from the economic and institutional crisis
that has led more than 3 million to migrate to other
nations. The delivery of essential goods to the poor
should not be prevented by blockades or acts of force
against those who want to facilitate it; on the contrary,
it is necessary to seek channels of coordination that
promote it, regardless of considerations that are not
strictly humanitarian.
The shortages and conflicts in Venezuela demand an
immediate political solution in order to avoid additional
negative effects on its people and the region. Urgent
understandings are required to lead to free elections,
without exclusions of any kind, transparent and with
guarantees of neutrality from transitional authorities
and international observation, within the framework
of Venezuelan law. Only democratic legitimacy will
guarantee the future institutional stability of the

S/PV. 8472

country and restore the economy and social order,
which is the responsibility of Venezuelans and will
require the support of the international community.
Our country has always shown its solidarity with
the Venezuelan people, which is why we have welcomed
more than 240,000 Venezuelans into our territory,
of whom about 101,000 already have a regular-stay
visa, not including international protection visas.
Furthermore, on 8 and 9 April, Ecuador will convene
the third regional meeting on the problem created by
the migration of 3 million Venezuelans, which will
serve to structure a joint work plan to solve the greatest
humanitarian problem in our region.
It should be noted that Ecuador is also the Latin
American country with the highest number of
recognized refugees: 63,537 people from more than
70 countries. Since 2016, Ecuador has received a
significant number of requests for refugee status from
Venezuelan citizens.
Ecuador does not support a military intervention in
Venezuela. The solution to the Venezuelan crisis will be
achieved only through dialogue and consultation. We
call for continued work to ensure that Venezuela has a
peaceful transition to a democratic path that safeguards
and guarantees the integrity, exercise and full respect
for the human rights of its people.
Mr. Thomas (Antigua and Barbuda): The
Government of Antigua and Barbuda continues to
monitor the situation in Venezuela with great concern
and appeals to all sides to remain calm and focused on
the Montevideo Mechanism, which is being facilitated
by the Governments of Mexico and Uruguay and the
Caribbean Community. All parties involved should
resist any escalation of rhetoric, which does nothing but
undermine a regional effort to bring about peace.
As we have stated on previous occasions, that
matter is of grave concern to Antigua and Barbuda, as
well as to all countries within our region. We cannot
overstate the importance of our region remaining a
zone of peace. We have had decades of interference into
the affairs of countries within our region that have left
the region broken. We cannot and must not return to
those days. Settling conflicts in countries is firstly a
matter of internal affairs, with no outside interference,
and most of all, it is a matter of finding peaceful ways
to reach agreements to solve conflicts.

19-0554241/48

S/PV.8472

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

The Government of Antigua and Barbuda remains
concerned about the events of the past few days that
have resulted in the loss of innocent lives and increased
human suffering, and about the effects that this has
had on millions of Venezuelans, including women,
the elderly, the disabled and children. Therefore, my
Government believes that where there is a need for
humanitarian aid, the United Nations should always
facilitate any form of aid distribution and support.
The application of aid supply should be free from
international political influence and preconditions
and should be done in a manner that is consistent with
international humanitarian aid relief.
The Government of Antigua and Barbuda reiterates
that, as States Members of the United Nations, we are
bound by principles enshrined in international law.
Those principles make it abundantly clear that no State
or group of States should interfere in the internal affairs
of sovereign countries. The Charter of the United
Nations also makes its abundantly clear, in Article 2,
paragraph 4, that
“all Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of
any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with
the Purposes of the United Nations”.
This rule was enshrined in the United Nations
Charter for a good reason — to prevent States from
using force as they felt so inclined, either unilaterally
or by a self-selected few. Diplomacy, dialogue and
peaceful negotiations should always be encouraged;
in fact, history has taught us that diplomacy garners
greater results. Any other process, including military
intervention, will undermine the legitimacy of
the United Nations in promoting peace and risks
destabilizing the entire region of Latin America and
the Caribbean, resulting in damaging effects for years
to come.
As we have stated in this Chamber, unilateral
declaration of support for one side in Venezuela over
the other is blatant interference and uninvited influence
in the internal affairs of a sovereign country. It does
nothing but undermine a process that requires urgent
attention, international diplomacy and respect for legal
processes within the society. International sanctions and
the strangulation of a country’s international finances
are tools that do nothing but hurt the most vulnerable
people of a society. We must cease the practice of using
42/48

26/02/2019

international institutions built to serve as instruments
of cooperation as instruments of war. Might cannot
be right.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of El Salvador.
Mr. Escalante Hasbún (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): I am pleased to see the representative of a
friendly country presiding over the Security Council
this month. I also welcome the Minister of the People’s
Power for Foreign Affairs of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
My delegation wishes to reiterate before this forum
what was previously expressed on the occasion of the
debate held on 26 January (see S/PV.8452), exactly a
month ago, and to express its deep concern about the
recent events in the brother country of Venezuela,
which has not been able to find a peaceful way to
address the differences among the parties involved.
Worse still, these actions are fuelling an ongoing
political confrontation that is affecting the stability and
development of the Venezuelan people.
Once again, we reiterate our conviction that it is
up to the Government and other internal Venezuelan
political forces to resolve all differences through
dialogue conducted by the Venezuelans themselves,
peacefully and within the framework of the Constitution
and international law, supported by political and
diplomatic means, without the use or threat of the use
of force.
El Salvador, as a responsible State, calls on the
international community to guarantee full respect for
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
including, as we all know, respect for the sovereignty
of States, non-intervention in internal affairs and the
prohibition of the use or threat of use force. As members
of the international community, we must therefore
advocate for a peaceful solution through dialogue, as the
best way to contribute to overcoming any difficulties
that Venezuela may face and to contribute thereby to
lasting solutions and regional peace.
Finally, the Government of El Salvador expresses
once again its support for the diplomatic initiative of
those countries that, committed to peace and stability
in the region, promote and hope to contribute to finding
a political and peaceful solution to the differences
in Venezuela.
19-05542

26/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Honduras.
Ms. Flores (Honduras): I thank you, Sir, for
convening today’s debate. Honduras ascribes to the
Lima declaration, adopted in Bogotá on 25 February.
Our hearts go out to the people of Venezuela in
their yearning for liberty, democracy and peace. We
express our solidarity with President Juan Guaidó,
interim caretaker of the Venezuelan Republic by virtue
of its Constitution, in the outstanding effort to make
available humanitarian relief to all who are suffering
and to form a transitional Government, in order to
commence the process of calling and organizing free
and fair elections. It is not an easy task under the
prevailing conditions, but a necessary one if Venezuela
is to recover its sovereignty and to fulfil its duties and
obligations as a Member of the Organization.
The population of Venezuela has been deprived for
far too long of fundamental human rights and has been
subjected to barbarous acts under a cruel dictatorship.
Many people have lost their lives and many others
their voice and freedom, and millions have fled to
escape the infernal situation. Yet many brave and
heroic individuals have remained, enduring terrible
hardships. A country rich in all forms of resources is
today devastated and desecrated.
The Organization of American States is a regional
agency and a key strategic partner of the United
Nations, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations. The Organization
of American States Permanent Council, at its special
meeting of 10 January, adopted a resolution in which
it resolved “to not recognize the legitimacy of Nicolás
Maduro’s new term as of the 10th of January of 2019”
and
“[t]o urge all Members States and invite
Permanent Observers of the Organization of
American States to adopt, in accordance with
international law and their national legislation,
diplomatic, political, economic and financial
measures that they consider appropriate, to
contribute to the prompt restoration of the
democratic order of Venezuela”.
The constitutional legacy in Latin America is one
that protects citizens from tyrannical rule. Nevertheless,
former President Nicolás Maduro Moros continues to
usurp the powers of the executive branch, undermining

S/PV. 8472

the rule of law and all independent institutions. The
blocking, burning and depriving Venezuelans of
humanitarian aid in the form of food and medicine on
23 February will be accounted for in the list of crimes
against humanity upon investigation and review by the
International Criminal Court.
Honduras supports a peaceful solution whereby
elections are called without delay. Nevertheless, we
recognize and respect the authority and faculties of
the National Assembly and the mechanisms outlined in
the Venezuelan Constitution, pursuant to the diligent
restoration of democracy. The many acts of aggression
committed by Nicolás Maduro and his supporters
against the rule of law, including breaking with the
principles of equality in the General Assembly and the
United Nations, have a great impact beyond our region.
Venezuela’s internal dynamics are a matter of concern
in the context of the maintenance of international peace
and security, where there is an urgent responsibility
to protect the innocent a civilian population amid an
impending conflict.
Finally, this house was created to ensure world
peace and must work to prevent all actions that call
into question the credibility of the United Nations
or undermine the critical role of the Organization
of American States, which is the most important
regional organization of the Americas. Rebuilding
a thriving and prosperous Venezuela in the hands of
Venezuelans is possible with the timely restoration of
a functional democracy and strong, independent and
complementary institutions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor the representative of Panama.
Ms. Quiel Murcia (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
A month after the first meeting of the Council to
consider the subject that brings us together today (see
S/PV.8452), it should be noted that concern continues
to grow, as confirmed in her briefing by Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs.
Acts of violence continue to cause injury and claim
human lives, in addition to the thousands of Venezuelans
who have been forced to leave their country in search of
better opportunities as a result of a political, economic
and humanitarian crisis that threatens their safety
and security.

19-0554243/48

S/PV.8472

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

As a country that promotes dialogue and peace and
with a manifest humanitarian vocation, Panama strongly
condemns the use of force against the Venezuelan
people, the repression of human rights and all the acts
of violence that prevented access to humanitarian aid
last weekend, despite the obvious needs which the
assistance was intended to meet. My country, together
with the more than 50 others that have censured the
perpetuation of a de facto regime, has ratified its
recognition of the interim President of Venezuela, Juan
Guaidó, to whom it has offered its support in the light
of its determined commitment to democracy, freedom
and peace in our brother country.
The illegitimate regime must allow a transition to
a democratic process, decided through fair elections
with the equitable participation of all political actors. It
must above all avoid further confrontations among the
Venezuelan people. As a member of the Lima Group,
Panama has also called at the highest level for the
political, economic and humanitarian crisis affecting
more than 27 million Venezuelans not to be turned into
a geopolitical conflict.
The superior purpose of the international
consensus that my country has joined seeks only for
Venezuela to return to the path of democracy, freedom
and prosperity for its people, within the framework
of a peaceful solution, without violence and without
the use of force. We therefore hope that dialogue and
prudence will prevail. Concern over the situation in
Venezuela has been and remains genuine, and under
no circumstances can it be interpreted as interference
in the internal affairs of that brother country. With
this vision, we endorse the contents of the declaration
issued yesterday by the Lima Group in Bogotá, in the
firm conviction that the international community’s
efforts in favour of the rights of the Venezuelan people
and institutional recovery in Venezuela are also critical
to the development and tranquillity of our region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa
Rica thanks you, Sir, for having convened this meeting
and Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
Not all options for finding a solution to the tragic
situation in Venezuela are open. I repeat — not all
options are open. In order to find a solution to this
crisis, the well-being of the Venezuelans must be our top
priority. Costa Rica therefore reiterates its irrevocable
44/48

26/02/2019

commitment to mechanisms for the peaceful resolution
of conflicts, diplomacy and dialogue as fundamental
tools, as well as the mechanisms of international law
and multilateralism. Our position has always been and
always will be one of firm rejection of any course of
action that implies the exercise of violence, the use of
force or military intervention in Venezuela.
In that vein, Costa Rica repudiates the regrettable
use of force and acts of violence committed under
the authority of Nicolás Maduro in recent days — in
particular on 23 February, a regrettable day for the
Venezuelan people, who are suffering the most serious
consequences of that regime, resulting in a population
that is beset by hunger, lack of health care and the most
basic sanitation services, and that now finds itself
deprived of its most fundamental rights and freedoms.
Costa Rica strongly encourages the safe and
effective delivery of humanitarian assistance — in
line with the international principles of humanitarian
aid, humanity, neutrality, impartiality and operational
independence — that reaches those who need it the
most. We request the cooperation of the relevant United
Nations agencies in this effort.
We reiterate our concern over the distressing
situation of the Venezuelan people and, above all, the
violations of human rights in that country, which have
already been extensively documented by the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights and analysed
by the Human Rights Council. Costa Rica has been
and will continue to be consistent in its support for the
efforts of the international community in this regard.
We reaffirm our conviction that the solution to
the crisis facing the brotherly country of Venezuela
must be peaceful, democratic and defined by the
Venezuelans themselves. As we have said before,
we believe that in order to restore democratic and
constitutional order in Venezuela, elections must be
free, fair, transparent, open to the participation of all
political actors, take account of all sectors, adhere to
international standards and convened in the shortest
possible time. This is consistent with Costa Rica’s
position of non-recognition of the electoral process of
20 May 2018, which, we reiterate, fell short of standards
for transparency and inclusiveness and did not enjoy
the international guarantees and norms necessary for it
to be considered legitimate. Costa Rica therefore does
not recognize the legitimacy of the regime that was
inaugurated on 10 January. As Mr. Maduro’s regime
19-05542

26/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

lacks that democratic capacity, Costa Rica recognizes
Mr. Juan Guaidó as interim President of Venezuela.
Costa Rica will remain committed to participating
in all efforts and measures aimed at bringing the parties
together and supporting the peaceful restoration of
constitutional order and respect for human rights in
Venezuela. We call on the international community
to continue and increase diplomatic efforts towards
opening effective avenues of negotiation for a peaceful
solution to the crisis in Venezuela.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Dominica.
Mrs. Bannis-Roberts (Dominica): I also wish
to recognize the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The Government of the Commonwealth of Dominica
again expresses its continuing concern regarding the
ongoing occurrences in the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and their disturbing potential outcomes.
The Commonwealth of Dominica also associates
itself with, and reiterates, the sentiments of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) on this matter.
The Commonwealth of Dominica strongly upholds
the principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs
of every sovereign State. We continue to promote and
uphold the principle of article 21 of the Charter of the
Organization of American States, which recognizes
territorial inviolability, as well as the principles of
human rights, international law, the rule of law and
the sanctity of national sovereignty, and the pivotal
principles of peace, dialogue and compromise as an
essential basis for the preservation of the dignity and
worth of the human person.
We believe that to peacefully and sustainably resolve
the situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
there must be meaningful dialogue and diplomacy
among all parties that is geared at reaffirming the right
of the people of Venezuela to peace and democracy.
Every effort should be made to help build peace,
promote reconciliation and find an amicable and lasting
resolution to the situation.
Dominica fully supports and endorses the
Montevideo Mechanism, which comprises four major
phases — the dialogue phase, the negotiation phase,
the commitment phase and the implementation phase.
Dominica strongly believes that, on the basis of that

S/PV. 8472

approach, there will be a peaceful and sustainable
resolution to the situation in Venezuela. Our region is
widely known as a zone of peace and all necessary and
precautionary measures should be taken to ensure that
our region continues to enjoy peace and tranquillity.
It is Dominica’s desire for an amicable and lasting
resolution to the situation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Minister of
the People’s Power for Foreign Affairs of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela has asked to make a further
statement. I give him the floor.
Mr. Arreaza (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): I thank the Security Council for
taking the time to take up an issue that deserves the
attention of the United Nations, namely the aggression
against Venezuela.
I just wanted to restate a few points very briefly.
First, as has been repeated here from a permanent
script on humanitarian assistance, the Government of
President Maduro has been working with the United
Nations for several years now, most recently in the face
of the economic crisis provoked by the criminal blockade
against the Venezuelan economy. In September last
year, President Maduro was here at the United Nations
and met with Secretary-General Antonio Guterres,
agreeing with him a mechanism to increase cooperation
and receive technical humanitarian assistance through
the United Nations. As noted by the Ambassador of the
Russian Federation and other countries of the region, we
have been receiving assistance through this mechanism
from the United Nations.
I also wish to emphasize that we agreed with the
European Union that this mechanism, which is already
in place and operational, could not only manage the
delivery of assistance to Venezuela but also, for an
economy that has been blockaded like ours, it could
facilitate procurement — purchases — because of
the problem of over-compliance, as the experts call
it, of international banks with the so-called sanctions
imposed by the United States blockade, so that they are
afraid of dealing with Venezuelan institutions and also
with the suppliers, who are imposing special terms,
such as insurance against acts of war and very high
prices, and very often these transactions do not even
go through.
For that reason, we have been receiving help from
friendly countries and from the United Nations through

19-0554245/48

S/PV.8472

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

this mechanism, which we designed in cooperation
with the most beautiful multilateral institutions that
exists, the best creation of humanity in the twentieth
and twenty-first centuries, which is the United Nations
Secondly, in the light of today’s meeting, I would
like to note that Venezuela insists that the Security
Council the other organs of the United Nations should
dedicate themselves to preventing a war against my
people, against Venezuela. We know that they have the
capacity to do so and also to lift the blockade against
my country. Those sanctions have affected the key
businesses at the heart of the Venezuelan economy.
They have affected the capacity of our country to trade
its own bonds and to seek financing as a State from
multilateral institutions.
They have blocked billions of dollars of
Venezuelan money — $30 billion, as I noted in my
previous statement. That is the cost of the blockade, but
in terms of assets that have been frozen, that figure is
doubled, and if we were to make an actuarial analysis of
the loss of production, the loss of exports and the loss of
sales resulting from the sanctions, we are talking about
billions and billions of dollars.
The Security Council should also call on the
parties to sit down at the table together. We are sitting
at the table and have always been there, as we have
said. There is no way of doing political business in a
democracy, a democratic revolution or a revolutionary
democracy without sitting down at the table, especially
with our political adversaries who have different
positions from ours — that is exactly where dialogue
should take place.
We must work for peace. We must reject any
threat of the use of force. Unfortunately, the delegation
of the United States is not ruling out that option.
Neither its President — the chain of command that we
mentioned before — President Trump, Vice-President
Pence, Secretary of State Pompeo, National Security
Adviser Bolton, members of Congress, such as Senator
Marco Rubio, Mr. Elliott Abrams nor others who
fall within that chain of command, has ruled out war
against Venezuela.
I would like the Security Council to ensure that the
United States, if it is a Member of the United Nations
and if it respects the Charter of the United Nations,
rules out the use of force and the threat of the use
of force — or why else is it a Member of the United
Nations? Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter is very
46/48

26/02/2019

clear and anybody who fails to abide by them — of
course, there are other articles that the United States is
violating, such as that on non-interference. But this is
very dangerous — the use of force — and that is why
we are emphasizing this point — it is the obligation of
the United States.
We have been informed that the Russian Federation
informally proposed a very simple draft resolution
calling on parties in Venezuela to sit down for a
dialogue and the United States delegation rejected it. I
would like to bring to the attention of the Council the
evident lack of will of that delegation and to remind
the Council that all of us, as States Members of the
United Nations, should see dialogue as an obligation
and oppose the use of force, in particular the members
of the Security Council and especially the permanent
members of the Security Council. We therefore now
have a very irregular model of behaviour — contrary
to the principles of United Nations — within the five
permanent members of the Security Council. We call
for the situation to be corrected. It is important that it
be corrected.
Lastly, I thank my region, Latin America and the
Caribbean, and all countries therein without exception,
including those that have differences with Venezuela,
for participating today and, despite the United States
opposition, for having ruled out the use of force and the
military threat as a solution for the institutional situation
in my country. This is a victory for our region, which,
through its regional body the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States, has been proclaimed a
zone of peace since 2014.
By way of summary, we can say that we must avoid
war and blockades against peoples. We have to protect
peace. We believe that today’s meeting, regardless of
who convened it, will prove to be a great victory for
peace and we must continue to work in that direction.
The President: The representative of Peru has
requested the floor to make a further statement. I give
him the floor
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): It was
not my intention to speak again, given the late hour. We
have heard various positions, including Mr. Arreaza’s
account of events, which we dispute substantively.
But we do agree that all the Latin American countries
represented here, as well as many others, have come
out clearly against any use of force. I agree with him on
that. However, we have asked to speak because, among
19-05542

26/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

the many issues he raised in his statement, he failed to
mention one factor that we believe to be essential.
One key element that has been referred to by many
speakers today is the exodus of Venezuelans that has
taken place over the past few years and which is the most
serious in the history of the region. I deeply regret that
he did not utter one single word of concern — not one
mea culpa — about the situation facing his compatriots
throughout the region. Some 3.4 million Venezuelan
citizens have fled the country; 700,00 of them are in
Peru. Lima is 4,300 kilometres from Caracas. Why
have 700,000 citizens come by land in very difficult
circumstances? They have done so because of the
economic disaster caused by the regime and because of
repression, but we believe that they also did so because
they had lost hope that one day things might change.
Unfortunately, the elections, which have been widely
discussed here, did nothing to give them such hope.
That was the reason for the establishment of the
Lima Group and its proposal for the use of political and
diplomatic means to put an end to the situation and to
re-establish democracy.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Minister of
the People’s Power for Foreign Affairs of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela has asked to make a further
statement. I give him the floor.
Mr. Arreaza (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): I apologize for taking the floor again.
All Venezuelans are dependent on the situation and
conditions in our country. Some 6 million Colombians
live in Venezuela. We welcome and appreciate them.
Last year, we received almost 100,000 Colombians,
who came because of the conditions in their country,
with which we are all familiar. We have Ecuadorians
and Peruvians in our country. There are almost a
million of them. They are welcome and we want them
in our country.
We have sent many diplomatic notes to the Foreign
Ministries of those countries that claim to be receiving
Venezuelans, asking them for precise information on
the numbers, because the figure of 3 million refugees
is absolutely absurd. It does not correspond to reality,
although there is heavy migration. How could there
not be emigration in a country that has been subject
over the past four years to an economic blockade that
is designed to make the people suffer? The United
States has admitted that its intention is to strangle the
Venezuelan people in order to spark regime change.

S/PV. 8472

The Peruvian Government recently decided not to
recognize our diplomatic personnel, who are entrusted
with protecting the community of Venezuelans in Peru.
That decision seems to be contradictory, but I would
ask for a demonstration of good faith so that our Foreign
Ministry can work with Peru, Chile and Ecuador to
gather the information we need, including names and
locations, so that we can fully address the needs of the
Venezuelan groups that have left our country.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the Russian Federation has asked to
make a further statement.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I shall not keep anyone here for long but,
building on what was said by the Foreign Minister of
Venezuela, I wish to inform the Council that, as we have
been holding this meeting, the United States delegation
has already managed to kill our draft statement by
introducing amendments condemning the Maduro
Government and so on. It is clear that the United States
approach to Haiti is not appropriate to Venezuela. It
reflects a blatant double standard.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the United States has asked to make
a further statement.
Mr. Ordeman (United States of America): I
apologize for taking the floor at this late hour, but I feel
that we have no other choice.
We did in fact engage in a statement that the Russian
Federation had proposed. We had hoped that it would
track with the actual situation on the ground, as opposed
to applying an approach that had been used with Haiti.
With that in mind, we had hoped to note that Maduro
had been given numerous opportunities to engage in
good-faith efforts to address Venezuela’s political
and socioeconomic issues and that he has consistently
used such opportunities to consolidate the power of
his regime, at the expense of the Venezuelan people.
We therefore would have liked the Security Council to
underscore the importance of a true democratic process,
and that that would have been allowed to proceed.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Minister of
the People’s Power for Foreign Affairs of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela has asked to make a further
statement. I give him the floor.
Mr. Arreaza (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): I apologize once again, but the only

19-0554247/48

S/PV.8472

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

thing we would ask the delegation of the United States
is that it honour its obligations, as clearly laid out in
the Charter of the United Nations. We do not need a
resolution or a statement. I simply wish to hear him say

48/48

26/02/2019

that the United States, like any other Member of the
Organization, rejects the use of force against the people
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The meeting rose at 8 p.m.

19-05542
