A/57/PV.85

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-seventh session

85

th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 13 May 2003, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kavan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In the absence of the President, Ms. Pacari Vega
(Ecuador), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 109 (continued)
Human rights questions
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms
Report of the Third Committee (A/57/806)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I
request the Rapporteur of the Third Committee,
Ms. Oksana Boiko of Ukraine, to introduce the report
of the Third Committee.
Ms. Boiko (Ukraine), Rapporteur of the Third
Committee: I have the honour to introduce for
consideration by the General Assembly the report of
the Third Committee on agenda item 109 (b), entitled
“Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of
human rights and fundamental freedoms” (A/57/806).
In paragraph 10 of the report, the Third
Committee recommends the adoption of a draft
resolution.

(Czech Republic)

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): If
there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of
procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the report of the Third
Committee that is before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
Statements will therefore be limited to explanations of
vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendation of the Third Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records. May I remind members that
under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401, the General
Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I also remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take a decision in the same

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

03-35644 (E)

*0335644*

A/57/PV.85

manner as was done in the Third Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance.
I call on the representative of the United States of
America in explanation of position before the taking of
the decision.
Mr. Twining (United States of America): The
United States would like to make a very brief
explanation of position.
The United States remains committed to the
establishment of a credible tribunal, and supports the
substance of the draft resolution before the Assembly;
but it will dissociate itself due to concerns about the
timing. The United States believes it would have been
better to delay consideration of this draft resolution
until after the Cambodian National Assembly elections
in July.
At the same time, the United States acknowledges
the efforts of the Secretary-General and the
Government of Cambodia to reach agreement on the
establishment of an extraordinary chamber with
international assistance to bring to justice senior
leaders of the Khmer Rouge and others who bear the
greatest responsibility for atrocities committed. We
take note of the commitment shown by a number
of nations to establish a credible Khmer Rouge
tribunal, especially the original sponsors of the draft
resolution — Japan and France — as well as Australia,
in leading the Friends.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 10 of its report.
The Third Committee adopted the draft
resolution, entitled “Khmer Rouge trials”, without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
57/228 B).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I call
on the representative of Japan.
Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): As one of the cosponsors of the resolution just adopted, I should like to
express our gratitude to all Member States for their
understanding and support for its adoption without a

2

vote. I also wish to take this opportunity to thank
Mr. Hans Corell and his team for their efforts to
achieve the agreement between the Secretariat and the
Cambodian Government.
We are now definitely one step closer to bringing
to justice those most responsible for one of the worst
crimes against humanity of the twentieth century. The
trials will provide us with an opportunity to help the
Cambodian people close that tragic chapter of their
history and build a free, accountable and stable society,
which in turn will enhance the stability of Indo-China
and the Asia-Pacific region as a whole. It is also our
hope that the Extraordinary Chambers, assisted by the
United Nations, will strengthen Cambodia’s judicial
system, promoting the rule of law and bringing to an
end an atmosphere of impunity.
We believe that it is incumbent upon the
international community to make the trials a success. I
would like to take this opportunity to reiterate our
appeal to all Member States to provide assistance,
including financial and personnel support, to the
Extraordinary Chambers so that they may begin to
function promptly and smoothly.
I would also like to stress to Cambodia that, now
that the General Assembly has decided to respond
positively through the adoption of this resolution to its
appeal for cooperation, it is that country’s solemn
responsibility to take all necessary measures, including
prompt ratification of the agreement, to ensure that the
Extraordinary Chambers will be able to achieve their
objectives to the full.
In conclusion, let me stress once again that the
success of the process leading to credible trials will
depend on the efforts and commitment of the parties
concerned, together with the understanding and
cooperation of all Member States. Japan will continue
to cooperate with the Secretariat and the Cambodian
Government for the early establishment of the
Extraordinary Chambers.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 109.
The meeting rose at 10.25 a.m.
