17

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

tion of offensive and defensive strategic nuclear-weapon
systems, to agree, as an urgent preliminary measure,
on a moratorium on further testing and deployment
of new offensive and defensive strategic nuclear-weapon systems,
Noting with satisfaction that the first phase of such
negotiations resulted in the conclusion, on 26 May
1972, of three bilateral instruments on the abovementioned matter23 and that the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the United States of America
announced that they had entered, on 21 November
1972, a second phase of negotiations,
Convinced of the necessity that the renewed negotiations should bring about early and positive results
in the field of nuclear disarmament,
1. Appeals to the Governments of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America to make every effort to expedite the
conclusion of further agreements including important
qualitative limitations and substantial reductions of
offensive and defensive strategic nuclear-weapon
systems;
2. Invites those two Governments to keep the
General Assembly informed of the results of their
negotiations.
2093rd plenary meeting
29 November 1972
2933 (XXVII). Chemical ancl hacteriological
(biological) weapons

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 2454 A (XXIII) of 20
December 1968, 2603 B (XXIV) of 16 December
1969, 2662 (XXV) of 7 December 1970 and 2827 A
(XXVI) of 16 December ]971,
Expressing its determination to act with a view to
achieving effective progress towards general and
complete disarmament, including the prohibition and
elimination of all types of weapons of mass destruction
such as those using chemical or bacteriological
(biological) agents,
Noting that the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and
on Their Destruction24 has been opened for signature
and has already been signed by a large number of
States,
Convinced that the Convention is a first possible
step towards the achievement of early agreement on
the effective prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of chemical weapons and on the
elimination of such weapons from military arsenals of
all States, and determined to continue negotiations to
this end,
Recalling the provisions of article IX of that
Convention,
Recalling that the General Assembly has repeatedly
condemned all actions contrary to the principles and
objectives of the Protocol for the Prohibition of the
Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonom or Other
Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of \Varfarc,
signed at Geneva on 17 June ]925. 2 "
23 See A/C.1/ 1026.

Reaffirming the need for the strict observance by
all States of the principles and objectives of that
Protocol,
Having considered the report of the Conference of
the Committee on Disarmament, 26
Noting that a work programme, a draft convention
on the prohibition of the development, production and
stockpiling of chemical weapons and on their
destruction, and other working papers, proposals and
suggestions were submitted to the Conference of the
Committee on Disarmament,
Conscious of the benefits to mankind that would
result from the prohibition of the development,
production and stockpiling of chemical weapons,
Desiring to create a favourable atmosphere for a
successful outcome of these negotiations,
1. Reaffirms the recognized objective of effective
prohibition of chemical weapons;
2. Reiterates, to this end, the request made by the
General Assembly to the Conference of the Committee
on Disarmament, in resolution 2827 A (XXVI), to
continue negotiations, as a matter of high priority,
with a view to reaching early agreement on effective
measures for the prohibition of the development,
production and stockpiling of chemical weapons and
for their destruction;
3. Stresses the importance of working towards the
complete realization of the objective of effective
prohibition of chemical weapons as set forth in the
present resolution and urges Governments to work
towards that end;
4. Reaffirms its hope for the widest possible
adherence to the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and
on Their Destruction;
5. Invites all States that have not yet done so to
accede to the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use
in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases,
and of Bactt~riological Methods of Warfare of 17 June
1925 and/ or ratify this Protocol, and calls anew for
the strict observance by all States of the principles
and nhjectives contained therein;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament all
documents of the First Committee relating to questions
connected with the problem of chemical weapons and
dwmi..:al rnetlwds of warfare;
7. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to report on the results of its negotiations
to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session.
2093rd plenary meeting
29 November 1972

293 l, (XXVII). Urgent need for suspension of
nuclear ancl thermonuclear tests
A
The Genera/ Ass,·111hlv.
H.ecogni:ing the urgent need for the cessation of

nu,:lcar and thermon11clear weapon tests,

24 See resolution 2826 (XXVI), annex.

25 League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV, No. 2138,
p. 65.

26 O/]icid Records of the Disarmament Commission, Supplement fur 1972, document DC/235.
