UNITED

OFFICIAL

JAN 2 6 1988

RECORDS

~-\ ; .‘.I
(!

THIRTY-FIFTH

-,

1 .I:

YEAR

22501”

MEETING:

15 OCTOBER

1980

‘NEW YORK
.CONTENTS
PU.gf

Provisional

agenda (SIAgendaj2250)

. .. ... . ... ... ... .. .. .. ... .. ... ... . ...

Expression of sympathy to the Government

1

and people of Algeria . . . . . . . . . .

1

Expressicm of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . :. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation between Iran and Iraq . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.2250

NOTE
..

Svmbols
-,
---- --- of
-- United Nations documents are composed of capital letters c(3mbined with fiaures. Mention of such a svmbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OjJkinl Rcxwds c$ the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

\

:

2250th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 15 October 1980, at 3BO p.m.
President: Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

Iraq to take a place at the Council table and I invite
the representative of Japan to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines,
Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

At the invitution of the President, Mr. Hcrmmctdi
(Iraq) took a place at the Cuuncil table and Mr. Nisibori (.iaprm) took the pluce reservedfor him at the side
o>f the Council chumber.

Provisional

4, The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
1 have received letters from the representatives of
Iran and Cuba in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules
of procedure.

agenda (S/Agenda/2250)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation between Iran and Iraq
The meeting

wws called to order ot 4.10 p.m.

Expression of sympathy to the Government
and People of Algeria

At the invitution
of the President, Mr. Ardukani
(Iran) took a place at the Council table cmd Mr. Roar
Kolrri (Cuba) took the place reserved for him ut the
side of the Council chamber.

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretution from Russian):
I should like, at the very outset of this meeting, to
express on behalf of the Council to the Government
of Algeria very deep condolences and sympathy for
the severe damage and loss of life which Algeria has
suffered in connection with the earthquake that
occurred there on 10 October. The members of the
Council fully share the grief of the people of Algeria
over this great catastrophe.
Expression of thanks to the retiring

5. -The PRESIDENT (interpret&on
from Russian):
Members of the Council have before them the following documents: S/14205, containing the report of
the Secretary-General requested by the Council in
paragraph 5 of resolution 479 (1980); S/14203, containing the text of a letter dated 29 September from
the representative of Iraq to the Secretary-General;
S/ 14206, containing the text of a letter dated 1 October
from the Charge d’affaires of the Permanent Mission
of Iran to’ the Secretary-General; S/14210, containing
the text of a letter dated 6 October from the representative of Iraq to the Secretary-General; S/14213,
containing the text of a letter dated 10 October from
the Secretary-General to the President of the Council; S/14214, containing the text of a letter dated 12 October from the Charge d’affaires of the Permanent
Mission of Iran to the Secretary-General; and
S/14216, containing the text of a letter dated 13 October from the Charge d’tiaires of the Permanent Mission of Iran to the Secretary-General.

Preside&

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
As this is the first open meeting of the Council for
the month of October, I should like to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to the President for the month of
September, Mr. TaIeb Slim, representative of Tunisia,
for the tireless efforts and great diplomatic skill with
which he conducted the Council’s proceedings during
September, when the Council had to consider especially difficult matters.
’
Adoption

of the agenda

The agendu was udopted.
The situation

6. I welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq,
Mr. Saadoon Hammadi, and invite him to make his
statement.

between Iran and Iraq

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russinn):
In accordance with the decisions taken at the 2247th
and 2248th meetings, I invite the representative of

7. Mr. HAMMADI (Iraq): Mr. President, allow me
first to extend to you and to the other members of the
1

.

’.,

Council my sincere thanks. for having given me the
opportunity to participate ;in this meeting.

12. On j.kpril 1979, the President of the Republic of
Iraq addressed to Khomeini a telegram of congratulations on the occasion of the declaration of the Islamic
Republic. .In’ that telegram our President expressed,
on behalf of the people and Government of Iraq and
on his own behalf, “sincerest congratulations*’ to
Khomeini and
_ to the
“neighbourly and friendly peoples of Iran, hoping
that the new republican regime will open wider
opportunities to serve the friendly Iranian peoples
in a manner that promotes Iran’s role in the service of peace and justice in the world and forges the
strongest relations of friendship with the Arab countries in general and Iraq in particular”.

8. As one of the founding Members of the United
Nations, Iraq has strongly ‘adhered in its international
relations to the purposes, principles and rules of the
Charter. As we are a member of the non-aligned
movement, the principles:‘of non-alignment constitute the cornerstone of our foreign policy. We have not
only dedicated ourselves to those principles but have
also translated them into ‘action in our international
relations. Whether in our region or in the world arena,
our policy has always been the preservation of international peace and security, as well as the avoidance
of world economic catastrophe. But this policy asbolutely rejects any form of interference from any quarter, irrespective of its pretext. Hence, we cannot agree
to any attempt or action to interfere in the internal
affairs of our country contrary to the legally established
norms of State conduct.
9. Having said that, permit me to state that the problem of which the Council is seized should be looked
upon in its proper perspective. Otherwise, we are
liable to overlook some of its important dimensions
and consequently no viable solution would be likely
to emerge. The problem is neither new nor simple.
It goes back over 460 years of history. It is not a mere
border problem or a minor conflict over navigational
rights. It is much wider than that. Historically it is
established that, since the year 1520, 18 treaties have
been concluded by the “Persian State” with its westem neighbours on its relations therewith; including
the question of borders, only to be terminated by that
State, whether by word or by deed.

13. To that telegram we received two answers from
Khomeini-a nice one, through the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, and another one published by the Pars News
Agency and some newspapers between 19and 21 Arpil,
expressing an entirely different attitude in a hostile
tone and with improper language. So we pursued the
matter through diplomatic channels to seek clarification. We were told by Prime Minister Bazargan and
Foreign Minister Yazdi that the former telegram was
the official one and that an investigation would be
carried out to find out how the second version appeared. We considered the matter settled, although
the outcome of that investigation was not communicated to us and we did not see any official correction in the Iranian press later on.
14. Despite that unhappy incident, we continued our
official contacts. My Government- addressed to the
Bazargan Government a note in which it expressed
its earnest intention to establish the closest fraternal
ties and co-operative relations with neighbouring
peoples and countries, especially with Iran, on the basis
of respect for sovereignty, non-interference in internal
affairs and respect for the legitimate aspirations of
peoples in accordance with principles they have chosen
oftheir own free will. The note also expressed the view
that Iraq had a special view on relations between the
people of Iraq and the neighbouring peoples of Iran
and Turkey, for those peoples were not merely neighbours but brothers with which the Arab nation in
general and the Iraqi people in particular were related
by old Islamic ties and a common history stretching
over hundreds of years. In addition, the people of
Iraq, which had struggled for years against colonial
domination, corrupt monarchy and exploitation, had
achieved their victory through the revolution of 17July
I%8 led by the Arab Baath Socialist Party. Hence
the people of Iraq looked with sympathy upon and
supported the struggle waged by the friendly and
neighbourly Iranian peoples for freedom, justice and
progress. It felt joy and pride when the Iranian people
achieved victory in those respects. In the note similar
satisfaction was expressed regarding the statements
and positions of Prime Minister Bazargan which
emphasized the Islamic character of some of the
popular trends in Iran, because such had been the prin-

10. We are neighbours of Iran and have shared with
the Iranian peoples cultural, religious and humanitarian
ties. We have for some time been convinced that the
policies and actions of the successive regimes in Iran
are clearly those of territorial expansionism. I shall
not bother the Council with a detailed historical
account. I need only recall one fact of very recent
history. All of us witnessed the visions of power and
domination of the Shah, which were not confined to the
Arabian Gulf area but extended also to the Indian
Ocean and beyond. And today we all know that President Bani-Sadr of Iran has declared that between
Muslim countries there are no borders. That is not
meant to indicate a policy of free and open relations
among Islamic States, because the Iranian Govemment claims that many Islamic countries belong to Iran
-countries such as Bahrain, Yemen and Oman-and
even the capital of my country.
11. The Iranian Government and its representatives
claim that, since the Islamic Republic was established
in Iran, my Government has adopted a hostile attitude
towards the new regime. That allegation is utterly
baseless. Khomeini was given refuge in Iraq for about
15years, and he was given full-scale moral and material
support for over seven years. Iraq welcomed the new
regime from the very early days, in every sense.
2

bala. Naiaf, Amarah, Basra and Nasiriyah. They consisted in hurling explosive materials on the masses
during religious and national occasions, throwing
nitric acid in the faces of ‘people attending prayers at
mosques, poisoning food and water prepared for the
pilgrims to the holy shrives in Karbala, Najaf and
Khadhumain, and the like., At Al-Thawra in Baghdad
-a heavily populated working-class quarter-the
terrorist attack claimed many lives, and a number of
Iranian terrorists were caught. The Iranian Ambassador, Mr. Doa’i, met with me personally later to
plead for the release of the terrorists, and we responded positively.

cipled and practical position of the Arab Baath Socialist Party. Such a trend was consideredby Iraq an
important positive transformation in the regron which
would contribute to promoting its independence and
development. Finally, the note went on to express
Iraq’s sincere hope for prosperity for the friendly and
neighbourly Iranian people and for strong relations of
fruitful co-operation between Iraq and Iran of a kind
that would promote common bonds, serving the mutual
interests of both countries and strengthening freedom, peace and stability in the region.
IS, Later on, my Government extended an invitation to Prime Minister Bazargan to visit Iraq and discuss bilateral relations and bases for mutual co-operation:‘The same invitation was renewed by the Iraqi
Vice-President of the Revolutionary Command Council during the month of Ramadan-in July and August
1979-in a telegram on that religious occasion. I should
say for the record that Mr. Bazargan was also co-operative ‘and tried to strengthen relations between the
two countries.
16. .Even after our relations with Iran became tense,
the President of the Republic of Iraq, in two meetings
with Mr. Yazdi in Havana last year, clearly expressed
his willingness to meet with the Iranian leaders at the
highest level to resolve our differences peacefully.
I reaffirmed the same thing to Minister Yazdi when
1 met with him last year here at the United Nations.
Minister Yazdi said that they would consider the matter in Tehran-but nothing happened.
17. Now let us ask: what was the outcome of all those
efforts-which surely cannot by any criterion be considered to be hostile?
18. Prime Minister Bazargan resigned, and with him
went Foreign Minister Yazdi. So the arena was left
free for Khomeini and his followers. At that time,
Khomeini reached the point of unmasking the true
intentions of his Islamic revolution, by deciding to
export it to Iraq and the Arabian Gulf region. Under
his auspices, and with his blessings, a meeting was
held at Qum of the leaders of the reactionary and
sectarian Dawa Party-which means the “Call Party”.
The decision was reached to overthrow our Govemment through subversion, sabotage and terrorism by
the so-called Jondi El-Imam-that is, the Imam’s
Soldiers, meaning the militants of the Dawa Party. The
idea was that after enough terror had reigned in Iraq
to destabilize its Government, then a popular uprising
would bring it down. Here Khomeini was obviously
thinking that what he had achieved in Iran could be
secured in Iraq as well.
19. The task of the so-called Jondi.El-Imam-the
Imam’s Soldiers-was carried out by Iranian infiltrators and residents in Iraq as well as by first-generation Iraqis of Iranian origin. We witnessed all over our
country, and particularly in the central and southern
parts, acts of sabotage and terrorism of’ mounting
magnitude. Such acts were committed at Al-Thawra
and Khadhumain in Baghdad, and in cities like Kar-

20. ‘All those acts were directed from Qum, as daily
instructions were issued to Dawa agents through
Khomeini’s broadcasting stations from Tehran, Qasre-Shirin, Ahwaz, Abadan and Kurdistan. Those stations also issued instructions to manufacture local
bombs for use in killing innocent citizens. The Iraqi
security forces seized considerable amounts of money,
arms, bombs, poisons and explosive materials in the
hideouts of the aforesaid criminal group.
21. The most cruel terrorist act was the throwing of
bombs at a huge student gathering at the Mustansiriyah
University in Baghdad on 1 April 1980, where an
attempt was made to assassinate Mr. Tariq Aziz, a
member of the Revolutionary Command Council and
Deputy Prime Minister. During that terrorist act lives
were lost, and many persons were injured. Similarly,
bombs were thrown from the Iranian school at Wazriya
Street on the funeral procession of those innocent
persons who had been murdered in a previous incident,
on 5 April, in which some Iranian diplomats took part.
In addition, an attempt was made on 12 April on the life
of the Minister of Culture and Information, in front
of his Ministry.
22. In ail those incidents, Iranians were caught who
fit the description of Jondi El-Imam.
23. We reacted to those acts of terrorism by expelling Iranian residents from our country. Our action
was prompted by reasons of internal security, as no
State in the world could be expected to condone acts
against its internal security by foreigners residing
within it.
24. It is worth noting that, parallel with the acts
I have just described, the Barzani followers-now
harboured in and supported by Iran-began to commit
similar acts of terrorism in the northern part of our
country. In addition, the Khomeini authorities began
to prevent the return of Iraqi Kurds from Iran to Iraq,
and to persecute any remnants of families when some
members of families had succeeded in returning to
their homeland. All those acts were accompanied by a
formidable public media propaganda campaign unprecedented in its fanatical and sectarian religious
overtones. Iraq, in fact, was not alone in witnessing
such acts. Similar actions were attempted in Kuwait,
Saudi Arabia, Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates.
3

:-

25. Khomeini’s scheme through the so-called Islamic
revolution was to destabilise the region through inciting
religious sectarian strife; ,We in Iraq refuse such a
mediaeval ideology. Our concept is secular, and we
do not mix together affqirs of State and religion.
Revolutions cannot be imposed from the outside
against the free will of thel people. We are bound to
stand against Khomeini’s.,theories and practices, in
defence of our security, w$!-being and independence.

that the Israeli assistance started under Eshko! and
grew under, Golda Meir and Rabin and that the last
Israeli insfructor left when Barzani was evacuated in
1975. Whi!e.our people were valiantly fighting against
the rebellion, a new factor emerged in relation to the
balance of the military situation, namely the October
1973 war. With a view to creating the appropriate
conditions that would enable us to.participate in that
battle together with our Arab brethren, my Govemment decided to seek a political settlement with Iran
through peaceful means. Consequently, when thelate President of Algeria, Houari Boumedienne, offered
to mediate, we accepted.

26. The Khomeini authohiies accuse us of fomenting,
civil strife in Iran amongst the national minorities.
Those authorities have lost sight ,of the fact that the
Arabs, Kurds, Turkomans.and Baluchi, and the other
national minorities in Iran,,,coniributed to the national
struggle which brought the downfall of the Shah. It
was natural, therefore, that those minorities expected
the so-called Islamic revohnion to grant them their
national rights. Iraq has nothing to do with their
renewed struggle to achieve their national aspirations. Why should we? What inherent hostility could
we possibly have had towards Iran or the Iranian
peoples, or Khomeini’s for that matter,. had it not
been for the most dangerous of a!! forms of interference in our internal affairs?

30. Against that political background the Algiers
agreement was negotiated and concluded in the form
of a package deal. It had both political and juridical
aspects. The spirit of the agreement was that the parties decided in a!! sincerity to conclude it with a view
to reaching “a final and lasting solution to a!! the problems pending between their two countries”, and that
the arrangements agreed upon were “in accordance
with the principles of territorial integrity, the inviolability of frontiers and non-interference in internal
affairs”. The elements of the package deal were the
definitive demarcation of land frontiers on the basis of
legal agreements between the two countries; the delimitation of water frontiers in the Shatt-Al-Arab according
to the thalweg line; the restoration of mutual security
and trust along the common boundaries and the commitment to exercise strict and effective control over
them with a view to putting an end to a!! acts ofinliltration of a subversive character, whatever their origin.
The most fundamental obligation which the two parties
assumed and which indicated the package-deal nature
of the agreement was paragraph 4 thereof, in which
the parties considered the three provisions just mentioned as “integral elements of an overall settiement and, accordingly, any breach of its component
parts would be clearly incompatible with the spirit of
the . . . agreement”.

27. Iraq has placed before the Council, in document
S/9323of 11July 1969, some historical facts and details
regarding the legal status of the Iraqi-Iranian border
up to 1969. That document will be brought up to date
and presented to the Council in order to show that the
policy of territorial expansion is a cardinal policy of
successive Iranian Governments. That policy has
always followed the same pattern: first, an Iranian
allegation; then, a denial of legal obligations, to be
followed by a new legal instrument designed to secure
a territorial gain for Iran; then the same sequence
repeating itself.
28. The Algiers agreement of 6 March 1975’ was no
exception to that pattern. The political situation in
our region during the period prior to that date witnessed
the emergence of the Shah in Iran as the policeman of
the region. The expansionist plans and pretentions of
the Shah were met by ‘us with’ a firm adherence to
sovereignty, full independence and non-interference
in the internal affairs of States. Neither ideologically
nor pragmatically did we fit into the picture; hence
the reactionary rebellion of Barzani was adopted as the
means for a solution.

3 1. In order to translate those arrangements into more
concrete instruments, a joint Iraqi-Iranian Ministerial
Commission was established in which Algeria participated, and a Treaty concerning the, State Frontier
and Neighbourly Relations, along with three protocols
and annexes, were signed at Baghdad on 13June 1975.’
In that connection, it is worth noting that article 4 of
the Treaty explicitly consecrated the package-deal
nature of the Algiers agreement.
32. Upon the coming into force of the Treaty, Iran
acquired sovereignty over half of the Shatt-AlArab, hence securing an early advantage. In return,
Iraq did not receive the land areas that Iran had trespassedon contrary to its international obligations. This
was the situation when the Shah was toppled from
power. Upon the installation of the new regime in
Tehran, the Government of Iraq saw fit to allow the
new Government a period of grace before pressing for
the completion of the process of the return of the areas
belonging to Iraq.

29. The idea was to disrupt our national unity in
order to overcome our resistance. The Shah provided
huge quantities of sophisticated armaments to Barzani.
The Iranian army gave important logistical support to
the rebellion. Israel for its part armed and trained
Kurdish rebels under Barzani from 1965 to 1975, and
also provided them with instructors.This was reported
by The Ne\lt York Times of 29 September 1980, which
published a report on the disclosure of what it termed
the “tightly suppressed secret” by Menachem Begin
on the date just mentioned. The report indicates
4

33. Notwithstanding Iraq’s positive attitude towards
the changes in Iran, Tehran’s new rulers soon revealed
their enmity towards Iraq through their official pro-nouncements and information media. They began to
display Iran’s renewed intentions of territorial ambitions and aggressive expansionism.

ment openly violated this fundamental obligation. It
brought over and offered refuge in Iran to the remnants
of the former rebels against Iraq, namely, the sons of
Barzani and his followers.‘:With the explicit support
of the ruling authorities ‘i’&Iran, those groups used
Iranian territory, as a base-for threatening and interfering in the internal security and national integrity of
Iraq. Repeated Iraqi demands for the return of Iraqi
lands were not only frustrated but also met by new
territorial claims, as I have.indicated.
1:
37. Unlike the Ayatollah” Khomeini, Iraq still has
faith in this international brganization. Iraq has, in
fact, twice brought complaints against Iran before the
Council. The first was in 1971 when Iran occupied by
force the three strategic Aiab islands in the Arabian
Gulf, and that complaint was brought on behalf of
the Sheikhdom of Ras El-Kheyma. It is sad to have to
state that the failure of the Council .to effect Iranian
withdrawal from the occupied islands served to
encourage the Shah and his ‘successorsto pursue their
dream of establishing Persian hegemony over the
whole of the Arabian Gulf. Iraq’s second complaint
before the Council was made in 1974, after Iranian
acts of aggression committed across the same borders as are the cause of the present conflict. Again
United Nations mediation failed to stop Iranian expansionist ambitions and Iran engaged, as I have already
stated, in blatant military interference in northern Iraq.

34. I should like to quote here a few examples of the
scores of statements made by high-ranking Iranian officials and directed against Iraq and the Arab countries.
35. ,On 21 March 1980, in a statement delivered by
Khomeini’s son, on behalf of his father, he declared
that:
“We must do our utmost to export our revolution
to the other parts of the world and renounce the
concept of keeping the revolution within our own
boundaries.”
On 3 April 1980, Ghotbzadeh, the then Foreign Minister of Iran, declared that Aden and Baghdad belonged to Iran; on 9 April he further added that his
Government had decided to overthrow the Iraqi Govemement. BaniSadr, the President of Iran, in an
interview with Al-Nahat Al-Arabi wa Al-Dawli, in its
issue 151 of 24 March, stated that Iran would not
evacuate or return the three Arab islands it had occupied by force in 1971 and that the Arab States of the
United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Oman, Kuwait and
Saudi Arabia were not independent States. Khomeini
was ,quoted in the Jumhuri lslami dated 19 April as
saying that “the Iraqi people should liberate itself
from the claws of the enemy; it is the duty of the Iraqi
people and army to turn against this non-Islamic
party in Iraq”. In an interview with Radio Monte
Carlo on 30 April, Ghotbzadeh denied the Arabs the
right to reclaim the three islands of Abu Musa and
Greater Tunb and Lesser Tunb in the Arabian Gulf,
because, he said, all the countries around the Gulf
are historically part of Iranian territory. In an interview
in the AI-Khaleej newspaper of 1 May, Ghotbzadeh
was asked whether he did not consider Khomeini’s
statement to the effect that if Iraq continued in its
policies, he, Khomeini, would go to Baghdad to liberate
the Iraqi people as interference in the internal affairs
of Iraq. Ghotbzadeh replied:

38. The prelude to the present conflict was not limited
to what I have mentioned so far. There were not less
thau 57 violations of Iraqi airspace by Iranian military &craft between the period from 23 February
I979 to 28 May 1980. In addition to the repeated Iranian
artillery fire on Iraqi territories and border police posts,
there were more than 15 intensive Iranian bombardments between 26 August 1979 and 3 June 1980. Most
of the bombardments originated from the Iraqi lands
held by Iran, namely, Zain Al-Qaws, Saif Sa’ad and
Maimak. Iraqi and foreign vessels navigating the
Shatt-Al-Arab were often subjected to attacks by
Iran. All those incidents and violations were the
subject of numerous official notes delivered to the
Iranian Foreign Ministry and the Iranian Embassy
in Baghdad, to which no Iranian replies were received.
39. Declarations were made in official circles in Iran
that Iran no longer considered itself bound by the
Algiers agreement. On 19 June 1979, Mr. Sadiq Tabtabai, the political assistant to the Iranian Ministry of
the Interior, said that Iran did not implement the
Algiers agreement. In a statement broadcast by Iran’s
television network on I5 September 1980, General
Falahi, Deputy Joint Chiefof Staffof the Iranian Army,
said that Iran did not recognize the Algiers agreement and that the tireas of Ztiin Al-Qaws and Saif
Sa’ad were Iranian, as was Shatt-Al-Arab. The latest
statement was that of President Bani-Sadr himself.
He was reported by Tehran Radio on 17 September
to have said the following to the French news agency:
“On the political plane, Iran has not fulfilled the Algiers

“This could not be considered as interference in
Iraq’s affairs since we consider the Islamic nation
as one, and the Imam [Khomeini] is a religious
leader; he is thus a ieader for the Iraqi people and
all Islamic peoples; as he feels responsibie for Iran,
so he feels responsibility towards Iraq.”
36. In addition, the present Iranian Government
committed another grave violation of the Algiers agreement. While the aforesaid agreement enjoined Iran
to restore security and trust along its common boundaries with Iraq, and to exercise strict and effective
control for the purpose of putting an end to all infiltrations of a subversive character, the Iranian Govem5

agreement signed with Iraq in 1975. . . . The Shah.
regime itself did not fulfil it.” All our persistent efforts
through diplomatic and poiitical channels to persuade
Iran to fulfil its obligations were in vain. Consequently, we were left with:‘.no choice but to reassert
our rights under international law by taking possession of our lands. In response to the intention of the
Iranian Government, which it had made clear by word
and deed, to terminate the Algiers agreement, my
Government decided to consider the aforesaid agreement as terminated on the grounds of the provisions of
paragraph 4 thereof, to which I referred earlier. In
announcing that decision we strongly emphasized
that we had no territorial ‘ambitions in Iran. Furthermore, we openly declared that we had no intention
whatsoever of waging war on Iran or extending the
scope of the conflict beyond the limits of defending
our sovereignty and legitimate rights.
40. The response of the Government of Iran to this
legitimate position was to escalate the situation to
total war through indiscriminate hostile acts involving
the use of force against Iraqi and foreign vessels in
Shatt-Al-Arab. Iran started bombing civilian centres
and economic establishments inside our country. Consequently, my Government was left with no choice
but to direct preventive strikes against military targets
in Iran. There was, to borrow from the well-known
Caroline Case, a “necessity of self-defence, instant,
overwhelming, leaving no choice of means and no
moment for deliberation’* .2-In taking those actions my
Government clearly and openly declared that Iranian
civilian targets would not be the object of military
strikes unless Iran continued to strike at such targets
in Iraq. Thus, our actions involve “nothing unreasonable or excessive, since the act, justified by
the necessity of self-defence, must be limited by that
necessity, and kept clearly within it”.2

43. It is well known to the Council and the intemational community as a whole that Iraq has responded
favourably, and positively to the various appeals
addressed to it and the efforts made to stop the fighting
and move towards a peaceful settlement of the present
conflict. We have co-operated with the Council from
the outset and have participated in its deliberations.
Our response to the Council’s resolution 479 (1980) was
prompt and positive; our President informed the’ Secretary-General on 29 September (S/14203] “we naturally accept the above-mentioned resolution . . . and
declare our readiness to abide by it if the Iranian side
does likewise” and that “We hope that the Council
will take the necessary measures to urge the Iranian
side to abide by that resolution’*.

41. Iraq does not stand for war, nor does it believe
in the use of force in international relations. Iraq, as
its record proves, and particularly in its frontier relations with Iran, has always adhered strictly and honourably to the letter and the spirit.of its international
commitments. But at the .same time Iraq does not
accept any form of threat or aggression against its
sovereignty and dignity, and we are ready to make
all the sacrifices necessary for the preservation of
our legitimate rights and vital interests.

47. Mr. ARDAKANI (Iran): I need not emphasize
the significance that we attach to this meeting of the
Council. Indeed, the Prime Minister of my country
has decided, in view of the importance of the matter
before the Council and its significance to the United
Nations, to come in person to explain our position
and to participate in the deliberations of the Council.
However, he will not be able to arrive in New York
until Thursday. Accordingly, Mr. President, I ask you
to arrange a meeting for the coming Friday so that he
can present the position of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on the matter on the agenda.

44. Iran officially rejected the call of the Council.
Moreover, in response to the good-will mission undertaken by the President of Pakistan and the SecretaryGeneral of the Islamic Conference, we offered a unilateral cease-fire from 5 to 8 October, which actually
went into effect at dawn on 5 October. Iran’s response
was a large-scale attack on land and sea and in the ‘air.
45. I should like finally to reaffirm before the Council that Iraq does not stand for the use of force in
international relations. We firmly believe in the peaceful settlement of disputes. We fully realize that, as
a developing country, we need to utilize all our energies and resources for social and economic development. But, at the same time, we cannot remain idle
in the face of any encroachment upon our legitimate
sovereign rights in. the totality of our territories, or
upon our security, peace and well-being.
45. The PRESIDENT (interprehztion from Russian):
I now call on the representative of Iran.

42. Concern has been expressed regarding the
repercussions of the recent events on the world economic interests which might be adversely affected.
Let me point out at once that Iraq is keen to protect
within the limits of its ability the economic interests
of other nations. Any attempt to widen the character
and scope of our problem with Iran would endanger the
situation. Such an attitude would invite further foreign
intervention in our part of the world, which we earnestly want to keep outside the sphere of influence
and rivahy of the big Powers, in the interest of international peace and security and world economic
prosperity.

48. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
49. Mr. ROA KOURf (Cuba) (interprerution from
Spanish): First of all, I should like to express to you,
Comrade President, my delegation’s pleasure that you
will be presiding over the meetings of the Council in
October. Apart from your outstanding diplomatic
qualities and your well-known position on matters of
6

_.,

.__,

.I.

.

,

_-

.,_

__,..

i

-..

-,_

..-,

-..

r

-

.

.-

,-

._^.

I..,

-

.

principle, you represent the great homeland of Lenin,
the Soviet Union, which has a strong record in defence
of international peace and security and in the building
of a world free from injustice, exploitation and poverty.
We are sure that for all these reasons you will conduct
the present meetings successfully and help in producing
the peaceful settlement so ardently desired by all of
this unfortunate conflict between two fraternal nonaligned countries.

and offering the sincere co-pperation of Cuba in settlement of the unfortunate dispute between those two
Govemements, both friends of Cuba. Minister Malmierca held talks at the highest level in both capitals
and transmitted ‘President. Fidel Castro’s message.
He is now once again in theaegion pursuing his efforts
on behalf of peace and a cessation of military activities.
55. I am not betraying sky secret when I say that
my Government, like all responsible Governments in
the world, is deeply disturbed by the development of
events, which not only have caused considerable
material damage and irreparable loss of life in both.
countries but are a serious threat to peace and stability
in that sensitive and important region of the world.
The Government of Cuba,, consequently, will spare
no effort to contribute to a’peaceful and honourable
settlement of that conflict, in conditions acceptable
to both sides. Our Minister for External Relations,
who, as I have said, is carrying out a second round of
talks with the leaders of Iraq and Iran, will continue
his efforts to achieve this result.

50. I should also like to take this opportunity to
express the gratitude of my delegation to your predecessor, the representative of Tunisia, for the efforts
he made last month, when he presided over the
meetings of the Council.
51. I wish to thank you and the other members of
the Council for having allowed me to speak. The situation which has arisen between Iran and Iraq is of grave
concern to all countries members of the non-aligned
movement, to the third world in general and to all
peace-loving forces and States. For this reason I have
received instructions from my Government to take
part in the consideration of this matter in my capacity
as representative of the President of the non-aligned
movement.

56. I am sure that I am reflecting the feelings of my
colleagues in the non-aligned movement when I say
that the efforts of the international community must
be directed now to an early peaceful and ~mutually
satisfactory settlement of the conflict; that an escalation of the military operations, which would only
increase the likelihood of the conflict spreading, must
be prevented at all costs; and that all States Members
of the United Nations must refrain from any action
which might lead to a worsening of the present delicate
situation.

52. It is well known that it is a cardinal objective of
the non-aligned countries to ensure the defence of
international peace and security, the non-use of force
or the threat of use of force in international relations,
the promotion of solidarity and co-operation among
Member States and the settlement by peaceful means
of conflicts which arise anywhere in the world and
which could endanger international peace and secu. rity, especially those conflicts which involve nonaligned countries.

57. In summary, my delegation hopes that the Security Council, which has primary responsibility for the
.maintenance of international peace and security, will
make an active contribution to the speedy termination of the conflict. In this context, we welcome the
efforts being made by the Secretary-General, the
Chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization,
Yasser Arafat, and various organizations and Govemments .
58. As the representative of the President of the
non-aligned movement, I wish to reaffirm solemnly
the desire of my Government, together with the Gove’mments of other members of the Movement, to
promote peace and restore friendly relations between
the Governments of Iran and Iraq, which could only
benefit the interests and the unity of all our countries
and peoples.

53. We were truly distressed to leam,of the outbreak
of armed conflict between Iran and Iraq. The Govemement and the people of Cuba have maintained
close relations of friendship and co-operation with
Iraq for many years. My Government, together with
the other member States of the non-aligned movement,
paid a tribute at the sixth summit Conference, at
Havana, to the Iranian people for their triumph against
the oppression of the Shah and welcomed the incorporation of Iran in our movement as a fully fledged
member. Our feelings towards both peoples, therefore, can but be based on fraternal friendship and the
principles and objectives of the policy of nonalignment.
54. When the conflict broke out a few weeks ago,
President Fidel Castro, exercising his powers as
President of the non-aligned movement and guided by
the decisions of the Movement regarding the peaceful
settlement of conflicts among Member countries,
decided to send the Minister for External Relations
of Cuba, Comrade Isidoro Malmierca, to Baghdad
and Tehran bearing personal messages to President
Saddam Hussein and President Abolhassan Bani-Sadr,

The meeting

rose at 5.15 p.m.

NOTES
I See United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1017, No. 14903.
2 The American Journal of International Law, vol. 32,. 1938, p. 89.

7

_.

..

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

;

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores’and
distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore
or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

D&NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les 1ib:airies et les agences depositaims du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou GenPve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las pubhcaciones
de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en libretias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Se&on de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

83-61462-October

00300
’ ..
-. _I

1987-2,050
