92

General Aamb)y-Tldrty-lourth SeSllon

Recalling further its resolution 33/20 of 29 November 1978 on the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research,
Acknowledging the value of the research and "futures
studies" undertaken by the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research,
Recognizing the role of the United Nations Institute
for Training and Research in assisting, through training
and other services within its mandate, members of permanent missions to the United Nations and other national officials concerned with the work of the United
Nations,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Executive Director of the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research11 and the introductory statement
which he made on 12 October 1979 ;12
2. Welcomes the emphasis on, and urges the continuation of the concentration of the work of the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research in the
sphere of, economic and social training and research
and the inclusion of specific projects on the problems
in the areas identified by the General Assembly at its
sixth and seventh special sessions and in the relevant
decisions adopted by the Assembly at its twenty-ninth
session;
3. Calls upon Member States and organizations to
provide greater and wider financial support to the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research.

34/ 19.

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee of
the Whole of the Economic Commission for Latin
America on its thirteenth special session, 15
Deeply concerned at the magnitude of the damage
caused in Dominica by hurricanes "David" and "Frederic", which resulted in extensive loss of human life
and destruction of the economic and social infrastructure,
1. Endorses the resolution adopted on 19 October
1979 by the Committee of the Whole of the Economic
Commission for Latin America;16
2. Urges Governments of Member States and international organizations to provide with the utmost
urgency the assistance envisaged in that resolution for
the rehabilitation, reconstruction and development of
Dominica;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly
informed during the next two years of the results
achieved in the implementation of the present
resolution.
61 st plenary meeting
9 November 1979

61 st plenary meeting
9 November 1979
34/ 18.

Internadonal assistance for the rehabilitadon,
reconstruction and development of the Dominican Republic

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee of the
Whole of the Economic Commission for Latin America
on its thirteenth special session, 18
Deeply concerned at the magnitude of the damage
caused in the Dominican Republic by hurricanes
"David" and "Frederic", which resulted in extensive loss
of human life and destruction of the economic and
social infrastructure,
l. Endorses the resolution adopted on 19 October
1979 by the Committee of the Whole of the Economic
Commission for Latin America;14
2. Urges Governments of Member States and international organizations to provide with the utmost
urgency the assistance envisaged in that resolution for
the rehabilitation, reconstruction and development of
the Dominican Republic;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly
informed during the next two years of the results
achieved in the implementation of the present resolution.
61 st plenary meeting
9 November 1979
11 _Dfficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/34/14).
• 12 Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Second Committee, 16th meeting, paras. 12-22.
1a E/CEPAL/G.1105.
14 Ibid., sect. IV, resolution 417 (PLEN.13).

International assistance for the rehabfiltadon,
reconstruction and development of Dominica

34/23.

United Nations Cocoa Conference

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12
December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Concerned at the increasing difficulties confronting
developing countries in international trade in commodities and at the little progress made thus far in the preparatory meetings and negotiations on the majority of
co~_odities under the Integrated Programme for Commodities, adopted on 30 May 1976 by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,1 7
Ctmsidering that the question of commodities, in
particular cocoa, has been under regular consideration
at the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development by producers and consumers but that no final
agreement on cocoa has yet been reached,
Taking into account the work done thus far with regard to commodities, in particular cocoa,
l. Takes note of the efforts being made within the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
t? implement the Integrated Programme for Commodities;
. 2. Urges all States participating in the United Nations Cocoa Conf~rence to intensify consultations preparatory to the third part of the Conference, which will
be held at Geneva from 19 to 30 November 1979;
E/CEPAL/G.1105.
Ibid., sect. IV, resolution 418 (PLEN.13).
17 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes
(~.Jnited Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.Il.D.10 and corrigendum), part one, sect. A, resolution 93 (IV).
15
16
