S/PV.8710

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8710th meeting

Thursday, 30 January 2020, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Dang/Mr. Pham. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Wu Haitao
Ms. Morrison González
Mr. Auväärt
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Licharz/Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Aougi
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Ms. Mogashoa
Mr. Baati
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2020/41)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-02365 (E)
*2002365*

S/PV.8710

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2020/41)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Salamé is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Brazzaville.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council member to
document S/2020/41, which contains which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Salamé and Mr. Mathias Licharz,
speaking on behalf of the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya.
I now give the floor to Mr. Salamé.
Mr. Salamé: I am pleased to be joining the Security
Council from Brazzaville, where I attended the eighth
summit of the African Union High-Level Committee
on Libya at the level of Heads of State and Government,
hosted by the President of the Republic of the Congo,
His Excellency Mr. Sassou Nguesso. In my intervention,
I reiterated the Organization’s strong partnership with
the African Union as we work together in the pursuit of
peace and stability in Libya.
On 21 January, the Secretary-General briefed the
Council on the outcomes of the Berlin conference and,
most important, on the collective efforts ahead in order
to peacefully resolve the Libyan conflict. I will briefly
2/23

30/01/2020

update the Council today on what has occurred since
the Secretary General’s briefing.
When we started preparatory consultations for the
Berlin conference in September 2019, at the peak of the
war, we were under no illusions about the challenges
of the task that lay ahead. We also knew that we had to
mobilize in order to prevent Libya’s further downward
spiral into chaos and civil war. I wish to express my
gratitude to Chancellor Merkel and the Federal Republic
of Germany for working relentlessly with us in the
months leading up to the 19 January leaders’ gathering.
At the Berlin conference, representatives of
countries concerned and regional organizations, some
of which have directly or indirectly fuelled the conflict,
agreed not to interfere in Libya’s internal affairs and
to abide by the United Nations arms embargo. The
final 55-point Berlin communiqué comprehensively
tackles the full range of issues underpinning the Libyan
problem set. It is buttressed by the detailed operational
plan of United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), which forms the basis for the Mission’s
work in the coming period.
The Berlin conference was a serious effort to try
to unify a discordant international community and to
give hope to the beleaguered Libyans in the form of the
provision of a protective international umbrella by the
summit participants. That umbrella will allow Libyans
to restore a measure of their plundered sovereignty and
come together to chart their way forward.
The summit was held against the backdrop of the
truce called for by Presidents Putin and Erdoğan on
8 January and accepted by both parties to the conflict.
Following the 12 January commencement of the truce,
there was an initial reduction in violence, which
provided the residents of greater Tripoli a much-needed
respite from the suffering of war.
But with recent developments on the ground, I
regret to report that the truce holds only in name.
Artillery exchanges have significantly increased in
Tripoli in recent days, with an associated increase in
civilian casualties due to the use of indiscriminate
shelling. Since 6 January, we have verified at least
21 civilian casualties —18 deaths and 3 injuries — of
conflict-related incidents in and around Tripoli. In the
last two days alone, four children — all under the age of
12 — perished as a result of shelling in the Al-Hadaba
area of Tripoli, two of whom died at the scene of the
20-02365

30/01/2020

The situation in Libya

attack, while the other two died in intensive care; the
last one died just yesterday afternoon.
We are also witnessing severe fighting outside
Tripoli. On 26 January, the Libyan National Army
(LNA) launched an offensive against Government
of National Accord (GNA) forces in the Abu Qurayn
area, south of Misrata, prompting heavy clashes with
dozens of casualties on both sides. Those clashes were
accompanied by fixed-wing strikes conducted by the
LNA and drone strikes by both sides.
As I speak, the battle for Abu Qurayn is ongoing.
On 8 January, the LNA extended its unilaterally
declared no-fly zone to include Mitiga airport. On
22 January, the LNA further extended that no-fly
zone southwards towards Gharyan and Tarhouna and
threatened to shoot down any military or civilian
aircraft approaching Mitiga airport. Since that time,
Mitiga airport has been shelled on three occasions,
resulting in civilian casualties, damaging the civilian
airport’s infrastructure and temporarily halting air
traffic. On 28 January, two days ago, GNA forces
reportedly downed an LNA drone in the vicinity of
Misrata. Since 12 January, the Mission has recorded
more than 110 reported violations of the truce.
I am also deeply worried about the military
reinforcements received by both sides, raising the
spectre of a broader conflict engulfing the wider
region. The warring parties have continued to receive
a sizeable amount of advanced equipment, in addition
to fighters and advisers from foreign sponsors — in
brazen violation of the arms embargo and the pledges
made by representatives of those countries in Berlin.
The LNA has reinforced its forces along the front lines
in Tripoli with arms, equipment and infantry elements,
including foreign fighters.
Meanwhile, there has been a notable increase in
heavy cargo flights — several per day — to Benina
airport and Al-Khadim air base in eastern Libya
delivering military equipment to the LNA. Yesterday
three boats were in Tripoli and Misrata delivering new
weapons in the west, while two cargo planes landed at
Al-Khadim air base in the east.
At the same time, foreign fighters who support the
GNA have been flown into Tripoli by the thousands
and deployed in forward locations, alongside Libyan
forces. During this period, the GNA forces, supported
by a foreign sponsor, established advanced air defence
systems throughout the western region — to put it

S/PV. 8710

bluntly, Hawk anti-aircraft defence systems. As recently
as Tuesday, the presence of foreign naval assets,
including warships, was witnessed off the coast of
Tripoli, in addition to cargo ships.
All those manoeuvres to resupply the two parties
threaten to precipitate a new and much more dangerous
conflagration. They violate the spirit and the letter
of the Berlin conference. I urge the parties and their
foreign sponsors to desist from reckless actions and
instead renew their expressed commitment to work
towards a ceasefire.
As the Secretary-General briefed the Council
on 21 January, we received from both parties — on
19 January, in Berlin — the full roster of names of their
military representatives to attend the Joint Military
Commission talks in Geneva. Those talks form the
pillar of the military track and must be launched as soon
as possible. I had hoped to be able to brief the Council
today from Geneva, not Brazzaville, with the talks
having started on Tuesday. The GNA representatives
are ready to engage, and I met with them personally
in Tunis on Monday to lay out the framework for the
expected talks. As of yet, the LNA delegation has
been unable to confirm its participation, although I
am scheduled to meet General Haftar in Al-Rajma in
two days’ time to push for the team to be dispatched
without delay.
It is imperative that the Joint Military Commission
meet under United Nations auspices to transform the
truce — or whatever is left of it — into a ceasefire
and discuss the modalities for a ceasefire monitoring
mechanism, which I know is of great interest to the
Council. The Commission will also seek to reach an
agreement on long-term security arrangements, while
directly addressing grievances expressed by both sides.
The Council’s collective support and engagement in
that process is vital. Consolidating the truce is critical
for the success of our parallel efforts to start the Libyan
political forum, thereby enabling the parties to discuss
transitional institutional arrangements.
However, the selection process for Libyan delegates
to that endeavour has not yet been completed. On
10 January, I asked the Presidents of the High Council
of State and the House of Representatives to start, on the
basis of each of the 13 electoral districts, a process to
select representatives of the two houses for the Libyan
political forum. I offered the support of UNSMIL to
ensure that the process was inclusive, transparent, fair

20-023653/23

S/PV.8710

The situation in Libya

30/01/2020

and democratic. On 19 January, the High Council of
State completed the selection of its 13 delegates. Deep
political divisions within the House of Representatives
have been impeding the selection process of its delegates
to the Libyan political forum. Yesterday a district-based
selection process for the 13 delegates started with the
support of UNSMIL. I am pleased to report that, with
UNSMIL representatives as witnesses to the process,
three House of Representatives districts elected their
delegates for the political talks. Yesterday’s efforts sent
a positive signal from Parliament to the Libyan people
that should be encouraged and replicated in the 10 other
districts. UNSMIL continues to be on standby to assist
the remaining districts in completing the process.

eastern Libya following local protests against the ports.
On 20 January, the National Oil Corporation extended
the force majeure to all onshore ports following
pressure exerted by LNA-aligned forces to shut down
production at the Al-Sharara, Hamada and Al-Feel oil
fields. Oil production will soon be reduced to 72,000
barrels per day, coming only from Libya’s offshore
sites. The blockade results in losses of approximately
$55 million per day in national revenue and, as of today,
the cumulative lost revenue as a result of the blockade
has reached over $622 million. The 72,000 barrels per
day that I mentioned must be compared to the situation
two weeks ago, when production stood at 1.3 million
barrels per day.

On the economic track, following their first
meeting, on 6 January, Libyan experts representing the
main national institutions, as well as different economic
sectors, are now developing the terms of reference for
the Libyan expert economic commission. We have
issued invitations to the second economic meeting,
which will take place on 9 February in Cairo, and
received an enthusiastic response from the participants.
On 7 January, UNSMIL convened a second meeting of
the second track dialogue between the two branches
of the Central Bank of Libya to develop a road map
for their eventual unification. The completion of the
international audit of the two branches of the Central
Bank of Libya remains critical for transparency and
creating the conditions for eventual unification.
While we have made significant progress and hope
to soon begin the audit, there has been no shortage
of challenges. We will continue to rely on the strong
support of the Security Council in order to move
forward with the process.

Libya’s national debt has now surpassed 100 billion
dinars and is spiking upwards. Expenditures on
salaries proliferate as competing authorities add to an
already bloated payroll. Government subsidies, both
hidden and overt, continue to increase as the quality
of services diminishes. Cuts to customs tariffs and
taxes are narrowing Libya’s revenue base, making
the country entirely reliant on oil exports — which
have now stopped — and fees on foreign exchange.
Commercial banks are finding it increasingly difficult
to operate under the supervision of two competing
central banks. A number of commercial banks,
particularly in the country’s east, are now either unable
to honour transactions or will soon reach that point.
While the Mission continues to work to find halfway
measures to keep the economy afloat, fully addressing
the situation requires a political solution that allows for
more fundamental economic and institutional reform.

The international follow-up committee to the Berlin
conference will get under way in the coming weeks
with the formation of four working groups focused
on the political, military, economic and international
humanitarian law and human rights tracks. Those
mechanisms will ensure that the hard work ahead
of Berlin continues and that those who obstruct the
process — whether inside or outside Libya — can be
held to account.

The humanitarian situation remains deeply
concerning. More than 150,000 people have been
forced from their homes in the Tripoli area since the
conflict began in April. As of 22 January, nearly 120
schools in Ain Zara and Abu Salim in Tripoli remain
closed after a number of schools reopened following
the truce, depriving at least 70,000 children of their
basic human right to an education. A total of 26 health
facilities have been damaged to varying degrees due to
proximity to the clashes, including 12 that have closed,
while another four remain at high risk of closure.

The economy in Libya is becoming increasingly
unstable due to the conflict. Institutional fragmentation
and the inability to enact a unified economic policy
are exacerbating existing challenges and creating new
ones. On 18 January, the National Oil Corporation
declared force majeure on oil exports from ports in

At least 953 migrants, among them 136 women
and 85 children, were returned to Libya in the first
two weeks of 2020. Most were disembarked in Tripoli
and all were taken to detention centres, where they are
routinely subjected to serious human rights violations
and abuses. Those returned migrants are among over

4/23

20-02365

30/01/2020

The situation in Libya

1,000 who have left Libya by sea since 1 January,
driven in part by the heaviest clashes Tripoli has seen
since hostilities began nine months ago. The increase
in departures is alarming, given the very limited
search-and-rescue capacity in the Mediterranean. On
27 January, UNSMIL and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) issued a joint report on the 2 July air strike on
the Tajoura detention centre, calling for accountability
for violations of international law and urgent action
to prevent a repeat of a similar incident. I regret the
recent news that OHCHR has stopped activities at the
gathering and departure facility it had established,
as it was unable to guarantee safety due to training
exercises nearby.
I am concerned about credible reports of serious
human rights violations in Sirte, including enforced
disappearances and arbitrary detention by armed
groups since the LNA took the city on 6 January. There
are reports of families forced to flee, some due to their
affiliation with the Government of National Accord
and others due to their association with elements of
the former regime, that is, the Al-Qadhafi regime.
UNSMIL has received reliable reports of hundreds of
prisoners from at least four towns and cities in western
Libya, including Tripoli and Khums, being released
contrary to Libyan law in order to fight on behalf of
the Government of National Accord in exchange for
promised freedom following the end of the conflict.
We have also received reports of summary executions
and revenge killings in Tripoli and in nearby Tarhouna,
which is under the control of forces loyal to the LNA.
The fate of many forcibly disappeared Libyans
remains unknown. More than half a year has passed
since Siham Sergewa, a member of the House of
Representatives, was seized at night from her home
in Benghazi. I reiterate that the authorities in eastern
Libya are responsible for respecting international
human rights law and are legally obliged to establish
the fate and whereabouts of Ms. Sergewa. I welcome
the joint statement issued by several Member States
on 17 January and urge others with influence on the
relevant authorities to demand her immediate release
and the release of all victims of enforced disappearance
and to hold those responsible to account.
In contrast to the malaise that has beset some in
Libya’s political class, many other Libyans have not
stood idly by in the face of the widespread use of
hate speech and divisive rhetoric designed to tear the

S/PV. 8710

country apart. I applaud the civil society activists and
tribal elders who have courageously raised their voices,
particularly in the past few days, in order to maintain
social harmony among Libyans. I was heartened to see
that a group of young activists in Benghazi issued a
New Year’s Day call for a cessation of hostilities and a
return to political talks.
It is my sincere hope that the momentum created
on 19 January in Berlin — genuine momentum — and
here today in Brazzaville will be seized by the Council
and by the Libyan parties. Libyans need to be given
some hope that the international community has not
abandoned them. Specific endorsement of the Berlin
conclusions by the Council through the adoption of
a resolution would send a decisive signal not only
to the Libyans but also to the spoilers — local and
international alike — about the seriousness with which
the international community regards this process.
However, I must also be candid in expressing my
deep anger and disappointment at what has occurred
since the Berlin summit. There are unscrupulous
actors inside and outside Libya who cynically hint
towards efforts to promote peace and piously affirm
their support for the United Nations. Meanwhile, they
continue to strengthen their commitment to a military
solution, raising the frightening spectre of a full-scale
conflict and further misery for the Libyan people, more
refugees, the creation of a security vacuum and further
interruptions to global energy supplies. All that is done
in blatant disregard of Libya’s sovereignty and the
fundamental rights of the Libyan people and in flagrant
violation of international consensus and the rules-based
international order. I hope that in the coming days the
Council can find its unity and its voice to halt Libya’s
senseless unravelling. Too much is at stake, including
our collective credibility.
The President: I thank Mr. Salamé for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Licharz.
Mr. Licharz (Germany): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011) of 26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security Council
on the work of the Committee established pursuant to
the same resolution. The report covers the period from
5 September 2019 to 29 January 2020, during which
time the Committee held three informal consultations
and conducted additional work by silence procedure.

20-023655/23

S/PV.8710

The situation in Libya

Allow me to begin by noting that at its most
recent informal consultations, held on 25 November,
the Committee heard a presentation by the Panel of
Experts on its final report submitted in accordance
with resolution 2441 (2018). Since the report is publicly
available in document S/2019/914, I will not summarize
its findings. Committee members expressed their
concern about the lack of implementation of the arms
embargo, in particular, and reported violations thereof,
as well as attacks against civilians and civilian objects,
which constitute a breach of international humanitarian
law. Committee members reiterated their support for
the work of the Panel and encouraged it to regularly
report on cases of non-compliance with the relevant
resolutions. Committee members also underlined the
importance of the privileges and immunities enjoyed by
experts on mission under the 1946 Convention on the
Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations. In that
regard, the Committee continues to follow the case of
Mr. Moncef Kartas, a member of the Panel of Experts.
The Chair recalled his intention to work towards
organizing a visit of the Committee to all agreed areas
of Libya, as mentioned in the Committee’s 2018 annual
report (see S/2018/1176), as soon as possible subject to
logistical and security arrangements.
Of the four recommendations addressed to it by the
Panel of Experts, the Committee agreed to take action
on two — one pertaining to the assets freeze and the
other relating to updates of the sanctions list. A third
recommendation regarding the listing of individuals
only required for the Committee to take note at this
stage. The remaining nine recommendations are
addressed to the Security Council. Since the submission
of the final report, the Committee has also received a
written update from the Panel of Experts on the topic
of the security agreement signed between Libya and
Turkey, in the context of the Panel’s role in monitoring
the implementation of the arms embargo.
Going back to the work of the Committee in the
preceding months, on 12 September 2019, upon the
request of Libya, the Committee received a briefing
from the Chairman of the Board of Directors and Chief
Executive Officer of the Libyan Investment Authority
(LIA), a listed entity. In the interactive discussion
that followed, Committee members emphasized the
need to preserve the integrity and value of the Libyan
frozen assets for the benefit of the Libyan people. They
further stressed the importance of cooperation between
the LIA and the Panel of Experts. Since that time,
6/23

30/01/2020

through Libya, the Committee has also received two
letters from the LIA on issues relating to the scope and
implementation of the assets freeze. The Committee
has sent a preliminary response and will be considering
a more comprehensive reply.
On 22 October 2019, the Committee received a
briefing from the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya and an oral update from the Panel of Experts, both
focusing on the implementation of the arms embargo
and reported violations thereof. Committee members
denounced continued violations of the arms embargo
and increasing civilian casualties, stressing that attacks
against civilians and civilian objects constituted a
breach of international humanitarian law.
I now turn to exemptions, requests for guidance and
implementation reports. Concerning the travel ban, the
Committee approved two exemption requests, invoking
paragraph 16 (a) of resolution 1970 (2011), submitted
by Ms. Aisha Al-Qadhafi and Ms. Safia Farkash
Al-Barassi, respectively. Given two prior cases of
non-compliance involving two other listed individuals,
the Committee has tasked the Panel of Experts with
updating its implementation-assistance notice on
the travel ban, so as to be able to provide additional
guidance to Member States on implementation.
With regard to the assets freeze, no negative
decision was taken by the Committee in relation to
a notification by the Kingdom of Bahrain, submitted
under sub-paragraph (a) of paragraph 19 of resolution
1970 (2011), in relation to basic expenses of the Libyan
Investment Authority. The Committee had previously
provided guidance to the Kingdom of Bahrain on the
correct exemption provision to apply. The Committee
also approved an exemption request by Switzerland,
submitted under sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph 19
of resolution 1970 (2011), in relation to extraordinary
expenses of the Libyan Africa Investment Portfolio.
The Committee further provided guidance to Malta on
the scope of the assets-freeze measure, and exchanged
additional correspondence with the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia on a financial transaction involving the Libyan
Foreign Investment Corporation, which is indicated as
an “also known as” for the Libyan Investment Authority
on the Committee’s list.
With respect to the arms embargo, the Committee
responded to a request for guidance on its scope from
the World Health Organization in Libya. During
20-02365

30/01/2020

The situation in Libya

the reporting period, the Committee received an
implementation report from Portugal.
Lastly, on the measures aimed at preventing illicit
exports of petroleum, including crude oil and refined
petroleum products, the Committee received the
name of the new focal point, appointed by the Libyan
Government, pursuant to resolutions 2146 (2014), 2278
(2016) and 2362 (2017). In addition, the Committee
is considering a draft implementation-assistance
notice prepared by the Panel of Experts on these
measures in order to assist Member States with their
proper implementation.
The President: I thank Mr. Licharz for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me start by
thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, for his briefing and
for the ongoing efforts of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) to broker an end to the
conflict in Libya. I would like to assure Special
Representative Salamé of the United Kingdom’s full and
unwavering support and appreciation for his untiring
efforts in this regard. Let me also thank Germany for
hosting the Berlin Conference and for all its efforts to
bring international leaders together in order to create
the right environment for a ceasefire and a resumption
of the political process.
Let me start with Berlin. We particularly welcome
the conclusions document agreed in Berlin, which
includes a commitment by all to refrain from interfering
in the conflict or in the internal affairs of Libya. It
is essential that these commitments are adhered to.
It has been only 11 days since Berlin, but it is clear
from Special Representative Salamé’s briefing that the
Libyan people are in grave peril and that the situation
has become more fragile and more dangerous. Libya
stands on the brink of disaster, and we are gravely
concerned by reports of breaches of the arms embargo
in recent days. Member States have obligations to abide
by the arms embargo imposed by the Security Council.
We are also deeply concerned by reports of
increased fighting over recent days, which underlines
the urgency of the Joint Military Commission’s
5+5 meeting, convened by UNSMIL, to agree to a
permanent ceasefire. It is essential that both sides
commit to participating in these talks without delay. We

S/PV. 8710

also support UNSMIL’s work to convene the political
forum and to establish the Libyan expert economic
commission. Both initiatives will provide opportunities
to address the political and economic questions that lie
at the core of the conflict. We condemn the blockading
of oil terminals in the east of Libya, which has led to
the declaration of force majeure by the National Oil
Corporation. The consequent loss of oil revenue will
lead only to the further suffering of Libyans.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/41)
underlines the worsening human rights situation in
Libya. Let me, at this point, echo Special Representative
Salamé’s call for clarity on the whereabouts of Siham
Sergewa. It is particularly distressing that there have
been at least 50 attacks on health-care facilities,
health-care workers and ambulances since April last
year. All parties to the conflict must comply with
their obligations under international law, including
international humanitarian law.
The Berlin Conference was a vital step in bringing
together key international players. They agreed to
support the United Nations-led political process
and they pledged to respect the United Nations arms
embargo. However, as Special Representative Salamé
just highlighted, the situation on the ground is
extremely worrying. The risks in Libya are high. It is
vital that the international community and the Council
show unity and put momentum in support of UNSMIL
and the United Nations-led political process. There is
no alternative solution. We should send a clear message.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, for his update on the increasingly
alarming situation in Libya.
Less than two weeks ago, international leaders
gathered in Berlin, where they called for a sustained
ceasefire and clearly committed to supporting effective
United Nations monitoring when a lasting ceasefire
is achieved and to rejecting toxic foreign interference
in Libya. The United States looked to the participants
at the Berlin conference to abide by the commitments
that they made to maintain a truce and support renewed
negotiations led by the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL). Regrettably, the promise of the
Berlin conference is already under threat.
During today’s briefing, we learned of further
blatant violations of the United Nations arms embargo,
including the deployment of foreign fighters and

20-023657/23

S/PV.8710

The situation in Libya

mercenaries and the delivery of weapons, ammunition
and advanced systems to the parties from Member
States. Violators include — and I must stress
this — several countries that participated in the Berlin
conference. It is past time for those who have violated
existing Security Council resolutions, including the
United Nations arms embargo on Libya, to face real
consequences. These egregious violations worsen an
already volatile situation in Libya, deepening the pain
and hardship faced by ordinary Libyans on a daily
basis. They must stop.
We join the United Nations in calling on countries
to live up to their Berlin commitments and we demand
that Member States comply with their obligations
to implement the United Nations arms embargo.
This entails an immediate and permanent halt of
all deployments of personnel, fighters and military
equipment to Libya. We also call on Libyan parties to
honour the fragile truce that they themselves respected
over the past few weeks. Engagement in UNSMIL’s
planned 5+5 talks will be an important signal of how
dedicated each side is to reaching a solution that avoids
even more unnecessary bloodshed. Both parties need to
commit to participating.
While working towards a ceasefire is a critical
step, it should not be the end goal. We cannot turn our
attention away from Libya as the 5+5 discussions are
launched. Any ceasefire must create space for serious
and concrete discussions among Libyans about how
to resolve the issues that have fuelled the conflict.
Among these difficult tasks are the dismantling of
extremist militias and the rooting of Libya’s economy
in transparency and the rule of law so as to benefit all
Libyans, as well as efforts to prevent groups or spoilers
from hijacking the political process.
Looking further ahead, we continue to urge all
sides to participate in UNSMIL’s planned intra-Libyan
political dialogue and to finalize the representation with
the inclusion of women and youth leaders as soon as
possible. A political solution for the conflict will require
an inclusive Libyan-led and Libyan-owned process.
In the light of the recent developments, we reiterate
in this context that no group should be allowed to hijack
Libya’s national oil production. It is the Libyan people
who suffer when the country’s revenues collapse.
The disruption of Libya’s oil production has already
caused electricity and water shortages. Shortages
of fuel and cooking oil will likely soon follow. The
8/23

30/01/2020

current blockade on Libya’s oil production must be
lifted. Moreover, threats to civilian lives and aviation
must end, and displaced people must be allowed
to voluntarily and safely return to their homes in a
sustainable and dignified manner. It is unacceptable
that they have not yet been able to do so. There is an
urgent need to reaffirm the truce agreed upon in Berlin
and to convert it into a lasting ceasefire under United
Nations supervision. On these points, we should all be
able to agree.
As parties to the Berlin conference affirmed, the
Libyan people deserve to determine their own future,
free from toxic foreign interference. It is the Council’s
responsibility, indeed its mandate, to enable UNSMIL
and Special Representative Salamé to help them do
just that.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, for his briefing and his tireless
efforts to find a political solution to the Libyan crisis.
I would like to reiterate France’s full support for
Mr. Salamé. We support his efforts and those of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
and of the Secretary-General.
The Berlin international conference on Libya,
in which the President of the French Republic,
Mr. Emmanuel Macron, participated, allowed for the
strengthening of the international consensus necessary
for a solution to the crisis. The commitments made
by international actors at that Conference must be
honoured and followed by action. The arms embargo
must be respected. We deplore the fact that more than 50
violations were recorded by UNSMIL last week. Foreign
interference and military support fuel the conflict
and must stop. I refer in particular to Turkey, as the
President of the French Republic highlighted yesterday.
We must eschew military force and proxy wars.
We are particularly concerned about the growing
presence of Syrian and foreign fighters, who continue
to flock to Libya in flagrant breach of the commitments
made on 19 January in Berlin. The most recent
developments give rise to fears of a regional escalation
of the Libyan conflict and threaten the security of the
Maghreb, the Sahel and Europe.
France calls on the Libyan parties to resume
constructive dialogue on economic and oil issues as
soon as possible, in order to allow for the equitable and
unobstructed distribution of oil resources for the benefit
20-02365

30/01/2020

The situation in Libya

of all Libyans. It is important that Libya’s neighbouring
countries, above and beyond those represented at
the conference in Berlin, such as Algeria and Egypt,
be fully involved in monitoring and implementing
the conclusions of the Berlin conference. We refer in
particular to Tunisia, Morocco, the Niger and Chad.
After a truce lasting two weeks, the escalation
of tensions on the ground is extremely worrisome
and must stop immediately. The Libyan parties must
act responsibly. They must first agree on a credible
and lasting ceasefire. France therefore expects
the Libyan parties to meet with the Joint Military
Commission — in the so-called 5+5 talks — as soon
as possible. The Committee should also enable the two
parties to agree on issues of common interest, such as
the dismantling of militias and the unification of Libyan
security institutions.
More broadly, the parties must engage in good
faith in constructive dialogue on various tracks to
discuss security, economic and political issues. The
Libyan parties must find a political solution that meets
the expectations and aspirations of all Libyans. The
dialogue should be conducted in an inclusive format
and lead to the formation of a genuinely inclusive
and representative Government that acts for the
benefit of all Libyans, so that they can freely choose
their representatives.
The resumption of dialogue must be achieved
with the support of the African Union and Libya’s
neighbours, which have a specific and legitimate
right to support a resolution of the Libyan crisis. We
welcome the initiative taken by the African Union to
host an inter-Libyan reconciliation meeting, which
could be held in Addis Ababa in the spring. It would be
an important contribution to ending the crisis in Libya.
In order to maintain the positive momentum of
the Berlin conference and to support the resumption
of the political process, the members of the Security
Council, in unison, must send a strong message to
all actors with respect to Libya. To that end, we must
quickly and decisively endorse the conclusions of the
Berlin conference by adopting a robust resolution. This
resolution must provide strong and unequivocal support
for United Nations-led mediation in Libya. This support
should be substantial and operational — whether it
be to monitor the ceasefire, to ensure compliance
with the arms embargo or, more broadly, to see to
the simultaneous implementation of the six elements

S/PV. 8710

addressed in Berlin. In this respect, we will, first and
foremost, strengthen UNSMIL. The Council must act,
and it must act quickly.
The Security Council can count on France’s full
commitment and mobilization in the quest for a solution
to the Libyan crisis. The French authorities will continue
to take action, together with their European partners,
the African Union and Libya’s neighbours, with the
support of the United Nations, to achieve peace and
stability in Libya.
Ms. Morrison González (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We would like to begin by applauding
the efforts of Special Representative Salamé, given
the challenging and commendable work he conducts
with his team on the ground to end the crisis in Libya.
We also thank the representative of Germany for his
briefing on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
We also congratulate Germany on organizing the
Berlin international conference on Libya, Algeria for
hosting the ministerial meeting for Libya’s neighbours
in Algiers, and the Republic of the Congo for holding
today’s meeting of the African Union High-Level
Committee on Libya, in Brazzaville, all of which
are important meetings on the future and the role of
international actors, including regional organizations,
can play to assist the Libyan people in achieving lasting
peace. We also welcome the concrete steps taken by the
parties to appoint members to Libya’s Joint Military
Commission, which we hope will garner results in the
coming days at the meetings in Geneva.
We are concerned about reports of ongoing attacks,
including on schools, hospitals and airports, as well
as of flagrant violations of international humanitarian
law and the arms embargo, following the conclusions
agreed at the Berlin conference. Accordingly, we call on
all relevant actors to take advantage of the momentum
generated at the international level and the provisions
made in good faith, which representatives of various
Member States negotiated in recent forums to bring
about a truce and genuine ceasefire.
We recall that there is no military solution to the
Libyan conflict and that the ceasefire must be agreed
upon without preconditions. The Libyan people must
not and cannot continue to suffer from the inability
of the Members of the United Nations to fulfil their
obligations, in line with the arms embargo and
international law. The efforts of the Council must focus

20-023659/23

S/PV.8710

The situation in Libya

30/01/2020

on slowing the escalation of indiscriminate attacks,
in particular those on civilian infrastructure, which
serve only to exacerbate the very fragile humanitarian
situation. It is therefore important to convey a clear
message on the Council’s unity in this regard.

always be the well-being of the Libyan people. Owing
to the nature of the conflict, consideration must also be
given to all affected neighbouring countries — from
countries in the Sahel to some in Europe — as they face
serious impacts from the ongoing conflict.

We remain concerned about the enforced
disappearance more than six months ago of Ms. Siham
Sergewa, an elected member of the Libyan House of
Representatives. We encourage the authorities to do
their utmost to investigate and bring to justice those
responsible. Any act of violence against women in
politics threatens the building of strong democratic
institutions and the well-being of the Libyan people.
Similarly, we again express great dismay at the
distressing conditions in detention centres, where
recurrent cases of severe malnutrition, torture, sexual
violence and forced labour are documented. We urge
the Libyan Government to end arbitrary detentions, in
particular of children, and seek alternatives that meet
minimum international standards and human dignity.

As we deliver this statement, the humanitarian
situation in Libya continues to deteriorate and hope
is waning. The urgency to de-escalate the conflict is
already resounding. Last week’s Berlin conference
was an opportunity for members of the international
community, in particular a group of concerned countries,
not only to send a clear message of support for the
Libyan people but also add impetus and demonstrate
commitment to curbing the incessant violence,
particularly the attacks against civilian populations.

Young Libyans are involved in mitigating the
effects of the conflict and in building peace and social
cohesion in their communities. We would therefore like
to welcome the Peacebuilding Fund’s joint project to
support young people and adolescents in Sirte, as well as
to provide training in leadership and conflict resolution
and opportunities to participate in decision-making
processes. The reins of a political process that brings
peace, security and stability must be in the hands of
Libyans and in particular of women and young people,
who play a critical role in the dialogue for lasting peace
throughout Libya.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines thanks Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), for his very sobering
briefing on the recent developments in Libya. We
applaud his unrelenting efforts to bring about a peaceful
solution to the Libyan conflict and express our support
for UNSMIL. Likewise, my delegation thanks Minister
Mathias Licharz, speaking on behalf of the Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya, for his briefing on the work
of the Committee.
We remain deeply troubled by the difficulty in
finding a solution to the nine-year long conflict in Libya.
Our primary focus has been, continues to be and will
10/23

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes the
efforts of the recent Berlin conference. We acknowledge
the tireless efforts of the respective leaders in reaching
consensus and encourage the inclusion of all neighbours
and affected parties in the process. We reiterate the
importance of a Libyan-owned and Libyan-led dialogue,
including under the auspices of the United Nations.
We also recognize and encourage all dialogue
efforts, including those held in Moscow, Algiers and
today in the Republic of the Congo. We welcome the
decision by the parties to the conflict to nominate
representatives to the 5+5 Joint Military Commission
(JMC). The designation of the representatives is a
positive sign that the parties are ready to constructively
engage. We urge them to commence negotiations in
good faith for a permanent ceasefire.
Accordingly, all States Members of our Organization
must fully abide by and implement the arms embargo,
in keeping with resolution 1970 (2011) and subsequent
relevant resolutions. Since 2011, approximately 19
Security Council resolutions have been adopted on the
situation in Libya, but we all know of reports that the
arms embargo has been violated with impunity. Let us
be very clear: the situation in Libya will not be resolved
unless Member States entrusted with the responsibility
to uphold international law duly comply with their
international obligations.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reaffirms its
stance that there cannot and will not be a military
solution to the Libyan conflict. We roundly condemn
the ongoing violence in Tripoli and reiterate our call for
a permanent ceasefire. We take note of the new report
20-02365

30/01/2020

The situation in Libya

on the July 2019 airstrikes in Libya at the Tajoura
detention centre and support its recommendations.
Finally, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is
cognizant of the momentum garnered in Berlin. The
upcoming JMC meeting in Geneva, coupled with
dialogue initiatives, in particular within the framework
of the African Union and the League of Arab States,
are encouraging. It would be foolhardy not to advance
on those platforms. Nevertheless, we urge careful
deliberation and assessment of the situation in Libya
as we decide the next steps, ever mindful that at the
centre of the crisis are the Libyan people, who need our
urgent help.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): At the outset, like others,
I would like to thank the briefer, Mr. Ghassan Salamé,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), and Mr. Mathias Licharz of Germany for
presenting the report on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011),
concerning Libya.
Libya is currently at an impasse. The situation on
the ground has garnered the attention of the entire world.
The world is watching how the Libyans will resolve their
issues, how the international agreement will hold and
what the Security Council will do next. Mr. Salamé’s
worrisome report (A/2020/41) refers once again to the
many civilian casualties, the children who are falling
victim to shelling in Tripoli, the continued escalation
of the conflict and the dire humanitarian situation, all
of which are grim stories from the field. The Council
cannot stay silent. What we, as the Security Council, do
now will indeed resonate in history. Therefore, allow
me to focus on the following points.
First, Indonesia supports all international efforts to
bring lasting peace to Libya. We welcome the Berlin
conference, as a complementary process to United
Nations efforts for Libya. We acknowledge the principles
of the Berlin communiqué and call for the international
community to support and respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Libya; international laws and
agreements, including the arms embargo; and efforts
to return to the political process for all Libyans. In
that connection, we welcome United Nations efforts to
facilitate the upcoming dialogue between the House of
Representatives, the High Council of State and other
constituencies in Libya. The need for such dialogue
is something that everyone has voiced, including

S/PV. 8710

Indonesia, and that has enjoyed consensus within the
Council. Everybody wants to see Libya find peace.
However, achieving peace is not the responsibility
solely of Libya but of us all, not only those of us who
were in Berlin or just the Council but the international
community as a whole. Therefore, we expand our call
to the entire international community to provide full
support to our Libyan brothers and sisters and to avoid
exacerbating the situation.
Secondly, we need to focus on Libyans, the
very people we are supposed to protect. Indonesia is
concerned that, following the truce last week, attacks
are persisting against civilians — including women,
children and migrants — and against health-care and
civilian facilities. Shelling of residential areas and vital
civilian infrastructure is continuing, including against
Mitiga airport. That must stop.
In the same spirit of protecting Libyans, we continue
to emphasize that all international efforts should enjoy
Libyan backing and be pushed forward in a Libyanowned, Libyan-led process. We also support the efforts
of Special Representative Salamé and UNSMIL in
facilitating a multitrack approach, including the 5+5
Joint Military Commission, which is a good forum for
advancing confidence-building measures among the
parties. Attendance and participation in the Geneva
talks will be indicators of the intention to achieve peace
or not.
We also need to provide the chance for Libyans
to benefit from their own natural resources. We are
concerned that the ongoing blockade of ports will
deprive them of those benefits. Special Representative
Salamé also alluded to that very important point.
Thirdly, the role of neighbours and regional
organizations is very important. The conflict in Libya
affects its neighbours, from the flow of arms to the flow
of migrants, and creates instability in neighbouring
countries and the region. Therefore, we again reiterate
the need to involve neighbouring States and regional
organizations, since they provide a unique perspective
for peace. We welcome the international follow-up
committee to the Berlin conference and hope that it will
involve relevant stakeholders who were unable to attend
in Berlin.
At the end of the day, we need to be reminded of
our collective duties as the Security Council. We are
here to save lives. I say this again and again because it
is our only agenda. To save lives, we need to seize the

20-0236511/23

S/PV.8710

The situation in Libya

moment — time is fleeting. Ten months after the new
conflict began, the Council has yet to produce a formal
outcome to address it. However, the momentum is with
us now but it will soon disappear. This is our time.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, for his
detailed briefing on developments in the military and
political situation in Libya. We are also grateful for the
representative of Germany’s briefing on the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya.
From to today’s briefing by the Special
Representative, it is clear that the situation in Libya
remains fraught with tension. Despite the announced
truce, the hostilities have continued and even escalated.
We are troubled by the reports of violations of the arms
embargo and stress the need to stop the fuelling of
the conflict by competing external actors. The illicit
proliferation of weapons in Libya is destabilizing the
security situation both within the country itself and in
the Sahel-Saharan region.
The representative of the United Kingdom stated
that Libya is standing on the brink of disaster. It is
indeed standing on the brink of disaster, but that did not
begin in April 2019, but in 2011, when Libyan statehood
was destroyed. Today’s events are rooted in those of
2011. From the very beginning, we have called for
international and regional efforts to focus on unifying
Libya. The aim of the Berlin conference was to achieve
stabilization by bringing together external stakeholders.
From the very beginning, the Russian Federation
participated in preparations for the Berlin conference.
We were guided by the need to support any initiative
to help to facilitate the end of the crisis. Let us recall
that we had previously participated in the meetings
held in Paris and Palermo. We also focused additional
efforts aimed not only at overall de-escalation in Libya,
but also at setting the stage for the summit in Berlin.
Together with Turkey, we organized the meeting of
Libyan parties in Moscow on 13 January. Our initiative
was aimed at establishing a truce in Libya in order to
enable the parties to revive efforts on the political track
and was our contribution to the Berlin conference.
In working on the documents of the Berlin
conference, we proceeded from the key premise of the
principles enshrined in the relevant Security Council
resolutions, namely, that the Libyan people themselves
12/23

30/01/2020

need to resolve the conflict and determine the fate of
their country. Russia had and has no hidden agenda
on Libya. We support and cherish our ties with all
stakeholders; we do not favour any of them. We
conveyed to them our support for a political settlement.
We consistently advise them of the need to renounce
seeking power through military means and the
importance of unifying the efforts of all conscientious
Libyan actors to promptly restore statehood and rebuild
national institutions.
We view the outcome communiqué of the Berlin
conference as a source of support for the efforts
undertaken by the Special Representative to set the
stage for the Libyan parties to return to the negotiating
table with the aim of initiating lasting, inclusive
nationwide dialogue. We reiterate what we stated
in Berlin, which has also been agreed to by all those
present in this Chamber, namely, that dialogue is to be
undertaken among the Libyan people themselves. It
must be a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned dialogue. The
Berlin Conference was intended to create the necessary
atmosphere and frame with a view to sending a direct
message to the Libyan parties. What is now needed
is clarity on the positions of the Libyan parties with
regard to each of the provisions of the conference’s
outcome documents.
We have listened attentively to Mr. Salamé and we
intend to continue our discussion with him in order
to clarify the details of his plan. We fully support the
efforts of the Special Representative in this difficult
endeavour. We trust that the meetings in the near
future of the Joint Military Commission — the 5+5
talks — will help to clarify those issues. We believe
that the Council should support measures that help to
facilitate the resumption of the political track and to
adopt draft resolutions that will lead to the settlement
of disputes among the Libyan parties.
In his briefing, Mr. Salamé used the word
“credibility”. We believe that any future draft resolution
to be adopted by the Security Council needs to be
credible. Indeed, a political settlement in Libya should
not be or become an arena for international competition.
We believe it is important to take into account the views
and the interests of Libya’s immediate neighbours, as
they are dealing with the immediate consequences of the
protracted crisis. The views of regional organizations
should also be considered. Libya’s neighbours are in
a position to play a constructive and valuable role in
making progress on a peaceful settlement.
20-02365

30/01/2020

The situation in Libya

Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, and the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya for their briefings. I welcome the
new Permanent Representative of Libya, Ambassador
Elsonni, to this meeting.
Libya has been in the grip of a protracted conflict
for nine years so far. The conflict, which is a snapshot
of the continued turbulence in Western Asia and North
Africa, has inflicted ruinous disaster on the Libyan
people and jeopardized the security and stability of
neighbouring countries and of the entire region of
Western Asia and North Africa. Spillover problems
resulting from the Libyan situation, such as arms
proliferation, refugees and terrorism, have posed
serious challenges to neighbouring countries, the
region and even the whole world.
China has been closely following the developments
in the country and appreciates the recent actions
taken by the international community, which have
been constructive in alleviating the Libyan situation.
An international conference on the Libyan question
was recently convened in Berlin, at the conclusion of
which a communiqué was released, demonstrating the
important consensus reached among the participants
at the conference. China welcomes this process.
Implementing the outcomes of the conference with
concrete steps will require the concerted efforts of all
Libyan parties, the relevant countries of the region and
the international community as a whole.
As for the Security Council’s endorsement of
the Berlin outcomes, we need not only to act with a
sense of urgency, but also to try to accommodate the
concerns of all sides. In so doing, we need to maintain
the unity of the Council and make every effort to adopt
an actionable draft resolution as early as possible. Let
me elaborate on the following four main points.
First, the current priority is to achieve a sustained
ceasefire. The parties to the Libyan conflict should
proceed from the desire to serve the overall interests
of their country and people and seek an immediate
ceasefire to ease tensions and return to the track of
finding a solution through peaceful dialogue and
consultations. Countries with influence should play
an active role by exerting their influence, pushing the
Libyan parties to bridge their differences, enhancing
mutual trust and providing constructive assistance

S/PV. 8710

in bringing about a ceasefire and restoring political
dialogue. China calls on the Joint Military Commission
to convene 5 + 5 talks as soon as possible and strive
towards making progress.
Secondly, global synergies should be created.
The international community should respect Libya’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity,
support Special Representative Salamé and the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya in their good offices
and mediation efforts, and remain committed to the
Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process within
the United Nations framework.
Given the fact that they are uniquely positioned
to mediate the conflict among the parties, the African
Union and the League of Arab States should be
supported in playing their respective roles, and their
efforts should be synergized with those of the United
Nations. As the Libyan question is closely linked with
the regional situation, any solution should address the
legitimate concerns of the countries of the region. In
this regard, the unique role of the relevant countries
should be brought into play.
Thirdly, unremitting efforts must be made
to combat terrorism. Recently, terrorism within
and around Libya seems to have been resurrected.
Therefore, the international community must remain
extremely vigilant with regard to this trend, strengthen
coordination and cooperation, and work together to
tackle challenges. It is imperative to combat all forms
of terrorism across Libya and to prevent the crossborder movement of foreign terrorist fighters. We
must never allow Libya to turn into a breeding ground
for terrorism.
Fourthly, sanctions must be used properly and
effectively. China’s consistent position is that sanctions
are a means to an end, not an end in themselves, and
should always serve the political settlement of relevant
issues. Under the current circumstances, it is important
to strictly enforce the arms embargo on Libya and
refrain from a military intervention or any other action
that could exacerbate the conflict.
The year 2020 will be the year we celebrate the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United
Nations. Yet we are pained that the Libyan people are
still living through terrible suffering. The international
community must firmly recommit to multilateralism,
and Council members must be united to deliver on
the mandate of maintaining international peace and

20-0236513/23

S/PV.8710

The situation in Libya

security. As a permanent member of the Security
Council, China will continue to support and facilitate
the Libyan political-settlement process as well as the
Libyan people’s pursuit of peace and tranquillity. We
will contribute to restoring peace and stability in Libya.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I wish to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, for
his briefing today. Belgium once again reiterates its
ongoing commitment to the return of peace in Libya.
Belgium firmly supports all elements of the Special
Representative’s plan, including the economic and
political aspects, which complement the ceasefire.
Belgium also welcomes the conclusions of the
Berlin process, which were endorsed by all participants
at the 19 January summit. They should reflect our
determination to support Special Representative
Salamé’s plan for a way out of the crisis in Libya and are
the best way to avoid a regional conflict and to achieve
a political solution for the Libyan people as a whole.
In recent months, we have systematically denounced
flagrant violations of the arms embargo and called for a
lasting ceasefire. Belgium now hopes that the Security
Council’s repeated call for non-interference by external
actors, for intra-Libyan dialogue and for respect for
the arms embargo will finally be put into practice. It is
the responsibility of each State to ensure that its arms
exports are not diverted to illicit destinations. Only
increased vigilance and a determination to respect its
own commitments will make it possible to ensure full
compliance with the arms embargo.
We also remain concerned about the information
coming from the field. It appears that military equipment
and reinforcements of foreign mercenaries have been
provided to both sides, even after the Berlin conference.
There has also been an increase in the use of heavy
artillery, particularly against civilian infrastructure and
in the immediate vicinity of densely populated areas.
The growing presence of increasingly sophisticated
equipment and foreign military actors would make
further escalation even more cruel. We are also deeply
concerned about the blockage of oil production, which
would have disastrous consequences for the country’s
economy and the population as a whole.
We call on the Libyan parties, in particular General
Khalifa Haftar, to back the Berlin conclusions and to
engage constructively with the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) in the preparations for
14/23

30/01/2020

the high-level political forum. The Berlin process,
the only initiative with a chance of restoring peace
to Libya, must receive unanimous support if we are
to prevent an escalation with serious adverse regional
consequences. I also hope that the Berlin meeting
will lead to the end of interference of certain States
in the Libyan conflict and that, on the contrary, those
States will now use their influence with the Libyan
parties in a positive way, finally encouraging them to
commit firmly and definitively to the path of dialogue.
By way of reminder, Belgium denounces the two
memorandums of understanding signed between the
National Government and Turkey — the first, because
it infringes the democratic rights of other States, and
the second, because it reinforces the military approach
and risks massively violating the embargo.
Lastly, the consolidation of the ceasefire and
practical modalities for its implementation are urgent.
In this regard, Belgium welcomes the appointment
of the delegates of each party to the Joint Military
Commission’s 5+5 talks and urges them to hold a
productive meeting. We also look forward to the
early resumption of direct political dialogue between
the Libyan parties at the political forum proposed
by the Special Representative. We also welcome the
engagement of regional organizations in support of the
implementation of the Berlin communiqué.
Once again, I would like to reiterate that it is
the responsibility of all parties to protect civilians,
including the most vulnerable. In this regard, I would
like to reiterate my country’s commitment to ensuring
that the most serious crimes committed in Libya do
not go unpunished and that the responsible parties are
brought to justice in national courts or the International
Criminal Court.
In conclusion, I once again commend the courage
and determination of all UNSMIL personnel and of
Special Representative Salamé.
Ms. Mogashoa (South Africa): I would like to
thank Mr. Ghassan Salamé for his briefing on the
situation in Libya.
South Africa commends the United Nations
Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Mr. Salamé, for their tireless efforts to bring together
all the international players to the Libyan conflict at
the Berlin conference that took place on 19 January,
with the aim of finding a lasting solution to the Libyan
crisis. My delegation also thanks Mr. Mathias Licharz,
20-02365

30/01/2020

The situation in Libya

speaking on behalf of the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), for his
briefing on the work of the Committee.
The protracted nature of the conflict in Libya
requires the Council to be frank about its genesis and
the reasons why it has taken on a proxy dimension. The
fragmentation of State control and security has resulted
in the proliferation of a multitude of armed groups vying
for control of the country and its resources, which has
resulted in one of the worst humanitarian crises on our
continent, given the effects of the conflict on Libyan
civilians, migrants and refugees.
South Africa reiterates that there can be no
military solution to the conflict in Libya. All Libyan
parties, community leaders and non-governmental
organizations should commit to political dialogue
and refrain from military confrontation. The parties
must urgently commit to a ceasefire and work towards
a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process.
Additionally, we call for an end to foreign interference
in Libya. Allow me to focus on three issues.
First, the insecurity seen in the Sahel region today
is a direct result of the instability in Libya. The arms
flowing into Libya also flow into the hands of the armed
groups operating in the Sahel region and the Lake Chad
basin. The spillover effects are seen today in armed
groups operating in the Niger, Chad, Mauritania, Mali
and Burkina Faso. More than a million people have been
displaced in the aforementioned countries as a result
of the jihadist insurgency that is rapidly spreading into
sub-Saharan Africa.
As we endeavour to realize the African Union’s
aspirational goal to silence the guns by 2020, the
endemic insecurity poses a threat to the legitimacy
and stability of the Governments of the region. Even
worse, the limited resources are now being diverted
from socioeconomic-development programmes to
security-related programmes, causing setbacks to the
region’s achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals. In this regard, South Africa wishes to reiterate
the statement made by the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, that
the various threats of political and military interference
in the internal affairs of Libya increase the risk of a
confrontation and undermine the fundamental interests
of the Libyan people in their aspirations for freedom,
peace, democracy and development.

S/PV. 8710

Secondly, the impact of the conflict on migrants
and refugees in Libya, including those in detention
centres, warrants the Council’s continued attention.
South Africa is concerned that the air strikes have even
targeted refugee camps and detention centres, resulting
in casualties. Most troubling is the dire impact that the
protracted conflict has had on civilians, particularly
women and children.
Thirdly, South Africa commends the efforts
of Germany as the host of the Berlin conference in
support of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) three-step process. We also note UNSMIL’s
operationalization action plan from the Berlin process.
We further call for greater cooperation with the African
Union (AU), as lasting peace and stability in Libya can
come only from an inclusive political solution.
We emphasize a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned
process without the interference of external actors.
In that regard, South Africa fully supports the goals
of unifying the country’s institutions, holding national
elections and enhancing the security, stability and
living conditions of the Libyan people, including the
unification and integration of the Libyan armed forces.
The African Union is engaged in efforts to resolve
the Libyan conflict through its Peace and Security
Council and the AU High-Level Committee on Libya,
chaired by the President of the Republic of the Congo,
as well as the work of the AU Special Envoy for Libya.
The AU High-Level Committee on Libya is meeting
today in Brazzaville to further consider the African
Union’s initiatives in that regard.
Finally, South Africa supports the observation of the
Secretary-General that there should be strict adherence
to the arms embargo, in accordance with resolution
2473 (2019), to prevent further violent escalations so
as to enable all parties to agree to a ceasefire. The
arms embargo measure must be fully implemented
without exception. South Africa wishes to remind
the international community of its commitments to
end military support to all parties to the conflict and
to uphold the existing arms embargo as a foundation
for political negotiations and the implementation of
a ceasefire.
It is time to synergize all efforts to the attainment
of that goal for the sake of the Libyan people and the
achievement of peace and stability in Libya and the
sub-Saharan region.

20-0236515/23

S/PV.8710

The situation in Libya

Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Let me first thank all
those who have highlighted and supported the Berlin
conference and the subsequent process. I wish to
reaffirm that the conference was held exclusively in
the interests of the Libyan people and in support of
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, in their efforts to bring peace to
the country. Therefore, my intervention will be very
brief, as we continue to support what Mr. Salamé is
trying to do. At this stage, I would like to thank him
personally, as well as his team, for their unwavering
commitment to the Libyan people.
First, I wish to state that I wholeheartedly share his
frustration about the present situation. He highlighted
the unfortunate suffering of civilian victims due to the
parties not adhering to the ceasefire, thereby breaching
the truce that they committed to in Berlin. Women and
children are once again among those most affected.
Secondly, I also share in Mr. Salamé’s dismay that
certain countries that committed in Berlin to refrain
from interfering in the armed conflict and the internal
affairs of Libya are among those that are now delivering
weapons, foreign fighters, ammunition and advanced
weapons to the parties. I share Mr. Salamé’s anger and
disappointment at the cynical behaviour of those States.
As several speakers already mentioned, such behaviour
represents a flagrant violation of international law.
Thirdly, I also wish to appeal to those who have
influence over the Libyan parties to activate the Joint
Military Commission, as that is long overdue. All those
with influence should spare no effort in that regard and
implement the other follow-up mechanisms that were
agreed in Berlin.
Fourthly, I listened very carefully to Mr. Salamé
repeat an appeal that we have made on several occasions
in the Security Council following the Berlin conference:
that the Council should rapidly adopt a draft resolution
that endorses the outcome of the Berlin conference,
which would serve two functions. First, it will send a
signal to the people of Libya that the Security Council
will not abandon them. As my Indonesian colleague
said earlier, we are here to save lives and, by sending
that message and adopting a draft resolution that has
weight, we will show the population that we stand with
them. Secondly, it will send a very strong message to
the spoilers, because Security Council resolutions are
legally binding under international law. I urge all those
around this table that have been dragging their feet to
16/23

30/01/2020

now forge ahead and adopt a draft resolution as soon as
possible for the benefit of the people in Libya.
Mr. Auväärt (Estonia): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, for his briefing on the latest developments
on Libya. Estonia fully supports the United Nationsfacilitated political process in Libya and the Special
Representative’s work towards that end.
Estonia welcomes the commitments made at
the Berlin conference on Libya held on January 19.
The conference, as a step towards creating space
for an intra-Libyan political process, was a success,
and we congratulate all the participating States and
international organizations on achieving that. Now,
however, concrete steps need to be taken by all
participants to honour the commitments and implement
the conclusions of the Berlin conference. The most
urgent step at this stage is to put an end to the violations
of the arms embargo. In that regard, it is important
to send a unified message from the Security Council
and press on with the endorsement of the Berlin
conference conclusions.
Developments in the security situation in Libya
and recent reports about the resumed fighting on the
ground are extremely worrisome. We call on all parties
to adhere to the truce that was agreed upon in Berlin
and take concrete steps towards achieving a lasting
ceasefire. It is absolutely clear that there can be no
military solution to the conflict. The Libyan people
deserve better than that.
Moreover, the Security Council has at its disposal
the sanctions tools to address the spoilers of peace
and security in Libya. It should consider using those
measures when and where necessary. The essential step
in moving towards the ceasefire is the direct dialogue
between the Libyan parties. We very much welcome
the nomination of representatives of the Joint Military
Commission for the 5+5 talks and hope that the first
meeting can take place as early as possible. Agreeing
to the terms of the ceasefire is a crucial step in order to
move forward and concentrate on the political process
in Libya.
The goal of a stable Libya, with fully functioning,
unified State institutions and authority, can be achieved
only through a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political
process. For the political process to truly succeed, it
needs to be inclusive. The adequate representation and
20-02365

30/01/2020

The situation in Libya

S/PV. 8710

meaningful engagement of women and young people
throughout the entire process is of critical importance.

work with the countries concerned in order to advance
the peace process in the country.

Finally, addressing the violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law must remain
high on the agenda. We need to keep working towards
protecting the civilians, including women and children,
and hold the perpetrators accountable.

We also welcome today’s meeting of the African
Union High-Level Committee on Libya in Brazzaville
and call on the Security Council to take into account
its outcomes, which will be endorsed at the upcoming
African Union summit, to be held in Addis Ababa in a
few days.

Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank Mr. Ghassan Salamé,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Mr. Mathias Licharz, speaking on behalf of the Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, for their
thorough and valuable briefings. The Council may rest
assured that the Niger, a neighbouring country of Libya
directly affected by the crisis, is ready now more than
ever to contribute to international and regional efforts
for the peaceful resolution of the Libyan conflict, a
guarantor of stability in the Sahel.
While we welcome the truce observed during
the Berlin international conference on Libya, the
recent resumption of hostilities is a stark reminder of
the complexity of the conflict, which is exacerbated
by foreign interference and the ongoing and blatant
violation of the arms embargo. The Niger strongly
condemns that state of affairs, which is characterized
by a dangerous deterioration in the humanitarian
situation in the country.
It cannot be said often enough that without a
solution to the Libyan crisis, the Sahel will continue
to be exposed to the horrors of terrorism, particularly
since international terrorists are deploying their most
dangerous and battle-hardened affiliates there. Libya
does not need more weapons and terrorists transferred
to it; it needs peace.
In that regard, we reiterate the African Union’s call
for a ceasefire between all parties and the return to an
inclusive political process so that Libyans can engage
in dialogue among themselves and there be compliance
with the arms embargo and the imposition of sanctions
against violators.
The Niger welcomes the meeting on Libya held
in Algiers on 23 January, which brought together
neighbouring countries and in which Germany
participated. That meeting was a good step in seeking
to ensure inclusiveness on the Libyan question, for
which my country, the Niger, has always called and will

Finally, the Niger encourages the Libyan parties
to prioritize dialogue and to reject any external
interference in their affairs.
Mr. Baati (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to commend Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and thank
him for his very important briefing. I also commend his
presence at the Brazzaville meeting to ensure further
concerted efforts to help the brotherly Libyan people
to soon restore stability. I welcome my brother His
Excellency Ambassador Elsonni, the new Permanent
Representative of Libya to the United Nations, to his
first Security Council meeting.
Recent events in Libya prove that military options
are far from the appropriate way to overcome the
crisis and meet the legitimate demands of the Libyan
people to enjoy freedom, democracy, the rule of law,
development and reforms. The chaos, instability and
military confrontations witnessed over the past years
have exacerbated the suffering of the Libyan people,
increasing their frustration and loss of hope. In addition,
that has complicated the crisis, hindered the settlement
track and threatened Libya’s unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
Tunisia has long-standing historical and social links
with Libya, and we are determined to assist our Libyan
brothers in overcoming their differences and ensuring
the security, stability and sovereignty of Libya so that it
can resume its role in the region and the world. I would
therefore like to stress the following seven points.
First, we reiterate our call to all Libyan parties to
respect the truce and transfer it to a permanent ceasefire
without delay. That would cease the Libyan bloodshed.
There is no military solution to the Libyan crisis; rather,
the solution must be through constructive dialogue and
negotiations among Libyans, without any exclusion
or marginalization, in the context of a comprehensive
national reconciliation process.

20-0236517/23

S/PV.8710

The situation in Libya

Second, we emphasize the importance of the Berlin
conference and we once again welcome its outcomes.
We appreciate the efforts of the German Government
and all parties to pave the way for the conference,
especially the Moscow meeting. We must continue
our efforts to establish operational mechanisms for
the implementation of the outcomes of the Berlin
conference. Negotiations must continue on the draft
resolution in that regard. That would enable the
Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities. In that
vein, we welcome the efforts of the United Kingdom
and Germany.
Third, it is important to respect the principle of
non-interference in the internal affairs of countries.
We therefore reiterate our rejection of any external
interference in the internal affairs of Libya or any acts
that would further fuel the conflict. We are deeply
concerned about the reports that Mr. Salamé shared
with us this morning in that regard.
Fourth, Tunisia fully supports the efforts of the
United Nations and Special Representative Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, particularly his three-step initiative towards
a political settlement of the crisis. We commend the
roles played by the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya, the neighbouring countries, the League of Arab
States and the African Union in supporting the political
process. In that regard, we commend the meeting of
the African Union High-Level Committee on Libya
convened in Brazzaville today, and we look forward
to the Libyan reconciliation conference to be held in
Addis Ababa this spring.
We would like to stress once again the need for
concerted efforts to help Libyans to overcome their
differences and resume dialogue towards a national
consensus. That will pave the way for the rebuilding
of State institutions under a civil regime that would
preserve the unity and sovereignty of Libya. That would
also meet the aspirations of the brotherly Libyan people.
The Tunis communiqué for peace is an example of our
continued efforts at the highest level to urge Libyans to
communicate and reach a consensus formula that would
ensure a way out of the current crisis through a political
agreement, respect for international legitimacy and the
subsequent move from such legitimacy to a Libyan
legitimacy of the people.
Fifth, we must respect all the relevant Security
Council resolutions on Libya, the most recent of which
is resolution 2486 (2019). That resolution called on
18/23

30/01/2020

all relevant parties to abide by a permanent ceasefire.
It urged all Member States to commit to the arms
embargo and called on the Libyan parties to exercise
self-restraint, protect civilians and work constructively
towards unifying Libyan military and economic
institutions
Sixth, we welcome all the developments that
advance the economic process in Libya. Tunisia hosted
the first round in that regard. We encourage the Libyan
parties to continue on that path in order to surmount
any obstacles faced by the Libyan economy in the
current critical circumstances. It is important to remove
any barriers to the production of petroleum in Libya
and ensure access to it by all brotherly Libyan people,
in addition to avoiding further deterioration of the
humanitarian and economic situations in the country.
Seventh, we underscore the need to respect
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law in Libya. We call for all necessary
efforts to be made to clarify information regarding the
fate of missing persons in Libya, such as MP Siham
Sergewa; the two Tunisian journalists Nazir Lactari
and Sufyan al-Sharaby, who were abducted in Libya in
September 2014; and the Libyan citizen Walid Ksiksi,
who worked at the Embassy of Tunisia in Tripoli and
has been missing since 13 October 2014.
To conclude, we reiterate the importance of
preserving the current momentum resulting from the
Berlin conference. We must work to prevent any further
worsening of the situation. We should focus efforts on
reaching a political settlement, countering terrorism
and preventing terrorist organizations from abusing the
current situation to extend their control in Libya and
the entire region, thereby threatening their security and
stability. Let us focus on the Libyan people, who have
high hopes. They count on the unity of the Council.
It is our responsibility to act accordingly and to not
disappoint them.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Viet Nam,
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, and Mr. Mathias Licharz
for their briefings. Viet Nam would like to commend the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
for its efforts and determination.
Taking into account the recent developments in
Libya, I wish to make the following observations.
20-02365

30/01/2020

The situation in Libya

First, on the political solution, Viet Nam stresses
the importance of ensuring a Libyan-led and Libyanowned political process as the only viable solution to
finally put an end to the conflict in Libya. We welcome
the outcome of the Berlin conference on Libya and
commend the efforts of Germany, the United Nations
and other relevant parties in that regard. We very much
hope that this momentum can be maintained and built
upon for a peaceful solution in Libya. The international
community should and must meaningfully and
constructively support that process.
Viet Nam agrees that a draft resolution should be
adopted to support the outcome of the conference and
its implementation, especially to achieve a ceasefire
and create the necessary conditions for the intra-Libyan
dialogue. Furthermore, we call on all parties inside
and outside of Libya to refrain from any act that could
further complicate the situation. All measures need to
focus on bringing about reconciliation, solidarity and
progress for all, taking into account the position of
all parties. We welcome the establishment of the 5+5
Joint Military Commission and hope that it will soon
contribute to a lasting ceasefire.
Secondly, on the security aspect, we share the
concerns raised by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General that despite the recent truce,
attacks have continued to take place. The conflict in
Libya has lasted for more than eight years, leading to
great suffering for the Libyans and their neighbours.
We condemn all attacks that have targeted civilians
and civilian objects and urge all Libyan parties and
armed groups to exercise self-restraint. The targeting
of civilians and civilian objects must be stopped
immediately, while security conditions must be
created to allow humanitarian aid. We are also deeply
concerned about the growing presence of terrorist
groups in Libya, particularly the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant. We note the recent efforts of the Libyan
parties in combating terrorism and violent extremism
and stress the need for further efforts in addressing
those challenges.
Thirdly, on the role of the United Nations and
regional cooperation, Viet Nam supports the work of
the United Nations, UNSMIL, under the leadership of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
and regional organizations and other countries in
contributing to the peace process in Libya. We
recognize the important role of neighbouring countries,
which are directly affected by the Libyan crisis. We

S/PV. 8710

take note of UNSMIL’s operational plan and support the
contribution of UNSMIL to implementing the outcome
of the Berlin conference, in line its mandate as set out
in the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Fourthly, on the issue of sanctions, we highlight the
importance of fully complying with Security Council
resolutions, including those on sanctions. We take note
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General’s
observation that the arms embargo has continued to be
violated, and strongly call on all parties to respect the
embargo. At the same time, we believe that sanctions
must be rightly and well targeted at individuals and
entities that threaten peace and security in Libya, in
line with Security Council resolutions, and must not
negatively affect the livelihood of the common Libyan
people. Sanctions should be lifted once conditions and
necessities warrant.
In conclusion, Viet Nam reiterates its support to
the Libyan people in the pursuit of peace and stability.
We are committed to working constructively with the
United Nations, UNSMIL, regional organizations and
relevant parties in contributing to the peace process
in Libya.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elsonni (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): It is a
pleasure for me to congratulate Viet Nam on its election
to the Security Council, as well as to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your succession to the presidency
of the Council for this month. We also welcome
Tunisia, the Niger, Estonia and Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines on their election to the Council. We further
thank Mr. Ghassan Salamé and Mr. Mathias Licharz for
their briefings to the Council.
I apologize in advance if my statement is a little
long today, but I think that the situation in my country
deserves an in-depth explanation. Allow me to begin
by honouring the memory of all innocent Libyans who
have fallen and all martyrs who have fought against
terrorism and tyranny over the past nine years.
I am speaking on behalf of the people of Libya
and many peoples of the region at a critical juncture in
the crisis in my country. They are currently angry and
distrustful of the international community — sentiments
that have been ongoing for decades now. In response to
their suffering, killing, displacement and destruction,

20-0236519/23

S/PV.8710

The situation in Libya

they have been met with only silence or statements of
condemnation. Those people are tired of seeing the
aggressor and the oppressed placed on the same footing
while the perpetrator is always unknown.
The conflict and aggression in my country and
against its capital have not arisen in a vacuum; they are
the result of years of systemic interventions and proxy
wars. In February 2011, when Libyans took to the streets
to bring revolution to their country and, together with
other peoples of the region, to demand their legitimate
rights to change and freedoms, the Council adopted
resolution 1973 (2011), under Chapter VII, calling
for the protection of civilians as its principal priority.
Since then, that resolution has been exploited by certain
parties to destroy the country, export crises elsewhere
and settle scores with the aim of controlling the country
and pillaging its wealth.
The aggression against Tripoli is nothing but
another attempt to create chaos and fuel the conflict,
thereby making it ever more difficult to return to where
we were before. Some take advantage of those who are
greedy for power. The resilience of Tripoli today is a
symbol not only of the courage and determination of the
Libyan people, but also of the people of the entire region
and their determination to uphold the civil State in the
face of those who seek to offer them only two options:
either to be subjected to tyranny or face destruction.
Countries that exacerbate our crisis today fear our
independent decisions. They know that because of its
geographic location and resources, Libya is poised to
play a key role at the economic, political and security
levels. That is why they do not want Libya to be stable
and prosperous; rather, those countries seek prosperity
and stability at home, while they kill our children and
destroy our country.
Given that the crisis has lasted nine years, the
Council has a considerable moral responsibility to
innocent civilian victims — children, women and young
people — regardless of their affiliation. There have
been six international envoys over the past nine years
and the situation remains unchanged. The aggression
has continued for 10 months and the Council is unable
to end it. Seventy-five years after the establishment of
the United Nations, it is high time to implement genuine
Security Council reform, as proposed by the Group of
African States, pursuant to the Ezulwini Consensus
and the Sirte declaration.
20/23

30/01/2020

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/41)
on the United Nations Support Mission in Libya was
published a few days ago. It reveals the extent of the
violations and crimes committed by Haftar and his
supporters. He has called for jihad to be waged against
Tripoli and even during the Secretary-General’s visit
to the country. That has never occurred before. It was
a few days prior to the Libyan National Conference, to
be held in Ghadames. The Congress has been welcomed
and supported by the Council.
The current aggression has been in the works for
years. That is why the aggressor has refused all political
solutions. He has been provided by certain countries
with heavy weapons, armoured vehicles and aircrafts,
in addition to mercenaries from Chad, the Sudan,
the Wagner Group and other sources. The SecretaryGeneral’s report, for example, notes in paragraph 22
that Haftar and his forces have conducted more than
1,000 air strikes, including 60 air strikes by foreign
fighter aircraft. On 4 January, these aircraft carried out
a strike against the military training institute in Tripoli,
killing 32 young cadets, in the prime of their life. They
represented all of Libya. How can that Army then claim
that it is a national army, when it targets the cadets of a
military training institute?
Those young people are added to the thousands of
civilians and displaced persons — women, children and
the elderly — who have been killed under the rubble.
Anas, Malek, Sanad and Zakariya were four children
who were killed the day before yesterday, on their way
to school in the Al-Hadaba region. Prior to that, there
was a massacre in Farnaj, the killing of the children
of the Keshirah family, the bombing of field hospitals
and the killing of doctors and paramedics, such as Dr.
Ayman Harameh and Samer Al-Sibaei. Even civilian
airports and schools have been targeted. All of that has
occurred and the perpetrator has not been named by the
Security Council.
The Tajoura Detention Centre has not been spared;
it, too, was bombed by foreign aircraft in July 2019.
Fifty-three migrants, the majority of them Africans,
were killed, as noted in the report on the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya and by the Human Rights
Council just a few days ago. These are just examples
of an unprecedented series of violations, crimes and
displacement incidents that have occurred in Tripoli’s
ancient or contemporary history, not to mention the
closure of oil ports and food manipulation of the
Libyan people.
20-02365

30/01/2020

The situation in Libya

The Secretary-General’s report also notes that
in the east of the country, the militias of Haftar have
carried out a series of public executions before cameras.
Other bodies, which are yet to be identified, have been
found at a garbage dump. Kidnappings and torture
continue, as we saw with the activist Ahmed Al-Kawafi
and MP Siham Sergewa, who has been missing for six
months. After all that, there are still those who equate
the aggressor with the assaulted.
Regrettably, there are countries that support
such violations and crimes. There is proof of that. In
addition, reports of the Council’s Panel of Experts
on Libya established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1973 (2011) have confirmed such incidents,
including the involvement of the United Arab Emirates
on 11 separate occasions. The Panel’s final report (see
S/2019/914) revealed the involvement of the United
Arab Emirates in providing armoured vehicles, air
defence systems, drones and laser projectiles. The
Sudanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs has also stated
that Emirati companies recruit young Sudanese and
send them to Libya without their knowledge. Another
document (S/2018/812) reveals information about the
provision of equipment by Egyptian authorities and
their participation in air strikes in eastern and western
Libya over the past years.
We therefore wonder — why such intervention?
Thousands of miles separate Libya and the United
Arab Emirates. Does such intervention not support
the putschists? Although we understand Egypt’s
commitment to its national security, we do not
understand how the big sister of the Arab nation can
become involved in supporting those who kill the
people of their country, thereby serving only to fuel
chaos and threaten security in the country and the
region. That has never occurred before in the history of
the two neighbouring countries.
In that regard, I was surprised to hear the
representative of France speaking of violations these
days. She forgot to name the countries that support
aggression and commit violations. Unfortunately,
the name of her country was cited in reports of the
Sanctions Committee upon discovering Javelin rockets
in Gharyan that belong to the forces of Haftar. The
French Government responded at the time by saying
that the rockets were to support the French Special
Forces in 2014. Did France seek the approval of the
Council in that regard?

S/PV. 8710

We say to the countries supporting the aggression
that they are fighting a losing battle. Their efforts
should seek to achieve peace and end bloodshed so that
Libyans will not accuse them of having participated in
the bloodshed. Despite our commitment to peace, we
cannot be disloyal to our country. We cannot accept
partial peace, which continues to expose us to threats.
Our national army and the heroes of Operation Volcano
of Rage are fully ready. They have demonstrated
sufficient resilience and made enough sacrifices to stop
the aggressors at the doors of Tripoli. It is our legitimate
right to defend our people, cities and principles.
We, respect and appreciate efforts made by the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya in monitoring all violations.
However, we wonder about its usefulness and
effectiveness. Revealing the involvement of certain
countries in committing those violations makes them
chose between two things. Either the accusations
against them are false and therefore they must
defend themselves, or they are guilty and must be
held accountable.
We are weary of visiting capitals, and we call on
Libyans to meet in their own country as was supposed
to happen in Ghadames. However, we appreciate all the
international initiatives and efforts to achieve peace.
To that end, we underscore our support for the role of
the African Union in resolving the Libyan crisis, which
some attempt to marginalize. We also appreciate the
efforts of the Group of African States in the Council. We
further thank President Sassou Nguesso of the Republic
of the Congo, who chairs the Committee on Libya,
which held its meeting earlier today in Brazzaville.
Haftar and those with him did not participate in that
meeting, as he clearly snubs African efforts. We support
this African move to support national reconciliation, as
it complements the United Nations plan and the efforts
of the Special Representative.
We also welcome the Russian-Turkish initiative
to put in place a ceasefire agreement, despite the fact
that the other party refused to sign it in Moscow. We
hope that Russia will pursue its efforts to ensure that
the initiative succeeds. In that context, we welcome the
efforts of Germany and Chancellor Angela Merkel in
convening the Berlin conference on Libya, despite all
the challenges and obstacles. We would like to clarify
the following points.

20-0236521/23

S/PV.8710

The situation in Libya

First, continued violations by the aggressor, even
after the Berlin conference, and his refusal to sign the
ceasefire agreement or to participate until now in the
5+5 Joint Military Commission, which should have
held a meeting in Geneva the day before yesterday,
again confirm that he does not intend to make peace.
The aggressor’s spokesperson admitted as much last
Sunday when he said,
“[w]e will attend international conferences, but not
to find a solution. We believe that the solution will
be found through guns and ammunition”.
Secondly, ongoing violations of the ceasefire might
lead us to reconsider participating in any dialogue before
such violations end and before the aggressor withdraws
to its base and displaced persons return home.
Thirdly, we call on the Security Council to quickly
adopt a resolution that can support the outcomes of
the Berlin conference, take a serious stance against
the aggressor and demand that those who commit
violations and war crimes be held accountable. We
emphasize that we will pursue the countries involved in
all international forums.
Fourthly, any political dialogue must be based on
the Libyan Political Agreement. The best way to end
the crisis is to respect the will of the Libyan people and
the constitutional process, as well as to move forward
with presidential and parliamentary elections, under the
supervision of the United Nations and the international
community. That will ensure that all Libyans, regardless
of their affiliation and without excluding anyone can
choose their leaders, unify their institutions and build a
modern democratic State.
Three pretexts are always used to justify aggression,
namely, the fight against terrorism, the elimination
of armed groups and the fair distribution of wealth.
With regard to the fight against terrorism, we have
always cooperated with a number of States, foremost
the United States of America, to eliminate terrorism
wherever it arose. For example, the liberation of Sirte
from the hands of Da’esh was carried out by the heroes
of the forces of Al-Bunyan Al-Marsous, who are now
defending Tripoli while some falsely accuse them as
being terrorists. They were deceived during the truce
violation, in which 10 of them became martyrs this past
Sunday in an attack in the area of Abu Qurayn, where
the fighting continues.
22/23

30/01/2020

We cannot deny that all Libyans have made
sacrifices and fought terrorism, whether in the east, the
west, the north or the south. But there are those who
exploit their blood to gain power.
As far as armed groups are concerned, we have to
face reality. There are armed groups in every city and
every region of Libya in one form or another. There are
tribal groups, regional groups and ideological groups.
We cannot put them all in one basket. The continuing
chaos, the spread of weapons and the deterioration of
the economic situation in the country over a number of
years are all reasons that such groups thrive. There are
also countries that provide them with financial support
and weapons.
Despite all that, through security arrangements
made in coordination with UNSMIL and with very
limited means, we have been able to reduce the number
and power of the groups in a remarkable way. Moreover,
we have managed to reintegrate a large number of their
members, thereby enabling more than 40 diplomatic
missions to set up in Tripoli since April 2019. Indeed,
we have a long way to go. Violations are being
committed, but everyone should know that many of
our young people have been forced by circumstances to
commit such acts and have been treated unfairly. Many
of them are patriots who love their country, in some
cases much more than those who call themselves the
elite. That problem will be solved not through armed
confrontation or submission to a military Government
but through dialogue, reconciliation, containment and
economic recovery.
Regarding the third point, the fair distribution
of wealth is in fact a false pretext. It is an attempt by
some countries to introduce guardianship mechanisms
over our resources. More than 60 per cent of the
State’s resources go to salaries and nearly 20 per
cent to subsidies allocated to all Libyans. The rest is
not even enough to cover administrative expenses or
development projects. It would be much more useful
to talk about the impact of the parallel entities on
wealth. For instance, the parallel bank has printed 11
or 12 billion dinars outside the framework of the State,
35 billion dinars have been borrowed from commercial
banks and public debt amounts to 50 billion dinars.
Those are all indicators that Libya’s economic regime
needs radical reform. We need legislation to establish
transparency and fight corruption. The fair distribution
of wealth is guaranteed by the State Constitution by
promoting decentralization and the optimal use of
20-02365

30/01/2020

The situation in Libya

resources, as well as development and social justice.
However, the Constitution, which was prepared by a
committee elected by the people, has unfortunately not
seen the light of day and the people have been deprived
of their right to a referendum to accept, reject or amend
it because of the same category of people who want to
abuse power by force.
Among Government priorities is the protection
of the assets of the Libyan people. In that context,
the Libyan Investment Authority, in coordination
with the Panel of Experts, has put in place a new
strategy for good governance and transparency in our
administrative system. We reiterate that we do not wish
to lift the asset freeze during this period of division,
even though we know that some countries and banks
are exploiting the freeze. We are simply asking to be
allowed to manage the assets in order to avoid annual
losses that amount to millions of dollars. We therefore
express reservations about the proposal of the Panel
of Experts to freeze the assets of companies affiliated
with the Libyan Investment Authority, which could
have negative effects on income and investments.
In conclusion, we extend our hand to peace. We
have always been at the forefront of any effort to stop
the bloodshed of Libyans and will spare no effort in that
regard. Before the aggression, we were very close to

S/PV. 8710

reconciliation with everyone, be they supporters of the
old regime or among towns and tribes. Many displaced
persons and migrants had returned to their homes.
Today’s battle is not between East and West, as some
are trying to popularize it. It is a war waged by a single
individual for power — a war fuelled by our citizens.
Our young people should be fighting for building and
reconstruction, not destruction and demolition. What
everyone ought to know is that Libyans will reconcile.
No one will succeed in sowing discord among us. The
rule of law will ensure that wrongdoers are prosecuted.
Certain countries will not succeed in dividing us.
Whether we agree or disagree with the regimes that
ruled Libya, the monarchy united our country and the
previous regime did not divide it. We will never allow
that to happen.
Libya will remember those who stood by its side
during the ordeal and those who killed its people and
ignited the crisis. Libya may be wounded today, but
it will recover tomorrow and be strong, unified and
sovereign, whether some like it or not.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

20-0236523/23
