UNITED NA TJONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

UN LBRnARY

RECORDS

API?25 1984
THIRTIETH

urr/sA GuLLEcTlo1N

YEAR

1845 th

MEETING:

30 SEPTEMBER

1975

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
P0gC?

.. . .... .. ... ... . ... ... ... ... . ... ... ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 19 September 1975 from the President of the General Assembly
to the President of the Security Council (S/11826) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (WAgendajl845)

S/PV. 1845

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplemwts of the Ojjicid Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions trrd
Dc~cisions c$ the Swrrrity Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1845th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 30 September
Mr. Moulaye

President:

EL HASSEN

(Mauritania).

2. The PRESIDENT
(interoretution
from Frenrhk
I wish to inform members- of the Council tha;‘I
have received a letter from the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic
requesting that his delegation be invited to participate
without the right to vote in the discussions of the
Council. Since there is no objection,
I intend, in
accordance with the terms of Article 31 of the
Charter and the relevant provisions of the provisional
rules of proced,ure, to invite the representative of the
Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic to’ participate
in the Council’s discussions without the right to vote;
I now invite the representative
of the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic to take the place reserved
for him at the side of the Council chamber, it being
understood that he will be invited to take a place
at the Council table when it is his turn to speak..

Present:
The representatives
of the following
States: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China,
Costa Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan,
Mauritania;
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
United
Republic
of Cameroon,
United
Republic of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/1845)

1.

Adoption

2.

Letter dated 19 September 1975 from the President
of the General Assembly to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1826)
The meeting

of the agenda

nws

culled to order at I I .30 u.m.

Adoption

1975, at 11 a.m.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Shevel
(Ukruiniun Soviet Sociulist Republic) took the place
reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber.

of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
Before I call on the first speaker, I should like
to draw the attention of Council members to draft
resolutions S/l 1832 and S/l 1833, which are before
the Council.

The ugendu wus udopted.
Letter dated 19 September 1975 from the President
of the General Assembly
to the President of the
Security Council (S/11826)

4. I now invite Mr. Shevel, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic,
to make his statement.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with the decision taken by the Council
at previous meetings, I invite the representatives of
Algeria, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
Dahomey, the German Democratic
Republic, Hungary, India, Laos, Madagascar,
Mongolia,
Poland,
Romania,
Senegal, Sri Lanka and Yugoslavia
to
take part in the discussion ‘without the right to vote,
under the terms of Article 31 of the Charter and
the relevant provisions of the provisional
rules of
procedure, and I ask them to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

5. Mr. SHEVEL (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Repuhlit) (interpretation from Russian): On behalf of’my
delegation and on my own behalf may I first welcome
you, Sir, to the responsible .position of President
of the Security Council and wish you all success.
I should also like to thank you and the members of
the Council for having given me, an opportunity
to
speak in this august body of the United Nations.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ruhul (Algeriu),
Mr.
Ghelev
(Bulgurin),
Mr. Surin
Chhuk
(Cumbodiu),
Mr. Alurccin
(Cuba),
Mr.
Vejvodu
(Czechoslovakia),
Mr. Adjibudh (Duhomey),
Mr. Florin (German
Democrutic
Republic),
Mr. Hollui
(Hungury),
Mr. Juipul (Indiu), Mr. Sipruseuth (Laos),
(Muduguhcur),
Mr.. Puntsugnorov
‘Mr. Tiundruzu
(Mongoliu),
Mr. Juroszek (Poland), Mr. Dutcrr (Romunid), Mr. Full (Senegal),
Mr. Amerusinghe
(Sri
Lanka) and Mr. Petri6 (Yugosluviu)
took the places
reservedfor
them ut the side of the Council chumber.

6. The constant growth of the ranks of the United
----Nations through the admission of new States that
have appeared on the map of the world as a result
of the irresistible process of history is one of the
most remarkable
phenomena of our time, showing
that the world is following unswervingly
the path
of progress. Quite recently the General Assembly
welcomed the peoples of the Republic of Cape Verde,
the Republic of Mozambique
and the Democratic
Republic of Sao Tome and Principe as they achieved
independence and admission to the United Nations.
1
..

The creation of these new independent
States and
their admission to the United Nations are the result
of the victories of the national liberation movements
and undoubtedly
attest to the fact that the final
abolition
of the last outposts of colonialism
and
racism is drawing near. At the same time, the delegation of the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic,
like many other delegations, is sincerely in favour
of a decision being taken on the question of the
admission to membership in the United Nations of
the Democratic
Republic
of Viet-Nam
and the
Republic of South Viet-Nam.

demonstrations
of this was the adoption by the
General Assembly of its resolution 3366 (XXX) on
19 September of this year. Any delay in finding a
positive solution to the problem of the admission
of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the
Republic of South Viet-Nam to the United Nations
might create artificial barriers to the implementation
of one of the most fundamental
principles of the
United Nations, the principle of universality.
Not
only would this not serve to strengthen the United
Nations;
it would, on the contrary, lead to its
weakening and would essentially be tantamount
to
ignoring the realities of the present-day world.

7. We express our regret that the negative vote
cast previously by one of the five permanent members of the Security Council made impossible the
adoption of the recommendation
on the admission
of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the
Republic ‘of South Viet-Nam
to membership
in the
United Nations. As a result of that step there has
been a completely
unwarranted delay in involving
in the activities of the United Nations the two Vietnamese States, whose peoples have made tremendous
sacrifices in their long struggle against the interventionists
and who have successfully defended
their freedom, independence and sovereignty.

11. In this connexion, we should like to emphasize
that the admission of the Democratic
Republic of
Viet-Nam
and the Republic
of South Viet-Nam
to the United Nations would be first and foremost
in the interests of the Organization
itself. It would
enhance its prestige and would help it more effectively to tackle the important
and responsible tasks
facing it. The Ukrainian
people, like all Soviet
people, have always stood shoulder to shoulder with
the heroic Vietnamese people and have made their
contribution
by giving them the necessary assistance
in their struggle against foreign usurpers and their
henchmen. On behalf of the people and Government
of the Soviet Ukraine, we would express our conviction that the applications
of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South
Viet-Nam
to be admitted to United Nations membership will enjoy the support of the members of the
Security Council and that both Vietnamese States
will become fully fledged Members of the United
Nations.

8. The Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the
Republic of South Viet-Nam have won the profound
respect and sincere sympathy of the peoples of the
entire world. They have received broad international
recognition. The steps taken recently in the international arena by the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South Viet-Nam
demonstrate
that they are endeavouring
to develop friendly
relations with different countries on the basis of the
principles contained in the Charter of the United
Nations.

12. The PRESIDENT
(in&v-pretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative
of Senegal.
I now invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

9. The Ukrainian
SSR resolutely
supports the
requests of the Governments
of the two States to
be admitted to the United Nations. In full accord
with the aim of universality
of the United Nations
and the requirements of its Charter, the admission of
both Vietnamese
States would undoubtedly
be an
extremely
important
contribution
to the further
strengthening
of peace, security and co-operation
among peoples and would represent the concrete
practical embodiment
of the principles of peaceful
coexistence. Nor can there be any doubt that a
decision to admit the two Vietnamese States to the
United Nations would help the achievement of one
of the most important purposes of the Organization
at the present stage: to deepen and broaden international detente and make it irreversible.

13. Mr.
FALL
(Senegal)
(interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, my delegation is happy to
see you presiding over the work of the Security
Council at a time when it is considering so burning
an issue as the admission of the two Republics of
Viet-Nam
to the United Nations. This pleasure is
due not only to the special ties-1 should say privileged ties-which
unite the Islamic Republic of Mauritania with Senegal, but also to the political course
taken by your Government
which is motivated by
ideals of peace, progress and justice that the Govemment of Senegal appreciates and shares with it.
Furthermore,
I hope, Sir, that you will allow me
to add a personal note to those considerations and
to express the feelings of friendship and high esteem
which I have for you, a generous man, a skilled
statesman and diplomat. I also request you to act as
my interpreter to all the members of the Council by
expressing the gratitude of my delegation for their
goodness in authorizing
our participation
in this
debate.

10. We are very gratified to note that the applications of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South Viet-Nam for admission
to the United
Nations
enjoy the unconditional
support of an overwhelming
majority of Members
of the United Nations. One of the most striking
2

another State. to subiect its affirmative vote to the
condition “that other States be admitted to membership in the United Nations together with that State”.

14. The Security Council is today dealing with
the applications for admission to membership in the
United Nations of the Democratic Republic of VietNam and the Republic
of South Viet-Nam.
The
Council already considered this question, at the
request of the parties concerned, on 11 August last
[1835th
and
1836th
meetings].
The Council then
voted on recommending
that the General Assembly
give favourable consideration
to these applications
[1836th
meeting].
However, that decision of the
Council could not take effect because of the vote
cast by a permanent member of the Security Council, the United States of America.

”

19. The delegation of the-United States of America
furthermore justified its veto by a refusal of selective
universality
in the United Nations. Now, the irony
of fate has willed it that precisely that same delegation
which is now so indignantly fighting such- a practice
did everything it could for almost 20 years to close
the door of the Organization to the legitimate representatives of more than a fourth of the population
of
our planet. If today the Government of the People’s
Republic of China is seated here with us, it is no
less true that the United States, up to the last minute,
objected to the restoration of its legitimate rights in
the United Nations. in the more recent past, the same
attitude couid also be observed regarding the seat of
Cambodia, which for almost five years was illegally
occupied by the puppets of the so-called Khmer
Government of Lon Nol. We are -equally entitled to
believe that it is doubtless their concern to prevent
selective universality
which leads the United States
to give its unconditional
support to 4 million white
racists of the Government
of Pretoria, while 16 million black and Coloured people who live in the
same State are refused any participation
in the
administration
of their own country. Senegal, for its
part, remains profoundly
attached to the principle
of the universality
of the United Nations; but the
problem we have before us today has nothing to
do with that principle.

15. Now the problem appears under a new light,
because this time it is not the requesting States
which have brought the matter to the Council, but
the General Assembly itself which felt that the
conclusion of the debate on 11 August last not only
did not reflect the real feelings of our international
community
but also were a violation
of Article 4
of the Charter of the United Nations. The General
Assembly adopted that decision by an overwhelming
majority in resolution 3366 (XXX). This means that,
in the light of that massive vote, it is the duty of the
Council to take into account the indications of the real
feelings of the vast majority of the delegations of the
Organization.
16. In the course of the debate on 11 August, the
permanent member who had recourse to the exercise
of his right to veto justified his action by saying that
the Council had rejected consideration
of the application of South Korea. I shall not dwell on the
political and legal arguments against that position.
Everyone
knows that Article 4 of the Charter
provides that:

17. In this connexion,
I would venture to point
out that the decision to admit a State to the United
Nations is not a matter for the Security Council,
but for the General Assembly; the Council only
makes a recommendation.
Therefore, if as laid down
in resolution
3366 (XXX) of 19 September
1975,
the General Assembly “considers that the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of
South Viet-Nam should be admitted to membership
in the United Nations”,
the Security Council should,
in its turn, note that its task has been considerably
simplified.

20. Furthermore,
there is some similarity
between
the problem of the States of Viet-Nam and the Korean
problem. In both cases they are countries divided
by circumstances independent of the will of their people. However, the comparison
can go no further.
The two Republics of Viet-Nam have freely requested
admission to the United Nations, whereas in respect
of the two Koreas only one has submitted such a
request. Furthermore, I must add that the application
for membership of the Government of the Republic
of Korea is in violation of the terms of the consensus
of the General Assembly when it met on 28 November 1973 on the peaceful reunification
of Korea.*
It is also contrary to the South-North
joint communique signed by the two parties concerned on
4 July 1972’ confirming
that Korea is a single,
indivisible
entity and that the two present Governments of Korea, like the United Nations, should work
for the peaceful reunification
of the country. Therefore, the problem of the admission of Korea can in
no way be linked to the question of the admission
of the two Republics of Viet-Nam
to the United
Nations’.

18. I shall not dwell, either, on the sense of the
opinion given by the International
Court of Justice
on 28 May 1948’ which indicated that there is no
legal foundation for a Member of the United Nations,
which is called upon to vote on the admission of

21. The Vietnamese people has heroically won its
right to citizenship in the broad family of nations.
It has spared no effort or sacrifice to recover its
freedom and safeguard its independence and national
sovereignty. It has likewise shown recently that it is

“Membership
in the United Nations is open
to all other peace-loving States which accept the
obligations contained in the present Charter and,
in the judgment of the Organization,
are able and
willing to carry out these obligations.*’

3

just as capable of working for the maintenance of
peace and security throughout the world as for the
development
.of relations of friendship and good
co-operation
among peoples. It would be shameful
if the Organization ‘were to submit. the applications
of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the Democratif -Republic of Viet-Nam
to the odious package
deal to which we’ are invited, whereas it ‘would be
to the’ honour of the Organization to admit the true
representatives of that heroic people which has paid
so heavy a price to defend the ideals of freedom,
justice and independence
to which we are all so
deeply attached.

on the international
scene as the United
States
should resort to such legal ,quibbling to show its
resentment against a people whose only crime is to
remain fervently attached to its freedom and national
independence.
In any event, the United States can
never win on the diplomatic
level a victory which
it was never able to win on the battlefield of the
Indo-Chinese
peninsula. ,However, it is comforting
to note >that this inadmissible
and ignoble conduct
meets with the almost unanimous condemnation
of
the entire international
community.
25. Once again the United States is alone, completely alone, in supporting an unjust and indefensible
cause and opposing the almost unanimous will of the
world community.
After having borne for 30 years
the terrible weight of a war they never wanted, the
people of Viet-Nam have now dedicated themselves
to the reconstruction
of their devastated country.
In this ,gigantic endeavour they should be able to
count on the moral and material support of the
international community, and particularly of those who
bear the heavy burden of having imposed those
sacrifices on them. The entry to the United Nations
of the Republics of Viet-Nam should be considered
as the true end of the .long nightmare in which for
30 years that heroic people has lived. I must in all
truth emphasize that so far no one in the Organization has challenged the ‘right of the Republic of
South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic of
Viet-Nam to take their places in the United Nations.
Thus the fundamental
point is that applications for
admission of those two countries should be considered
impartially
and without partisanship,
rancour or
acrimony, with the sole concern of working for peace,
reconciliation
and understanding among peoples.

22. In the course of his statement, last Friday in
the Security Council [1842nd meeting],
the representative of the United States of America stated that
his Government
was. still determined
to veto the
applications for membership
in the United Nations
of the two Viet-Nams
despite the overwhelming
majority decision of the General Assembly. He also
reminded us of something we already know, that it
was at the request of his Government that the International Court of Justice handed down its ‘opinion
of ‘28 May 1948. However, it would seem to us to be
curious, to say the least, that in his statement;
after having linked the- applications
for admission
of the Republics of Viet-Nam to that of the Republic
of Korea, the representative of the United States of
America- now accuses the other members of the
Council of making their vote dependent on the
admission of another State-that
is the Democratic
People’s
Republic
of Korea-when
there is no
question of considering the case of that State, which
has never submitted an application
for admission
to the United Nations.
23. Furthermore,
the statement
of the United
States representative contains elements which seem
to us to be somewhat contradictory.
After having
pointed out that the International
Court of Justice
considers over-all solutions in respect of admission
to the United Nations
to be unacceptable,
the
United States representative
nevertheless ended his
statement by saying that his Government
,would
exercise, its right of veto if the applications of the
two Viet-Nams were not dealt with on a, footing of
equality with that of the Republic of- Korea,’ which
is not even on the agenda of the Security Council,
The United States representative also affirmed that
the General Assembly and the Security Council
had on several occasions expressed the opinion that
the Republic of Korea was qualified to become a
Member of the United‘ Nations. It seems that matters must have developed considerably, judging by
the decisions on this subject taken recently by the
Security Council. As for the opinion of the General
Assembly
on the matter, the delegation
of .the
United States can learn this by submitting
the
question for its consideration.

26. The United Nations, which was not able to
find effective means to spare that people suffering
and tears during 30 years of heroic struggle, swill
be failing in its dutyif it does not seize the opportunity
now offered to make reparation, even if only in part,
for the error, not to say tragic complicity,
of which
it could with justice
be accused. The Security
Council. should without hesitation
accede. to the
requests of the two Republics of Viet-Nam and thus
respond favourably to the wish of .almost all the
representatives to the United Nations. Only such a
decision would satisfy the entire international community and if the Security Council were to pronounceitself against resolution 3366 (XXX), adopted by an
overwhelming
majority
in the General Assembly,
according to which “the Democratic
Republic of
Viet-Nam
and the Republic
of South Viet-Nam
should be admitted to membership
in the United
Nations*‘, it would undoubtedly be taking a decision
fraught with consequences.
However,
we should
like to believe, that, despite a statement made at. a
previous meeting of the Security Council, no member
of the Council
would assume such a serious
responsibility.

24. It is truly deplorable to note that the spokesman of a country which plays so paramount a role
4
‘.,

,.

27. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Madagascar.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council ‘table and
to make his statement.

we note that those two States have once again
been ostracized by the
,<:.,,arbitrary will of a single State.

ing],

32. An uninformed
layman could draw three possible conclusions from this: first, that the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South
Viet-Nam
had not accepted the obligations
of the
Charter, or, secondly, that in the judgement
of the
Organization
the two States were not peace-loving,
capable of meeting those obligations and prepared
to do so, or, thirdly, that the United Nations had
invited the two States not to abide by the principles
of the Charter.

28.

Mr. TIANDRAZA
(Madagascar) (inferpretation
French):
Mr. President, allow me to express
the feelings of particular
satisfaction of my delegation at seeing you preside over the Security Council. The very friendly relations which. Mauritania
and Madagascar are honoured to maintain give me
every hope that under your diligent,
enlightened
and informed direction the Council will be able to
find a solution in accordance with the common
ideals of peace, understanding
and progress to the
problem at present before it. I should like to take
this opportunity
also to address the thanks of my
delegation to you personally, and through you to all
members of the Council, for having agreed to our
request to participate in this discussion.

from

33. The first conclusion is formally disproved by
the declarations of the two Governments,
as regards
both the Organization
and all countries throughout
the world with which they wish to initiate diplomatic
relations based on the principles of non-alignment,
namely, sovereign equality,
mutual respect, noninterference,
respect for independence
and mutual
advantage. The second conclusion flies in the face
of the deliberations
held on 19 September last, as a
result of which the Organization,
validly and democratically ,represented
by the General Assembly,
recognized in resolution 3366 (XXX) that the two
Vietnamese
States could become Members of the
United Nations. It is true that the United States
and other States did not see fit to go along with that
majority opinion, which is not supported only, we
would emphasize,
by the non-aligned
and the
socialist countries. Regarding the third conclusion,
it is clear that it is an untenable paradox because
as an organization we are pledged to ensure that all
States act in accordance with the principles
on
which the obligations of the Charter are based. For
our part, all the objective conditions for admission
have been met by the two Vietnamese States which
have, furthermore,
received democratic, unanimous
and non-partisan support.

29. International
opinion is agreed in recognizing
the present situation in South-East Asia, and particularly in Viet-Nam,
as a decisive factor in the
strengthening
of peace and security in that region
and hence throughout the world. That situation has
come about through the courageous struggle waged
by the Vietnamese
people of an entire generation
against colonialism
and imperialism,
as well as by
the victory of the forces of progress against reaction
and foreign intervention.
30. There is therefore an indisputable link between
the strengthening
of international
security and the
victory of the Vietnamese people. Furthermore,
we
all recognize
that the main responsibility
for
maintaining.peace
and security is borne by the Council and that their strengthening is an integral part of
its functions, exercised, it must be recalled, on behalf
of all Members of the Organization.. It follows that
if we are indeed wedded to these two essential
elements, namely, the role of the Council and the
contribution
of the Vietnamese people, in the field
of the strengthening
of peace, there should be no
opposition
to international
recognition
of the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the Republic
of South Viet-Nam,
which would be the necessary
corollary to the admission of those two States to the
United Nations.

34. That would explain. the procedural manceuvres
indulged in by the United States and the doubts some
have tried unsuccessfully to cast on our intentions.
Thus the United States at the last minute instigated
a candidacy, knowing quite well that it would be
contested as it had already been four times previously. It also implicitly
and explicitly invoked the
question of conditional
admission, whereas it could
not be unaware, since it had raised the question
itself, that the International
Court of Justice had in
1948 handed down an advisory opinion’ to the effect
that that thesis was invalid.
Now, by a rather
unusual reversal of the situation, the other States are
accused of making the consideration of one candidacy
contingent upon that of another which exists only
in the imaginations
of certain people. To be more
precise, as far as we know the Organization has not
had any request for admission by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.

31. The United States, for its part, has declared
that it is not opposed to the entry of the two Vietnamese States. It would have been eminently desirable for the United States to be in a position to
make it clear that it would not be opposed to it in any
way imaginable,
as it stated it wished to support in
all possible ways the favourable consideration
of
another candidacy.
Unfortunately,
after the most
recent statement of the United States [ihid.] to- the
effect that no change would occur in the attitude
it had adopted during the first discussion of the
candidacy of the two Vietnamese States [1834th meet-

35.
tion
5

From’the point of view of ideas, there is objecto our speaking of the need for ideological

pluralism and universality.
We have, however, been
misunderstood,
because it is precisely in the name of
that pluralism that we are demanding the admission
of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the
Republic of South Viet-Nam.
As far as universality
is concerned, it is high time, if only to satisfy the
international
public,
to remove
the ambiguities
purposely injected into that concept. Because we share
with the Vietnamese States the same ideology and
the same concept of the promotion
of man by
socialist revolution, it ‘is claimed that the support we
give to them proceeds from some sort of selective
universality.
There is an attempt to ignore the fact
that, according to the Charter, which implicitly
recognizes
the status of a non-Member
State,
universality
can only be the universality
of acceptance of our principles and objectives. To go beyond
that would be tantamount to violating the spirit and
the.letterof
the Charter.

future of our institutions.
We shall at least have the
advantage of saying that we are not responsible for
this absurd situation, the origin of which is to be
found in the manipulations
indulged in by certain
States, to the detriment of strict respect for the provisions of the Charter.
40. For 30 years, because of the determination of the
great Powers and despite the reiterated appeals of the
universal
conscience and the most authoritative
persons, the United Nations was not able to play a
truly significant role in the settlement of the VietNam war. We shirked our responsibilities
when
there was a breach of peace and security in that
region.
41. The Vietnamese
people endured,
with the
greatest dignity, the most terrible suffering and the
worst humiliation
that can be imagined.
Is it too
much to ask that we ensure that that suffering was
not in vain? Is it too much to ask that the United
Nations recognize, in the most appropriate
way
possible, the victory won by a people over colonialism,
occupation and foreign domination,
and recognize
as well that people’s contribution
to the strengthening of international security? Finally, is it too much
to ask that we be consistent with the principles of
the Charter and the declarations adopted during the
past 15 years on relations between States, intemational security and the liberation of peoples?

36. The objective and subjective conditions in which
the examination of the applications of the two Vietnamese States is taking place lead us to share
the following thoughts with the Council. First, the right
of veto, which is certainly questionable
although
still recognized by the present Charter, should be
exercised only when peace and security are endangered. It is difftcult’to
see how the admission of the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the Republic
of South Viet-Nam
can have a negative effect on
the security of a country or lead to a breach of
international
peace and security.

42. The outcome
of the Council’s
discussions
appears to be predetermined.
We deeply regret that,
and we shall know what conclusions to draw from
it. Nevertheless, whatever decision may be taken by
the Council, we remain convinced that justice and
equity will finally prevail and that the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South
Viet-Nam will make a positive contribution
to international life. They have already given proof of that
in the non-aligned’ movement
and we know that
they will not remain for long in .the limbo of. the
history of the Organization,
for in the final analysis
it is we who stand to gain by their membership
in the United Nations.

37. Secondly, the Charter provides that in regard
to the admission of a new Member State the decision
is to be taken by the General Assembly and that the
Security Council can only make recommendations.
Now, a recommendation
has no binding value’, and
one can therefore wonder what meaning and what
value can be attached to the exercise of the veto in
this particular case.
38. Thirdly, despite the interpretation
given by the
International
Court of Justice 27 years ago, in completely different conditions,
it can be agreed that
the Council’s
recommendation
to the General
Assembly may take three forms: it can be positive,
as has been the case for most previous admissions-at
least for 20 years now; or it can be conditional, which was the case in 1949 when one State
was admitted; or it can be negative.

43. Mr. JACKSON
(Guyana): Having co-sponsored
the draft resolutions now before the Security Council,
my delegation has the greatest pleasure in voicing
its support-as
it did in August [18.?&h und 1835th
meetings]-for
the admission
of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South
Viet-Nam
to the United Nations. That the Security
Council is reconsidering
these applications
a mere
few weeks after its previous deliberations on the subject is the result of the fact that it has been specifically requested so to do by the General Assembly
in its resolution 3366 (XXX), in favour of which
123 delegations voted. Thus, the Council has received
an opportunity to redeem itself on this issue.

39. Since the Council cannot arrive at a positive
recommendation
because of the veto cast by a
permanent member, and since there can be no question
of a conditional
recommendation
in the case of the
two Vietnamese States, we see no alternative for
the Council but to be obliged to transmit a negative
recommendation
to the General Assembly,
The
Assembly, with full sovereignty, will decide how to
treat such a recommendation.
This is an unprecedented fact, of exceptional
gravity for the very

44. It is not, I believe, necessary to recount in full
the heroic exertions of the Viet-Namese people against
6

Guyana delegation regrets that this understanding can
still, at the present time, be susceptible to a breach.

the forces of modem
political
enslavement.
The
severity of their suffering is as widely acknowledged
as their well-deserved victory is universally acclaimed.
The Vietnamese people have won the admiration
of peoples throughout
the world not only by the
successfui culmination
of their struggles but also by
the statesmanship’
and dignity of their .leadersand their people-in
the hour of supreme victory.
Now they are assiduously working for the reconstruction of their countries so wantonly ravaged and
so ruthlessly despoiled. But the Vietnamese people
are not blinkered. One political leader of the Republic of South Viet-Nam placed in proper perspective
the world’s debt to his people when he said that
“a nation that has recorded such splendid exploits
deserves to enjoy peace, freedom and happiness”.

48. That notwithstanding,
let us look at the stated
reasons for such an intimation.
The representative
of the United States of America, Mr. Moynihan,
in
his statement of Friday last, clearly expressed his
Government’s
desire not to stand in the way .of the
admission to the United Nations of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South
Viet-Nam.
Further, in his statement Mr. Moynihan
affirmed his delegation’s support for.the ruling of the
International
Court of Justice given in 1948 relating
to the “link,age”
of applications
for membership of
the United Nations, and he asserted that: “each
application
should be considered on its merits, on
the basis of ,established criteria”
[1842nd mwring,
pWW . 991. Yet the delegation
of the United States
of America proceeded to proclaim that it would cast
a veto-albeit
with regret-thereby
frustrating the
applications currently before the Council.

45. The people of Viet-Nam have pledged to contribute their distinctive talents and experience to the
cause of world peace and international
co-operation.
And in this respect their stated goals includeextending the hand of amity to their former adversaries once this process is founded on mutual respect
and is in strict accordance with the other fundamental
principles enshrined in General Assembly resolution
2625’ (XXV), the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning
Friendly
Relations
and
Co-operation
among States in accordance with ‘the
Charter of the United Nations.

49. Starting from a position
of lofty principle
against so-called “package deals”, that delegation then
referred to attitudes regarding North and South
Korea, issues which .are not on the agenda-and
it
is an agenda adopted by democratic means and in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure.
Thus we are faced with a most curious situation. A
strange logic is indeed at work, By the introduction
of the question of Korea, the United States. delegation has acted against the principle of non-linkage
of applications, a principle which it espouses

46. No one denies-and
this is significant-that
.the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the Republic of
South Viet-Nam
are fully qualified -for membership
in the United Nations. I repeat: no one denies that. The
two States are peace-loving, they accept the obligations contained in the Charter, and there is no
question of their ability and willingness to carry out
the obligations contained therein, Indeed, it is really
difficult, if not impossible,
to find any one or two
States not now enjoying the benefits and privileges
of membership
in the United Nations that are as
eminently
qualified for. such membership
as the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the Republrc
of South Viet-Nam.
What, therefore,
can now
frustrate these applications? Starkly and simply put,
it is the statement of intent to exercise again a Charter
right-which
some indeed call a privilege. I refer to
the veto power held by the United States of America.

50. The situation is not, however, irreversible.
My
delegation joins others which have expressed the hope
that it is not too late for the United States to change
its position. If the United States does not, my delegation remains confident in its conviction that such
action against the, forces and the realities of history
can only be temporary and that in time the Democratic Republic of VietlNam
and the. Republic of
South Viet-Nam will take their rightful places among
us.
GURINOVICH
(Byelorussian
Soviet
51. Mr.
Socialist Republic)
(interpretcrtion
$YW
Rrrssicrn):
Mr. President, permit me firstly to congratulate you
as President of the Security Council, to’mention your
great competence in guiding the work of the Council
and also to thank you for the warm words of welcome you addressed to me in connexion with ‘my
participation’
in the work of the Council.
The
Council has met in response to the request of the
General- Assembly in resohmon 3366 (XXX) that the
Council immediately
and favourably reconsider the
applications
of the Democratic
Republic of VietNam and of the Republic of South Viet-Nam to be
admitted to ‘membership
in the United Nations in
strict conformity with Article 4, paragraph 1, of the
Charter of the United Nations.

47. In the debate on this issue on 19 September,4
at the current session of the General Assembly,
my colleague from the sister republic of Mexico
reminded us of the commitment
made in the quadripartite statements whereby the four original permanent members of the Security Council-and
‘this
includes the United States of America-pledged
not
to use their veto power with the deliberate intention
of impeding the work of the Council. We were also
reminded of this by my colleague from non-aligned
Yugoslavia
in his statement
yesterday
[/8#3rd
nwetirlg],
which was excellent. Suffice it to say that the
7

52. In that resolution,
which was sponsored by
approximately
70 States, including the Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic, the General Assembly has
reaffirmed the legitimate
right of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam and of the Republic of South
Viet-Nam
to become Members
of the United
Nations. That resolution, againstwhich no one voted,
did not link-the question of the admission of the two
Vietnamese States to -membership
in the United
Nations with the consideration
of any. other applications for membership in the Organization,
..
53. -we are pleased that in its agenda the Sect&y
Council has confined itself-solely to the request made
by the General Assembly and that, in view of the
present conditions of international
detente, it has
refrained from reviving attitudes born’of the cold war
that bar the way of the aspirations of the Korean
people to unify their country on a’ peaceful, democratic basis.

admission to the United Nations, that is, that they
are peace-loving States and are prepared to assume
and to fulfil the obligations under the Charter.

54. To those speakers, who, for purely subjective
and political motives, have ‘now made some reference to the inadmissibility
of discrimination
or to the
one-party nature of the United Nations, I should
like to point out that it was precisely their countries
which for many years’ supported the admission to
the specialized
agencies only of those countries
which suited them, and ,did everything to bring it
about. In a discriminatory
way, they blocked the
admission to the specialized agencies of the United
Nations of .the Democratic
People’s Republic
of
Korea and other socialist States.
..
55.. It should also be recalled that at the Final Act
of lthe Conference on Security and Co-operation
in
Europe, held at Helsinki in 1975, the States participants confirmed “that in the event of a conflict
between the obligations of the Members of the United
Nations under the Charter of the United Nations and
their obligations under any treaty or other international
agreement, their obligations under the Charter will
prevail, in accordance with Article 103 of the Charter
of the United Nations*,‘.

the Vietnamese
people solemnly
58. Recently,
celebrated an important
anniversary:
the thirtieth
anniversary of the proclamation
of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam.
During the past 30 years,
under difficult circumstances of virtually uninterrupted
aggression, it has achieved considerable success in
building socialism . in the Democratic
Republic of
Viet-Nam.
As a- result of its heroic victories, the
Vietnamese people fully liberated .its land of VietNam from the imperialists and their henchmen. The
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the Republic of
South Viet-Nam
have received wide international
recognition. Their foreign policies are based on the
strengthening of international peace and security and
the extension of international
detente to the entire
world. They pursue a pohcy of developing friendship
and good-neighbourly
relations with all countries
and of further deepening comprehensive international
co-operation on the basis of mutual respect, independence, equality, common advantage and peaceful
coexistence. This foreign policy is entirely in harmony
with the requirements laid down by the Charter.

57. Their right to become Members of the United
Nations was won by the Democratic Republic of VietNam and the Republic..of
South Viet-Nam
in the
course of a long and relentless struggle for their
liberty and independence
and for the restoration
and strengthening of’ peace in, Indo-China.
In that
heroic struggle, the people of Viet-Nam relied on the.
constant support of the States of the socialist commonwealth
and all anti-imperialist
forces. The
victory that crowned the just struggle waged by the
people of Viet-Nam
had a beneficial influence not
only on the situation in South-East Asia but on the
international
situation as a whole. It created favourable circumstances
for further improvement
in the
international climate.

59. There can be no doubt that the admission of the
two Vietnamese States to the United Nations would
significantly contribute to enhancing the effectiveness
and authority of the United Nations. It would represent
a step forward towards genuine universality. It would
enable it to benefit in full measure from the great
experience of politics and of life that has been gained
by t.he Vietnamese people.

56. In the present ,specific ,case this signifies that
when considering applications
for admission to the
United Nations we must necessarily be ruled by
the provisions of Article 4, paragraph 1, of the
Charter, and not by any other facts. The course of
the debate in the General Assembly and the present
discussion in the Security Council amply show that
the applications of the Democratic Republic of VietNam and of the Republic of South Viet-Nam
for
admission to membership
in the United Nations
enjoy the virtually
universal
support of States
Members
of the. United
Nations..
Everyone,
including the representative
of. the country which
prevented the Security Council from taking a deeision in August of this year, has declared that these
two States meet the requirements stated in Article 4,
paragraph 1, of the Charter applying to States seeking

60. The delegation of the Byelorussian
SSR considers that the question of the admission of the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and of the Republic
of South Viet-Nam
to membership
in the United
Nations must be decided positively and without delay.
It is particularly
urgent in the light of the positive
changes which are occurring in the’ international
arena, broadening and deepening detente and ensuring
its irreversible character.
8

.’

>

61.. Any further delay, any second refusal to admit
the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the Republic
of South Viet-Nam
to membership
in the United
Nations would run counter to the will of the majority
of the States Members of the United Nations and would
be irreconcilable
with the purpose of enhancing the
prestige and authority., of the. Organization.
As a
sponsor .of draft resolutions
S/11832 and S/11833,
which have been submitted
on behalf. of nine
States, containing recommendations
from the Security Council to the General Assembly to admit the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the Republic
of South Viet-Nam to United Nations membership,
the Byelorussian SSR would appeal to all members of
the Security Council to do their duty and to support
those draft resolutions.
We are convinced that, if
not at the present series of meetings of the Security
Council, then at least in the very near future, reason
and common sense will prevail, that the just cause of
the Vietnamese people will triumph and that both Vietnamese States, the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South Viet-Nam,
will become
full Members of the United Nations.
62. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
.(France) (interpretulion
from French):
After an interval of some six weeks,
here we are in the Security Council repeating a debate
in which the arguments of each are known in advance.
Like other delegations,
the delegation
of France
can only reaffirm its position; we have nothing of
substance to add to the considerations’
we put
forward on 11 August [1835th meeting],
nor do we
wish to retract anything.
63. We have stated the reasons why we earnestly
desire the admission of the two Viet-Nams
to the
United Nations. The trials of the Vietnamese people,
which give them a moral right to assistance from the
entire world community;
the commitment
which the
two Republics of Viet-Nam undertook, in submitting
their applications,
to respect the Charter and to
assume the obligations incumbent.on
every Member;
our historical links with the people of Viet-Nam-these
are some of the reasons in favour of the admission
of these two States.
64. The recent. adoption; by a very large majority,
of General Assembly resolution 3366 (XXX); is a
further argument of the same side. The delegation
of France will therefore have no hesitation.in
voting
again, as we did last month [1836?h tieeting],
in
favour of the admission ,of the Democratic Republic
of Viet-Nam ,and of the Republic of South Viet-Nam.
65. ,It .seems to us, furthermore;
that the question
on the agenda should be considered on its merits and
not as dependent on any other. We have said .and
we would say again that we do not approve of the
scheme of linking one. vote to another. We are
against the practice ‘of the package deal, even
though certain States which are indignant
in the

present case readily accommodated
it in other circumstances.
_...,‘.. ..‘&..

themselves

to

66. Having said this, the delegation of France can
the more readily reaffirm its deep attachment
to
the quest for a universality that will symbolize our
intention of putting an end to the co!d war everywhere. The principle of universaiity is not divisible..
We are in favour of the .admission of the two VietNams. We are also in favour of the admission of the
Republic of Korea, since that State has submitted
an application
for membership
which .is still valid
and still before the Council, and because .we do not
doubt that it has the necessary qualifications.
Certainly we feel that it is not imperative
to consider its case today, concurrently with those of the
two Viet-Nams.
But we’ regret that the other half
of Korea, which is equally qualified to be one of us,
refuses to join the United Nations and seems to
consider the Organization
as a place to be avoided.
We ,regret that the result of this abstention should
be that the Republic of Korea is, kept out of the
United Nations.,,This
scorn surprises us all the more
since the Assembly once again has on its agenda a
major debate on the question of .Korea, and ‘since
we have all,. to make great and sincere ‘efforts,
in this part of Asia as well as in the .rest of the
world, to achieve the agreements and the ,detente
that are unanimously desired by our nations.,
g .’
’
67. Mr. VINCI
(Italy): I have carefully followed
the statements made by the representatives,
and
Foreign Ministers of several countries, within and
outside the Council, who have taken part in this
debate. Jt is indeed an interesting and altogether a
civilized exchange of views. But it would -be rather
difficult
to try to draw ‘any specific ,conclusions
from so ‘many speeches. However, if 1 was’asked
to single out a main feature of the debate, I would
for my part,. say that what impressed, me’ most was
hearing the same argument used to support one thesis
or the other, which shows how little’.logic
.cou’nts
whenever deep-rooted political differences exist and,
consequently,
how easy it is to fall ‘into contradictions while defining .positions ‘on -the grounds of
principle. Of course, this is nothing new in the United
Nations records or, for’ that‘matter,
in international
i
affairs in general.
68. Belonging ,to a country which has given no
minor contribution
to the development of law. I feel.
of course, a~rather strong temptation
to follow the
same. line or approach of previous speakers. As the
old Latin saying goes, jus descendit
a jrrstiticl -siwt
414 natrrrtr
s14u,
which, translated,
means that law
descends from justice as from its ‘own nature. But
I will resist the temptation of referring to resounding
legal and ethical values and speak plainly, since the
whole debate has shown how much ,the issue is
essentially of a political nature.

69. Now, with all the respect I have for the views
put forward by several delegations, I will start by
saying that they have failed to convince us that one
of the three applications for United Nations membership which were before the Council could not be
considered at present. Apart from the right of a State
to have its application considered on its merit without
any link of connexion with other parties directly or
indirectly
concerned, the existence in our midst
of two Member States from the territory of a divided
country cannot be ignored or discarded lightly,
qualifying as-it does the procedure once followed as a
generally accepted practice. In our view it proves,
inter cdiu, that differences of political
or economic
system do not hinder admission to the United Nations.
This is, we feel, an example to follow, not one to
refute with arguments that are not consonant with
our main duty, which is to reconcile different positions
and to harmonize the actions of nations.
70.

accelerate the fulfilment
of their plans for rehabilitation. At the same time, admission of the Republic
of South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic
of Viet-Nam
would constitute
a significant
step
towards the universality
of the Organization
and
give momentum to the restoration of stable and peaceful conditions to an area which has gone through
so many-too
many-years
of human suffering and
material destruction.
74. Mr. ZAHAWIE
(Iraq): The position of my delegation concerning the item on the agenda does not
require any elaboration, as Iraq has already stated its
position on the matter and is now listed among the
sponsors of the two draft resolutions before the Council
recommending the admission of the Republic of South
Viet-Nam and the Democratic’ Republic of Viet-Nam
to membership
in the United Nations.
I should,
however, like to make a few remarks on the question
of membership
in general, on the mandate of the
Security Council and the General Assembly according
to the Charter, and on the possible outcome of the
present debate in the Council.

That

is why I believe that we should also
the Democratic Peoples Republic of Korea
to join the Organization rather than take the opposite
position. Such a move on the part of the United
Nations would be in keeping with the ideal, which
is unanimously, supported, of universality and would
in our view help, the objective of unification which
each of the two States of Korea has set as the basis
of their policy.’

encourage

75. The question of membership
in the United
Nations is replete with ironies and contradictions.
In the name of universality,
for instance, two
States eminently eligible for membership
are being
prevented from enjoying that membership.
Then,
too, those who are so vociferously advocating the
principle of universality,
which is not a provision
of the Charter, call for the strict observance of the
Charter and at the same time adamantly oppose any
implementation
of clear and unequivocal provisions
of the Charter concerning
membership-namely,
Articles 5 and 6. These two positions-the
newly
found total support for the principle of universality
as an end in itself, on the one hand, and the categorical rejection, on the other, of even a consideration
of the possibility of the implementation
of Articles 5
and 6 of the Charter with regard to the most intransigent Members-are
clear and deliberate attempts
at distorting the purposes and principles ofthe Charter.

71. Having made these general remarks, I do not
think I have much to add to what was stated by
Mr. Cavaglieri at the 1835th meeting of the.Council
on 11 August. In fact, the position of Italy was made
clear through the votes its delegation cast at the
meeting of the Security Council in August [ibid.],
in the General Assembly in support of resolution
3366 (XXX),
and in the Council on Friday last
[/842nd meeting].
We regretted then, and we regret
now, for the reasons I have just mentioned, that the
application of the Republic of Korea was not included
in the agenda. We are now prepared to vote in favour
of draft resolutions S/l1832 and S/l1833 introduced
by Mr. Salim of the United Republic of Tanzania.

76. The refusal to contemplate the possibility of the
application
of those basic Articles is maintained
in defence of the continued
membership
of the
likes of South Africa and Israel, whose unparalleled
records of violation of the Charter and contempt
for and defiance of the resolutions of the United
Nations have only served to erode the effectiveness,
the position and the very foundations of the United
Nations. I might add, in passing, that the case of the
Israeli regime’s membership in the United Nations
is all the more incongruous,
as that regime was
established in contravention
of General Assembly
resolutions on the future status of Palestine. To this
day it leaves its territorial boundaries undefined in
the hope of acquiring or annexing further territory,
and over the last two decades it has adamantly
refused the fulfilment of the provisions upon which its
admission was made conditional.

72. As the Foreign Minister
of Italy, Mariano
Rumor, stated in the general debate in the General
Assembly on 23 September: “Another region which
for too many years has been a theatre of war is
South-East Asia. Although armed conflict has now
come to an end in Viet-Nam and Cambodia, there
remains in those areas a number of problems related
to reconstruction”.
Further on, he said: “In line with
the growing interest of the countries of the [European]
Community
in the political and economic stability
of So’uth-East ,Asia, Italy, will not fail to support all
appropriate’
initiatives
for the advancement
of a
region which has long sought to achieve its legitimate
aspirations for progress in a new climate of peace”.6
73. ” We are convinced
of the two Vietnamese

that the active participation
States in our work would
10

77. It appears that the Council is now heading towards
another veto. It will be yet another demonstration
of what has rightly been called the -tyranny of the
minority. That should not, however, necessarily mean
that the whole debate was but an exercise in futility.
It does not mean that the will of the great majority
.of the, Members of the United Nations will be
paralysed by the willfulness of the very small minority.
The General Assembly will no doubt draw the ‘proper
conclusions
from the votes cast in the Security
Council, from the vetoes that kept South Africa in the
United Nations and the vetoes that keep the two
Republics of Viet-Nam out.

vote in the Security Council debate on the item
before it. If there is no objection,
I intend, in
accordance with our-practice and with the provisions
of rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, to
invite the representatives. of Mexico and Mozambique to take the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber, it being understood.
that they will be invited to take a place at ;the
Council table when it is their turn to speak.
At the in\*ittrtion
of the President,
Mr. Garcia
Rohles (Mexico) and Mr. Chissano (Mozambique)
taok the places reserved for them at the side of the
Cmrncil chamber.

78. As long ago as 1950, the General Assembly
adopted resolution 377 (V), which provided that if the
Security Council, because of a lack of unanimity
among its permanent members, failed to exercise its
primary responsibility
in the maintenance of peace,
the Assembly would take up the matter immediately
and make the necessary recommendations,
including
the use of armed force when necessary to maintain
international
peace and security. Now, the maintenance of international
peace and security is, of
course, the primary responsibility
of the Council,
and yet the Assembly, in accordance with the provisions of that resolution,
which is known as the
“Uniting for peace” resolution, assumed responsibilities which were, according to the Charter, entrusted
solely to the Council.

82. Mr.
BOOH
BOOH
(United
Republic
of
Cameroon) (interpretation
fram French): On 19 September last, the General Assembly, by an almost
unanimous
vote, adopted resolution
3366 (XXX)
whereby it requested
the Security
Council
to
reconsider immediately
and favourably
the application for membership
in the United Nations of
the two Vietnamese’states,
in strict conformity with
Article 4, paragraph 1, of the Charter.
83. It was therefore justifiable
to think that this
urgent request by the Assembly, together with the
declaration
of reconciliation
and goodwill made by
the representatives of the two Vietnamese States in
respect of all countries of the world and particularly
in respect of the United States of America, would
have been considered by the, Security Council with
the calm and seriousness which this subject requires.

79. With regard to the question of membership, the
role of the Security Council is, however, limited
to making recommendations
only, as has already
been pointed out by the representative of Yugoslavia
in his statement to the Council [/843rd meeting[.
Decisions on membership were, according to Article 4,
5 and 6 of the Charter, to be effected by the General
Assembly.

84. My delegation cannot but deplore the fact that
certain Powers believed it appropriate to choose this
occasion to revive once again the request for admission of the Republic of Korea which, while enjoying
some sympathy in the Security Council, has always
given rise to well-founded disputes. It seems to us
mistaken to believe that the entry of the Republic of
Korea into the United Nations would be a panacea
for and lead to the solution of all its fundamental
political problems.

80. In the face of the recent failures of the permanent
members of the Security Council to arrive at unanimous decisions on questions of membership, the only
logical step for the General Assembly would appear
to be the adoption of a resolution similar to resolution
377 (V) on “Uniting
for peace”. The new resolution
would of course concern itself with the question of
the decisions on membership
which the Charter
entrusts to the General Assembly. Such a resolution
might well be entitled
the “uniting
for justice”
resolution. The General Assembly may indeed find
in the adoption of such a resolution the only course
of action left open to it in the face of the obstructive
actions of a minority in the Security Council.

85. The United Republic of Cameroon has excellent
relations with both the Republic of Korea and the
Democratic
Peaple’s Republic of Korea, and we
believe that a just outcome of the Korean question
must be based on taking into account the fact that
two Governments
at present preside over the destinies of the Korean people, and that it is for them
in the first place to determine, without foreign interference; the appropriate
means for ensuring the
peaceful and independent
reunification
of their
country. The two Governments of Korea would therefore stand to gain by working tenaciously towards
conciliation,
dialogue and compromise.
They can be
assured of the sympathy and constant encouragement
of my delegation.

81. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
Before calling on the next speaker, I should like to
inform members of the Council that I have received
letters from the representatives
of Mexico
and
Mozambique,
asking to be invited, in accordance
with Article 31 of the Charter and the provisional
rules of procedure. to participate without the right to
II

86. In the case of the applications of the Republic
of South Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic of
Viet-Nam, I should like to reaffirm the position which
my delegation
stated last month in the Council
[/835th meeting],
namely,
that Cameroon
unreservedly supports the applications
for admission
of those two countries,
for reasons connected
both with the excellent
relations between their
respective countries and my own and our deep
appreciation
of the political
realities in the new
Indo-China.
Indeed,
since henceforth
they will
effectively exercise ‘power over their territories, the
two sovereign States of Viet-Nam simultaneously and
freely accept the obligations
which the Charter
imposes on Members
of the Organization,
and
solemnly undertake to comply with them.
87. Furthermore,
by its long struggle against all
foreign aggression and the indescribable
sacrifices
which it accepted in the name of freedom and
justice, the Vietnamese people has indisputably proved
to the entire world its unflagging devotion to peace
and understanding among peoples and its ability to
assume the responsibilities
of a State Member of the
Organization.
Moreover,
we cannot but express
satisfaction
that no member of the Council has
expressed any doubts as to the merits of the two
candidates in respect of the Charter. All delegations,
including that of the United States, have declared
that they have no reason to object to the entry of the
two-Vietnamese
States to the United Nations. That
is a just attitude in conformity with the Charter and
with the advisory opinion of the International
Court
of Justice of 1948’ on the subject, which should not
be obscured either by a re-emergence of the questionable bargaining of the cold-war period, or by the
persistence in an absurd resentment against the Vietnamese people.

89. It is a well-established
principle that applications for admission
of new Members
must be
examined objectively
and individually
on the basis
of Article 4, paragraph 1, of the Charter. One cannot
therefore evoke artificial
arguments to bar those
requests without bearing the heavy responsibility
of
trampling underfoot the Charter of the United Nations.
That is why my delegation appeals urgently and in a
friendly manner to the delegation
of the United
States to reconsider its position and also support
unconditionally
draft resolutions S/l 1832 and S/l 1833,
which the representative
of the United Republic
of Tanzania
so eloquently
introduced
yesterday
[184&h meeting] on behalf of the sponsors and which
reflect the desire of the overwhelming
majority
of States throughout the world that the Republic of
South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic of
Viet-Nam should without delay become Members of
the United Nations.
90. The obstinacy of a single Member of the Organization in opposing the admission of the two Vietnamese States to the United Nations, thus opposing
the will of all countries of the world, is bound to
be defeated and will in no way alter the determination
of the Vietnamese people to defend today, with the
same dignity and firmness as it did yesterday on the
field of battle, the recognition
of its legitimate
rights by the international
community.
We are
convinced that time is on the side, of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South
Viet-Nam,
which can always count on the sympathy
and active support of all peoples throughout
the
world who love liberty in countering
the sordid
manmuvres of imperialism
and ensuring the triumph
of their national rights, both in their homeland and
in the United Nations.
The meeting

rose at I p.m.
Notes

88. The political realities of the Indo-China of today
are irreversible; to accept them is surely to work for
peace and reconciliation
among States, as insistently
proclaimed
in the Charter. It would be unjust,
indeed odious, for the Council -to hold .the Vietnamese people responsible for the misfortunes of the
people of Korea and therefore to act in contravention
of its just aspiration fully to assume its responsibilities
within the community of free nations.

’ Admission
of a State to the United Nations (Charter, Art. 4).
Advisory
Opinion:
I.C.J. Reports
1948, p. 57.
z See Official
Records
of the General
Assembly,
Twentyeighth Session. Supplement
No. 30, p. 24, item 41.
’ Ibid.. Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement
No. 27, annex
I.
4 ibid., Thirtieth
Session, Plenary
Meetings,
2354th
meeting.
5 United
111/l/37.

6 See
Session.

12

Nations

Official
Plenary

Conference

Records
Meetings,

on

International

qf the

General

2357th

meeting.

Organization,

Assembly,

Thirtieth

‘.

.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UN-ITED

NATIdNS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore
or write to: United Nations. Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LFS

PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Lcs publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dam les librairies et Is agences depositaims du
monde entier. Informer-vous
auprk de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Get&e.

COilO

CON.%EGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONIiS

UNIDAh

Las pubiicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en lib&as
y casas distribuidoras
en
todas par& dei mundo. Cons&e
a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccibn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations.

New York

00300

82-61202-November

1963-2,200
