TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING: 4 MARCH 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 395) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .

Page

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The question of South West Africa:
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the representatives of Chile, Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Turkey, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia and Zambia
(S/8397);
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Iran, Iraq,
Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Philippines,
Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sudan,
Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper
Volta and Yemen (S/8398 and Add.l/Rev. 1 and Add.2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SjPV.1395

TIlIRTEEN

HUNDRED AND NINETY-FIFTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Monday, 41March 1968, at 11 a.m.
l’r&ic~lt:

Mr. OUSIWHIC

SW@ DIOP

(Senqyl).

J’resozt: TIE reprcsentnlivcs of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 395)

1. Adoption of the Bgcndu.
2. The question of South West Africa:
Letter dated I2 February 1968 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Chile, C<>lombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Turkey, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia
and Zambia (S/8397);
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Afghanistan, Algeria, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzavillc),
Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Iran, Iraq, 1~01~ ,Coast,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libya,
Matlagasc:lr, Malayda,
Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,
Sudan, Syria, Th:&und, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Yemen (S/8398
and Add.l/Rev.l and Add.2).
Expression of thanks to the retiring President

1. The PRESIDENT (tmnsk&?d from French): Members
of the Council will, I am sure, allow me to express on their
behalf our warmest contragulntions to Ambassador Miguel
Solano Lopez for all that he has done throughout the
month of February to guide the critical work of the
Security Council along the right channels. Thanks to his
insight, tact and perseverance, he has been able to achieve
practical results, for which we most sincerely thank him.
His patience and his conciliatory attitude have set an
example which I, in my turn, hope to follow in carrying Out
my duties as President for the month of March.
2. I now Cilll upon the representative of Paraguay.
3. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated from
Spanish); Mr. President, in a few brief but very sincere
words I wish to thank you for your generous reference to
my work as President of the Security Council during the

month of February. May I also avail myself of the
opportunity to thank each and every member of the
Security Council for their sincere and patient co-operation
which enabled me to discharge the great responsibilities of
the Presidency of the Council. Those duties are indeed
arduous, but they carry their own reward in the knowledge,
gained at first hand, of the spirit of co-operation which
characterizes every member. Once again, 1 am most grateful
to all the members of the Security Council.
Adoption of the agenda

The agenda wasadopted.
The Question of South West Africa:
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of Chile,
Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Turkey, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia arid Zambia
(S/8397);
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville),
Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libya,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,
Sudan, Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Yemen (S/8398
and Add.l/Rev.l and Add.2)
4. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In accordance with the Security Council’s previous decision, if there
is no objection I shall invite the representatives of Guyana,
Turkey, Chile, Indonesia, Yugoslavia, Nigeria, the United
Arab Republic, Zambia, and Colombia to take the places
reserved for them at the sides of the Council chamber, on
the understanding that when one of them wishes to speak
he will be invited to take a place at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr, E. A. Braithwaite
(Guyana), Mr, 0. Eralp (Turkey), Mr. J. Pii’iera (Chile),
Mr. D. Adjam (Indonesia), Mr. Z. Jazi6 (Yugoslavia), Mr. A.
Clark (Nigeria), Mr. M. R. Abdul- Wahab (United Arab
Republic), Mr. R. B. Manda (Zambia) and Mr. A. HerrdnMedina (Colombia) took the places reserved for them.
5. The PRESIDENT (translated porn French): The Council will now proceed to consider the item on its agenda. The

13. The fourth preambular paragraph restates the obligation of the Member States of the United Nations to accept
and carry out the decisions of the Security Council in
accordance with the United Nations Charter.

first speaker on my list is the representative of Pakistan, on
whom I now call.
6. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Mr, President, let me first of all
congratulate you on your assuming the Presidency of the
Security Council. It is indeed a matter of great satisfaction
to us that you should be presiding over our deliberations at
this time when we are again considering the question of
South West Africa. Nothing could be more appropriate than
that you-a distinguished leader and statesman of Senegal,
which represents the progressive forces in Africa-should
guide our efforts to face the challenge presented to the
Security Council by the Government of South Africa.

14. The fifth preambular paragraph reflects the distress
felt by the members of the Security Council-indeed, by
the entire membership of the United Nations-that the
Government of South Africa has failed to comply with
Security Council resolution 245 (1968). It is hardly necessary for me at this stage to quote the much stronger
expressions that have been used by almost all members of
the Security Council during the present debate in voicing
their reactions to South Africa’s conduct. Compared to
what they have said, the language of this paragraph is an
understatement.

7. I should also like to pay the tribute of my delegation to
your predecessor in the Chair. As President of the Council,
Ambassador Solano Lopez performed his task with patience, skill, ability and great wisdom. He was determined
and tireless in his efforts to help us achieve positive results
in our consultations.

15. The sixth paragraph of the preamble takes into
consideration the memorandum of 25 January 1968 of the
United Nations Council for South West Africa, which gives
full information concerning the illegal trial of the South
West Africans detained for alleged terrorist activities. It also
takes cognizance of the letter of the President of the United
Nations Council for South West Africa to the President of
the Security Council. That letter [S/8394/ expressed the
profound shock and indignation of the United Nations
Council for South West Africa, as the authority charged by
the General Assembly with administering the Territory
until independence, when it received the news of the
sentences passed on 9 January on thirty-three of thirty-four
South West Africans, in contravention of General Assembly
resolution 2324. (XXII) and Security Council resolution
245 (1968). The letter also stated the view of the United
Nations Council for South West Africa that the Security
Council, as the highest authority of the United Nations,
should consider taking appropriate action.

8. In the course of their statements in the Security
Council meetings held last month, representatives made
some kind remarks on the manner in which Pakistan
presided over the Security Council meetings in the month
of January. I should like to express to all of them our
profound gratitude.
9. Before adjourning the 1393rd meeting of the Security
Council on 21 February, the President voiced his expectation that the members of the Council would undertake
consultations for the purpose of submitting draft resolutions on the question before us. Those consultations have
since taken place among the members of the Security
Council and also with the delegations of other interested
Member States. As a result of those consultations the seven
African, Asian and Latin American members of the
Security Council-namely, Algeria, Brazil, Ethiopia, India,
Pakistan, Paraguay and Senegal-have circulated a draft
resolution which they have co-sponsored. I have the
honour, on behalf of the seven co-sponsoring delegations,
to introduce this draft resolution, which is contained in
document S/8429. I trust that our colleagues have studied
the text; being self-evident it requires no elaborate explanation. I shall therefore make only a few brief introductory
comments.

16. The penultimate paragraph of the preamble to the
draft resolution reaffirms in substance the second preambular paragraph of Security Council resolution 245 (1968).
It also observes that the continued detention and trial and
subsequent sentencing of the South West Africans constitute a flagrant violation of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. In this context it is pertinent to quote from
the text of the consensus reached by the United Nations
Commission on Human Rights at its 951st meeting, on
9 February 1968:

10. I shall first deal with its preambular part. The first
paragraph recalls the substance of operative paragraphs 1
and 2 of resolution 245 (1968), adopted unanimously on
25 January.

“The Commission on Human Rights expresses its deep
indignation at the fact that the Republic of South Africa
has defied the international community by sentencing
these South West Africans after an illegal trial and under
the ‘Terrorism Act’-a law which has been rejected by the
whole international community as contrary to the principles of the United Nations Charter and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights”. (S/841 I]

11. The second preambular paragraph is similar to the first
preambular paragraph of resolution 245 (1968) except for
the substitution of the words “taking into account” for the
words “taking note”. The co-sponsors beheve that the
expression now used is more appropriate to the situation.

17. The last paragraph of the preamble, as compared to
the last paragraph of the preamble to resolution 245 (1968)
is more specific in regard to the special responsibility of the
United Nations towards the people and the Territory of
South West Africa.

12. The third preambular paragraph is nothing more than
a reaffirmation of the right of the people of South West
Africa to freedom and independence. In the light of the
Charter, of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14
December 1960 and of the other relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly, that right is beyond question.

18. I shall now deal with the operative pad of the
seven-Powerdraft resolution.
2

Ig. In regard to paragraph 1, it is obvious that the
Security Council would be failing in its duty if it were to
ornit a censure of the Government of South Africa for the
latter’s deliberate disregard of resolution 245 (1968), as
well as of the authority of the United Nations, of which
South Africa is a Member.

action under the Charter it should take. But the seven
sponsors are firmly convinced that in that event the
Security Council should not exclude from its consideration
the application of appropriate measures under Chapter VII
and the other Articles of the United Nations Charter which
are relevant to situations in which a Member State
persistently violates the principles of the Charter. The seven
sponsors believe that the Security Council cannot afford to
let South Africa remain under the impression that in the
event of its refusal to comply with the present draft
resolution the Security Council will lapse into passivity or
inaction. The provisions of operative paragraph 4, in the
judgement of the sponsors, constitute the minimum necessary to warn South Africa against an impression which may
be comforting to it but which would be subversive of
justice and dangerous to peace. We consider that this
warning is both necessary and timely because South Africa
is reported to be about to start another illegal trial, under
the infamous Terrorism Act,’ of eight more South West
Africans,

20. Paragraph 2 demands in plain language the forthwith
release and repatriation of the South West Africans.
Considering South Africa’s persistent defiance of the
Security Council, it is the firm conviction of the seven
sponsors that this is no time to mince words.
21. Paragraph 3 is stronger than operative paragraph 3 of
Security Council resolution 245 (1968). That resolution
invited all States “to exert their influence in order to
induce the Government of South Africa to comply with”
its provisions. Many Member States have sent replies to the
Secretary-General informing him of the action taken by
their Governments in response to that invitation. Now that
South Africa has spurned all their appeals and is confronting the Security Council with a challenge to its own
authority, the seven sponsors of the present draft resolution
believe that the Security Council should do no less than
summon all the resources of persuasion and even pressure
commanded b’y the entire membership of the United
Nations to ensure that the Government of South Africa
complies with the provisions of the present draft resolution.

24. In operative paragraph 5 the Secretary-General is
requested to follow closely the implementation of the
present resolution and to report to the Security Council
within a time limit from the date of its adoption. It is our
intention to propose a time limit of two weeks, within
which time we would hope that the Secretary-General
would report on the efforts of the Member States to induce
South Africa to comply and on South Africa’s response.

22. In regard to operative paragraph 4, the seven sponsors
are convinced,. that, given the record of South Africa’s
arrogance and obduracy, the Security Council owes it to
itself to make it clear to South Africa that the Council has
the will to act effectively if South Africa disregards the
present draft resolution. By doing so South Africa would be
violating Article 25 of the United Nations Charter. In that
casethe Security Council would be faced with the necessity
of having recourse to those provisions of the Charter which,
in its judgement, would effectively meet the situation
created by such defiance. It is clear, in the light of what was
said and done in regard to the interpretation of Article 25
at the time of the signing of the United Nations Charter at
the San Francisco Conference in 1945, that the Security
Council is competent to make recommendations as well as
to take decisions under Chapter VI of the Charter. The
question whether the Security Council in acting under
Chapter VI of the Charter is merely making a recommendation or is taking a decision is, in our view, a matter more of
policy for the Security Council than of law. Having regard
to all the circumstances of the present case, having regard
to South Africa’s’defiance of the United Nations for more
than twenty years, and finally having regard to South
Africa’s defiance of Security Council resolution
245 (1968), the seven sponsors consider that the time has
now come for the Security Council to adopt a resolution in
the nature of a decision under Chapter VI of the Charter,
rather than to make yet another recommendation to South
Africa.

25. The last paragraph of t$e operative part of the
seven-Power draft resolution is identical with the corresponding paragraph of Security Coun.cil resolution
245 (1968).
26. The text of the seven-Power draft resoIution which I
have just introduced has been evolved after intensive
consultations in which the different points of view among
the seven sponsors and among the other interested delegations, in particular those of Africa, have been adjusted on a
basis of mutual accommodation. As such it contemplates a
course of action by the Security Council which they
consider to be the minimum in the light of South Africa’s
defiance of Security Council resolution 245 (1968) and also
its endless violations of the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations for more than twenty years.
27. The seven sponsors are conscious that constructive
suggestions have been made by some representatives in the
course of the present debate. The idea has been put forward
that the Secretary-General should be requested to send a
special representative to South Africa to secure the release
and repatriation of the South West Africans. The sevenPower draft resolution does not in any way preclude such
action by the Secretary-General. It would be consistent
with operative paragraph 5 of the seven-Power draft
resolution for the Secretary-General, on his own initiative,
to send a special representative to South Africa to bring
about compliance with the Security Council’s demand for
the release and repatriation of the South West Africans.

23. It is not the intention behind operative paragraph 4 of
the seven-Power draft resolution to bind the Security
Council in advance to a specific course of action. Naturally
the Council would wish to decide for itself, should South
Africa again defy the Council, what particular course of

1 Act No. 83 of 1967, to Prohibit Terroristic Activities and to
Amend the Law Relating to Criminal Procedure; and to Provide fOf
other Incidenbl Matters.

3

28. In regard to the other suggestion that has been made
that every additional effort should be made to ensure
humane treatment of the South West Africans detained by
South Africa, and that the International Committee 0f the
Red Cross should be enabled to have access to each 0f the
South West Africans detained under the Terrorism Act of
1967, it is the view of the seven sponsors that this is a
matter within the competerlce of that humanitarian organization. Here we are concerned with the Security Council’s
OWII
responsibility in the face of South Africa’s defiance of
resolution 245 (1968). The seven-Power draft resolution
therefore confines itself to the discharge of that responsibility.

33. we are also conscious of the fact that in order t0

induce the Government of South Africa to respect the
decisions of the United Nations, the role of the permanent
members-and, in this context, of those permanent members which are in a position to bring to bear great and even
decisive influence on South Africa-will be a crucial one. It
iS our earnest hope that they will bring to bear to the
greatest possible extent the influence which they command,
and that they wjll do so both individually and collectively
to bring about a speedy release and repatriation of the
South West Africans, and indeed to ameliorate the disturbing situation.
34. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (transZated from
Rench): First, Mr. President, I should like to join with the

29. Before f conclude, on behalf of the seven sponsors I
should like to express their gratitude to the representatives
of the United Kingdom and the United States for their deep
concern that the Security Council should continue to act in
this mnfter unanimously. The seven have had intensive
consultations with Lord Caradon and Ambassador Goldberg, who put forward their comments and observations to
us on their own behalf and also as spokesmen of the views
held by the representatives of France, Canada and Denmark.

of Paraguay and Pakistan in congratulating
you on your accession to the Presidency of this Council.
Our congratulations are all the more sincere in that they arc
addressed to someone whose worth as a statesman, a
diplomat and a scholar is greatly appreciated not only by
the members of the Algerian delegation but, indeed,
throughout the territory of Algeria and the whole continent
of Africa. Moreover, Senegal and Algeria are almost
neighbours and have for many years woven ties beyond the
normal requirements of protocol, as part of the common
bond of African unity and solidarity we hold so dear.
representatives

30. We believe that we were able to convey to them. as
clearly as we could the intent and meaning of the
seven-Power draft resolution, However, differences between
the two sides, which in the main seemed to pertain to the
language of the draft resolution, have not so far been
reconciled. The seven sponsors, in deciding not to postpone
any further the introduction of their draft resolution, are
deeply conscious of the spirit of sincerity and co-operation
which Ambassador Goldberg and Lord Caradon have
brought to the consultations. We know that both they and
the other members of the Security Council whose views
they represent are no less concerned and anxious than the
seven co-sponsors that the Security Council should respond
to the challenge of the situation confronting it, effectively
and promptly, and that the South West Africans concerned
should be released and repatriated without delay.

35. I must also pay a tribute to you for the effort., you
have already made in these few days and for the concern
you have shown, particularly over the weekend, to achieve
some worthwhile result and to assist this Council in finding
a just solution to the problem confronting us.
36. After the brilliant speech with which my distinguished
friend and colleague, Ambassador Shahi, has presented the
Afro-Asian and Latin-American draft resolution, there is
little left for mc to say. I think it is’ important, however,
that members of the Security Council should be fully aware
of the position of the three African States concerning the
draft which they have co-sponsored. Although, as Ambassador Shahi has already indicated, we consider that this draft
only partially reflects the concern of our Governments and
of all the African States, we agreed to sponsor it as a result
of a long and fruitful discussion which was guided with tact
and competence by Ambassador Solano L6pez of Paraguay.

31. Tl?at the seven sponsors have decided to introduce
their draft resolution does not-1 repeat, not-in any way
mean or imply that they refuse further consultations with
the other members of the Security Council. Our attitude is
exactly the contrary. We remain ready at all times to pursue
constructive consultations with them in a spirit of sincerity
and co-operation in order that a draft resolution commensurate with the requirements of the situation can be
evolved.

37, At this juncture I should like to pay a well deserved
tribute to the objectivity and intellectual honesty which
Ambassador Solano Lbpez has displayed throughout his
most difficult tenure of office.
38. It is indeed difficult for us‘to take note of Pretoria’s
defiance without reacting to it more vigorously. We should
have liked. to see the Security Council enforce respect for
its decision of 25 January by resorting to the means which
the Charter puts at its disposal. Several members of the
Security Council, however, who in other respects maintain
sometimes close ties with Pretoria and who came Out
strongly against South Africa’s rejection of Security Ccun/
ciI resolution 245 (196X), would not allow this violation to
be punished as it should have been. We deplore this
faint-hearted attitude, which Pretoria will certainly exploit
and interpret as it must be, We deplore this attitude eve@
more, in that those same delegations have stated that we a#

32. It must be confessed that, in formulating the text of
the draft resolution which I have just introduced, the
African and Asian members of the Security Council would
have liked to propose a text which would be in their
judgemcnt more commensurate with the gravity and chaIIenge of the situation that is now confronting the Security
Council. We would have preferred to deal with the root 0f
the problem. However, in deference to the views of our
other colleagues, the seven-power draft resolution has been
couched in terms which we believe do not necessarily bind
any member of the Security Council in advance to action
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
4

dealing with a humanitarian problem, in spite of the fact
that the African States are still convinced that the
humanitarian aspect is only one side of the problem of
South West Africa Which is essentially political,

44. With regard to paragraph 4, it is hardly neCeSwry
to
point out that the allusion to Article 25 of the Charter does
not necessarily imply an automatic reference to a specific
Chapter of the Charter, or that the rest of the paragraph is
designed essentially to allow for any action as may be
deemed useful, barring none, according to the situation that
arises.

39. With your permission, Mr. President, I should like to
stress the importance WC attach to some of the provisions
of the draft resolution now before the Council. The
commitment into which the Council entered on 25 January
1968 allows us today to consider concrete measures to
implement the Council’s decision and, if South Africa
continues to ignore resolution 245 (1968) we hope, adopt
the draft resolution now under discussion. Such measures
are provided for in the Charter and, according to the
relevant provisions, can be preventative, provisional or of
the enforcement kind.

45. It can thus be seen that, in order to achieve a
concerted result, the Council will have to make a twofold
effort. The co-sponsors of the draft resolution, despite their
desire to go much further, had to agree to seine limitations,
had to contain and channel their will to act. The other
Powers, however, as partners of South Africa in one way or
another, should avail themselves of the opportunity thus
given them, to bring the full weight of their moral and
political authority to bear on the side of the third world,
and, on a broader basis, the Security Council. Hesitation on
their part would be unfounded, useless and not even
positive. It would be unfounded by reason of paragraphs 3
and 4, as we have just pointed out; it is obvious that it
would be useless as far as they were concerned; and in
relation to the concerted action which must be taken
jointly, with the other members of the Security Council, it
would be negative.

40. I should like to add that the reason why the African
delegations in the Council joined the Asian and LatinAmerican delegations in sponsoring this draft (which as I
have already said, falls far short of meeting all their wishes,
was in order to maintain the unity of the third world, a
unity which has already been apparent in this matter among
others in the General Assembly, the Security Council and
the United Nations Council for South West Africa. We hope
that this unity will be extended to include the other
members of the Security Council, especially those which
have close relations with Pretoria. For without such
unanimity it will become increasingly difficult to carry our
decisions into effect. Energetic action is imperative, if we
wish to avoid fLurther setbacks which might have serious
consequences for the authority of the United Nations and a
direct effect on the current situation in South West Africa
and southern Africa as a whole.

46. In our view, we have no other alternative but to
strengthen the effectiveness of the Council’s action and
authority. The support of the great Powers for such a
resolution will at least give us reason to hope that the
United Nations will confront this problem with a courage
which it should never allow to wane. A refusal to grant such
support will encourage the idea that the West prefers to cut
itself off, refuse to co.operate with the third world and
avoid any confrontation with South Africa. Conversely, the
unanimous adoption of a resolution such as the one before
us, that is to say, a resolution. With the characteristics of
realism, will prepare a situation permitting the necessary
action, whatever that may be, to be taken at a later stage.
In our view, there is no alternative.

41. If we examine the present draft resolution, we shall
see that it falls somewhere between a determined search for
unanimity and the necessity of taking some additional step
towards the solution of the problem. This means, first, that
we should strengthen the credibility of the decisions which
the United Nations sees fit to take and that, secondly, we
should be preparccl to foresee every single possible further
development of the situation.

47. To adopt a weaker resolution would be an admission
of failure and would lend credence to the idea that the
Council has shifted to a negative approach. To envisage
more energetic action would certainly have been in keeping
with the situation; but, things being as they are, it might
have given grounds for breaking the unanimity which has
always been advocated here whenever possible.

42. The draft resolution before us meets both these
requirements and this fact is stressed in the very wording of
paragraph 3. The words “calls upon the Members of the
United Nations to co-operate with the Security Council”
clearly cover States maintaining trade or other relations
with South Africa, States which have what might be termed
privileged relations with that country, the great Powers, or
at least some of them, which still have relations with South
Africa, and in particular those which still maintain diplomatic relations with that country. These States have both
the opportunity and the power to exert influence, or even
as Ambassaclor Shahi has said, pressure on South Africa,
whether it be moral, political or material.

49. WC think it important to reaffirm that a unanimous
vote in favour of the present draft resolution could
effectively lead South Africa to initiate measures which
would obviate a confrontation, if such a possibility exists.

43. Paragraph 3 contains nothing to alarm Powers which
are convinced of the rightness of the United Nations cause
in South West Africa and we believe that it would not be
contrary to their interests to agree to the implementation
of this paragraph,

50. The Ambassador of Pakistan has empahsized the good
faith and good-will of the sponsors. Suffice it to mention
that the African, Asian and Latin American delegations
asked the Security Council to consider this question nearly
three weeks ago. The fact that the sponsors of the draft

48. In adopting the draft resolution contained in document S/8429, we should be committing ourselves to
examining the situation as it develops in future and to
deciding what action could be taken.

5

throughout the world. We feel that it constitutes a further
step for securing the release of the prisoners. We feel that it
corresponds to the will of the overwhelming majority of the
Members of this Organization. Its approval by the Security
Council can give to every one of US around this table a
sober satisfaction that the responsibilitiesthat devolve on
us under the Charter have been duly discharged.Confronted by the defianceof South Africa, we will have acted
responsiblyand with that restraint that must guideall of us
in this Council.

have waited so long and, in spite of their desire to act
rapidly, have agreed to successive adjournements, testifies
to their will to reach an agreed decision. This concerted
approach is something we can achieve. For our part, we
believe that an exhaustive debate on the draft resolution
now before us will prove both useful and necessary. It will
unquestionably help the Council, the United Nations and
public opinion in general to get a clearer picture of the true,
as distinct from the alleged nature and implications of the
spirit and the letter of the resolution. It will also make it
possible to give free rein to the will, affirmed in some
instances and publicized in others, to demonstrate a
constructive spirit which will fail neither through a dangerous inertia nor through a prejudicial rupture.

57. I should like, on behalf of my Government, to stress
the following, In our view, the draft resolution before us
does not commit the Council to any specific course of
action and doesnot in any way prejudge the substanceof
any future recommendationor action on the part of this
body. It would not be wiseto determinehere and now the
stepsto be shapedby tomorrow’sevents. There is only one
commitment in this draft: to meet again and forthwith in
caseof new defianceon the part of South Africa. Then, and
only then when confronted with a new development, shall
the Security Council be in a position to choosea particular
course.

51. Before concluding, I should like, with all the clarity
which the situation demands, to echo the words of my
collcague, Ambassador Shahi, when he said that the
sponsors of the draft resolution contained in document
S/8429 wish to reiterate their desire to co-operate unreservedly as they have done during the last few weeks, and
to enter into public or private talks in order to reach an
agreed decision, whether unanimous or not. To that end,
any constructive or better practical suggestion or initiative
will be taken into consideration and will be carefully and
openly studied.

58. In my previousstatement on this question, I stressed
the necessityfor the Council to achievea solution approved
by a very substantialmajority, I shouldlike to repeat here,
on behalf of the delegationsof Paraguayand Brazil, that in
order to achieve this goal we are ready at any moment to
enter into negotiations with all delegationsaround this
table.

52. The PRESlDENT (franslated jkonz French): I thank
the representative of Algeria for the kind words he
addressed to me, in which, I am sure, he has exaggerated
my qualities.
53. Mr. DE CARVALHO SILOS (Brazil): Mr. President,
allow me, first of all, to express to you on behalf of my
delegation our satisfaction at seeing you in the Chair of the
President of the Security Council. I am sure that all of us
here will profit in the month ahead from your competence
and wisdom. Permit me also to thank Ambassador Solano
Lopez of Paraguay for the very effective way in which he
discharged his duties as President of this Council during the
past month.

59. Now I come to my last remark. My delegation
sincerelyhopesthat at this time the Government of South
Africa will prefer to heed the wishesof the international
community, and follow a constructive path of moderation
and restraint, and that it will reconsiderits decisionnot to
comply with Security Council resolution245 (1968).
60. The PRESIDENT (translated porn French): I again
call on the representativeof Pakistan.

54. It is a source of gratification to my delegation to
second the very able presentation made by the representatives of Pakistan and Algeria of the draft resolution
contained in document S/8429, sponsored by Algeria,
Brazil, Ethiopia, India, Pakistan, Paraguay and Senegal, on
the question of South West Africans illegally tried and
sentenced in Pretoria.

61. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Mr. President, I apologize to
you and to the membersof the Security Council askingfor
the floor a secondtime, but I feel it necessaryto do so in
order to make good an inadvertent omission from my
statementwhich pertainsto the role of the representatives
of the Soviet Union and Hungary.

55. The views of my delegation on this question have
already been expressed in the intervention I made before
the Council on 19 February (1392nd meeting], Since then,
the Brazilian Government has informed the SecretaryGeneral that it has appealed to the Government of South
Africa, through the appropriate diplomatic channels, to
comply with Security Council resolution 24.5 (1968).

62. The sevenco-sponsors
acknowledgewith gratitude the
constructive co-operation extended. to them by
Mr. Morozov and Mr. Csatordayand the greatcontribution
which they madeto the formulation of the draft resolution
which we hope will commandaswide support aspossible,
and which at the same time makes it clear to the
Government of South Africa that the Security Council
would not refuse to act with determination should that
Governmentdefy its decisions,

56. With your permission, Mr. President, I should like to
make some comments, on behalf of my delegation and of
the delegation of Paraguay, on the draft resolution before
US. My delegation feels that this draft faithfully expresses
the continuing commitment of the United Nations to
human rights, to the rule of law and to racial equality

63. The PRESIDENT (translatedporn French): The next
speakeris the representativeof Nigeria. In accordancewith
the Council’sprevious decision,I invite him to take a place
at the Counciltable in order to makehis statement.
6

convincing if the problem is not seen in its true perspective,
that is, as a challenge to the authority of the Security
council.
Those countries which, like my own, place their
hopes in the United Nations to establish conditions under
which justice and respect for the obligations arising from
the Charter can be maintained will be disillusioned.

further illegal prosecutions, which have already been put
forward as the intention of South Africa.
80. As Ambassador Shahi has correctly and accurately
stated, several delegations not sponsors of the draft
resolution /S/8429/ have submitted their own conception
of specific proposals for Council action. Those proposals
are not intended in any way to weaken the Council’s
abhorrence of South Africa’s action or the Council’s will to
take appropriate action with respect thereto; rather they
embrace, in our view, a reflection of the law of the Charter
and a realistic appraisal of the best method to proceed in
order to achieve the practical result we all seek in common.

75. It is not the severity of the penalty to be imposed on
South Africa that bothers us. Whether such penalty should
be under Article 5 or Article 6 or under Chapter VII is not
at issue. Those who worry about this question have the
right and the opportunity to ask South Africa to comply
with resolution 245 (1968) and the present draft resolution, and thereby avoid the necessity for any action under
those articles and that chapter. What we must certainly
demand is that the Security Council retain its will and
capacity to act.

81. I am sure I speak on behalf of all of the five
delegations which have presented certain proposals in the
course of the informal discussions that have taken place, in
saying that we welcome the conciliatory spirit displayed by
the sponsors of the draft resolution before us and reciprocate it in full measure. We similarly are willing to consult on
all proposals, theirs and ours, in a spirit of flexibility and
with a genuine desire to achieve unanimity.

76. The draft resolution before you has the full support of
my Government, as it seeks to warn South Africa of its
obligations under the Charter. If compliance with those
obligations is lacking, the Security Council must, with
courage and humanity, face up to its responsibilities.

82. Mr. President, it is the tradition of the Council that
consultations are carried on under the leadership of the
President. We respect that provision and pledge you our
continued co-operation in carrying on such further consultations as you may see fit to conduct to reach agreement in
the light of the several statements that have been made here
today.

77. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): At the
very outset, I should like to associate myself with what
Ambassadors Shahi, Bouattoura and de Carvalho Silos have
so well said about you, Mr. President, and about your
illustrious predecessor, Ambassador Solano Lopez. I congratulate Ambassador Solano Lopez on his able stewardship
of our affairs, and express the conviction, based upon the
manner in which you, Mr. President, are already discharging
the duties of your office, that you will carry on with similar
objectivity and ability.

83. Mr. MOROZOV (Union of. Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): The Soviet delegation has
already had an opportunity to state in detail the position of
principle of the Soviet Union on the question raised before
the Security Council on the initiative of a large number of
African, Asian and Latin American States. We wish now
fully to confirm that position and to declare that we shall
in future invariably continue the struggle against the
inhuman policy conducted by the racist regime of the
South African republic.

78. I have listened with careful attention to what Ambassador Shahi has said in presenting the draft resolution on
behalf of the co-sponsors. I regard it as one of the most
outstanding sponsoring statements that I have heard since I
assumed my post on this Council, now almost three years
ago. This is not only because of the clarity of the presentation of the sponsors’ point of view, but, perhaps
more important, because of its spirit-a spirit of concern,
resolution and responsibility, and at the same time, of
conciliation. I extend to Ambassador Shahi my sincere
congratulations on his presentation. I am sure that if we all
pursue it in the proper spirit, it can provide the key to
common action at this stage of our consideration of the
grave problem before us. I also want to thank Ambassadors
Bouattoura and de Carvalho Silos for their valuable
contributions to our debate, as well as to express my
appreciation for the able intervention of the representative
of Nigeria.

84. The Pretoria regime, as has been eloquently shown ’
here by my colleagues, has ihegally arrested South West
African patriots who were defending the freedom, dignity
and independence of their homeland. Not only were those
arrests carried out in a territory which is not under the
jurisdiction of the Pretoria regime, but what is even more
important, they are attempts on the part of that regime to
subject individuals to repression for acts committed in a
country to which the jurisdiction of the South African
regime does not extend. Thus, from the legal point of view,
there has been a double violation: the seizure of persons in
a territory not under the jurisdiction
of the Pretoria
authorities and the charge of acts committed in a territory
which is not under the jurisdiction of that regime. The
point, therefore, is not whether the accusations levelled
against the thirty-three South West African patriots are
justified or not, or whether the sentences imposed on them
were severe or lenient. The point is that this whole action is
an altogether unprecedented violation &of international
legality and of the basic principles of international law and
of the Charter. It is from this standpoint that the solution
to the problem must be approached, as indeed it has quite

79. Nothing this Council does or fails to do should give
any aid or comfort to South Africa in its illegal application
of the so-called Terrorism Act to South West Africa, The
very best way to prevent South Africa from gaining any
comfort from what this Council does or fails to do is to
preserve the unanimity which has characterized our action
thus far. That unanimity is indispensable if we are to be
effective in our common objective of obtaining the prompt
release and repatriation of the South West Africans concerned, who have already been sentenced, and of preventing
8

correctly been by the representatives of Asian and African
countries.

necessary measures to ensure compliance with the Council’s
decision by the South African authorities.

85. This act is a manifestation of international gM@XiSm
on the part of the Pretoria rbgime. An end must be put to
this through the efforts of the United Nations.

91. We have said, however, that we are ready, for the sake
of solidarity and on account of our traditional support of
the progressive attitudes of the Asian and African members
of the Security Council, to support the draft resolution as
submitted, despite the shortcomings which we have referred
to.

86. There is hardly .a.ny need to repeat in detail that the
system of apartheid imposed by the Pretoria regime in the
territory of South West Africa, which the South African
racists are trying to transform again into their colony, has
now become synonymous with fascism and obscurantism, a
most shameful phenomenon, rightly abhorred by all progressive mankind. It is the duty of the United Nations,
including the Council, to defend the elementary rights of
peoples subjected to such unprecedented and arbitrary
action, and to put an end to the very possibility that the
facist and racist rabble can carry out such arbitrary and
illegal acts.

92. We shall vote in favour of the draft resolution on the
understanding that the appeal contained in paragraph 3 in
no way applies to countries which are striving-and have
proved this by their actions-to put an end to the criminal
policy of the racist r&gime in Pretoria, but applies to those
countries which continue to extend a helping hand to the
South African racists.
93. In conclusion, I should like to express the conviction
that the just cause for which the South West African people
are fighting will triumph, and that the sacred struggle of
those patriots for justice, freedom and their national
independence will end in victory for the progressive forces
and peoples,

87. The Soviet delegation is ready to support the draft
resolution submitted by the seven Afro-Asian and Latin
American countries [ibid/. We firmly support the demand
by the African and Asian States that an end should be put
immediately and without delay to the arbitrary measures
and the persecution of the inhabitants of South West
Africa, who are trying, in conformity with the Charter and
the many decisions taken by the United Nations, to ensure
respect for their legal rights to national independence.

94. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): It is not my
intention at this late hour to keep the Council. Certainly I
have no time now adequately to express our gratitude to
the Ambassador of Paraguay, who led our discussions last
month, or to thank him for his courtesy, steadiness and
impartiality. Nor have I time now adequately to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the Presi.
dency of the Security Council. We know you well. We have
full confidence in you. We shall seek to support you in this
matter and in all others that may come before the Council
during your Presidency.

88. We pay tribute to the efforts made by the African and
Asian countries to-bring about liberation of the South West
African patriots. We consider that a demand by the
Security Council, confirming the clear and unequivocal call
for the immediate release and repatriation of the condemned South West Africans, would be a useful step in
defence of the victims of the oppression meted out by
those unbridled racists.

95. Since, however, it was I who, on the last occasion
when this Council met, urged that there should be ful
consultation among us in the hope that we could act
unanimously within our capacity, I feel it right that I
should express to the Ambassador of Pakistan and the other
sponsors of the draft resolution who have made statements
today our very great appreciation of the spirit in which
they have spoken to us. We have carefully noted the
assurances they have given us.

89. We cannot, however, pass over the fact that the draft
resolution submitted for our consideration has certain
defects. We should like to note, for example, that the
appeal contained in operative paragraph 3 of the resolution
should rightly be addressed to those who hitherto have
supported the racists. We have already remarked, and wish
to recall at the present moment,
that many Western
Powers-above all the United States of America, Britain and
the Federal Republic of Germany-continue,
despite the
numerous appeals of the General Assembly, to maintain
close economic, trade and political relations with the South
African regime and to give aid and support of various kinds
to the racists. We shall not tire of repeating that it is this
assistance and support on the part of the main Western
Powers which enable the racist regime in Pretoria to ignore
the decisions of the United Nations concerning South West
Africa, and in particular the call for the release of the South
West African patriots and freedom fighters who were
illegally arrested and imprisoned in the Pretorian torturechambers.

96. It is right, of course, that we should consult. It was
with that in mind that we first put forward a request to the
sponsors-a request which was courteously received when I
myself had the opportunity of speaking to them a few days
ago. Then, following that request and the acceptance by the
sponsors of the necessity for consultations, a number of us
put forward specific proposals. We put them forward in
good faith. We assumed that they would be fully discussed.
Today we have the assurance of the sponsors that they are
prepared to enter into such discussionsJ We on our part give
full assurance of our readiness to co-operate in that spirit.

90. That is why we consider that the Security Council, in
its decision, should categorically demand that the Western
Powers we have mentioned, the main trading partners and
Political allies of the Republic of South Africa, take the

97. We therefore hope that without delay we can go
forward to consultations in the desire that we can still act
together and achieve full agreement and unanimity so that
our actions can have the maximum effect.
9

102. Though positive responses have already been
would, nevertheless, like to underline on behalf
delegation what I have already said in private
Mr. President during the last few days, that my delel
desirous, indeed finds it essential, that these cons\
be continued with a clear view towards obtain:
agreement which is so important for achieving the
for which we are here assembled, namely, the relear
South West African prisoners.

Finally, we too feel a sense of urgency. There is no
question on the part, .of my delegation and others with
which I have been in contact of desiring any delay
whatsoever. We hope that we can go forward to a
conclusion, as rapidly as possible. We too have in mind other
trials ‘that, so we hear, may take place under’ the condemned Terrorism Act. It is with that in mind, also, that we
hope ,that we hope that we can now.proceed to consultations and achieve the full effect of this Council acting in
unanimity.
98,

103. Mr. President, I also want to assure yc
sincerely that my delegation will go to such cons1
whenever you call for them, and that we shall gc
consultations giving yoc our full co-operation in a
flexibility and compromise I

99. Mr, RORCH (Denmark): &lr. President, in view of the
,lateness of the hour, I promise you I shall be very brief.
100. First, I want to congratulate you on your taking over
the Presidency of this Council and to assure you of our full
support.

104. The PRESIDENT (translated from French)
no further speakers on my list, The next meeting
place at three o’clock tomorrow afternoon.

101, Secondly, I also want t,o say here that I listened with
the greatest interest and appreciation to the several expressions of readiness to continue the private consultations
made by the sponsdrs of the draft resolution before us.
,

10

,’

Litho

in U.N.

Price:

The meeting rose at 2.15 p.m.

$U.S.

0.50

(or equivalent

in other

currencies)

35189-April

1
