S/PV.7352

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7352nd meeting

Monday, 22 December 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cherif . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Chad)

Members:

Argentina. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Omaish
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Sison

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

14-71134 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1471134*

S/PV.7352

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/507)
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
the President and the entire mission of Chad for their
leadership during this busy month of December. To our
Chilean colleagues, we wish the very best for January.
They can count on our support.
Today I would like to share our delegation’s views
on some areas where the Security Council has been
productive, while also looking ahead to what we will
need to continue to focus on in January and beyond into
the new year.
Although I joined my country’s delegation to the
United Nations very recently, I understand from my
team and from discussions with predecessors that this
has been a singularly demanding year in the Security
Council. This year the Council has deliberated on
continuing crises, such as in Syria; nascent or mounting
situations as in Mali and the Central African Republic;
deteriorating security across North Africa, including
acts of violence and terror committed by Boko Haram
and other groups; tensions in the Middle East and Gaza,
the emergent threat of Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and the risk of foreign terrorist fighters,
to name just a few.
That comes on top of the already significant work
required to mandate and oversee 16 peacekeeping
operations, 11 political and peacebuilding missions
and 15 sanctions committees. With this significant
workload, we know how difficult it can be to maintain
perspective and identify and focus on priority tasks.
As we examine what we have done over the month, we
must do so while looking forward.
The Al-Assad regime’s brutal tactics remain the root
cause of Syria’s problems today, including 12.2 million
people in need, nearly 5 million displaced and the rise
of ISIL. The humanitarian situation remains grim, with
2/23

22/12/2014

nearly 10 million people food-insecure and 11 million
in need of clean water and sanitation. Meanwhile,
ISIL’s terror in northern Syria continues to reduce
humanitarian access to 2.7 million Syrians in need of
aid. We and our coalition partners will continue our
efforts to degrade ISIL forces in Syria and Iraq.
We support Special Envoy De Mistura’s efforts to
help reduce violence and alleviate the suffering of the
Syrian people. The United States supports any ceasefire
that would provide relief to Syrian civilians and is
consistent with humanitarian principles, but ultimately
there can be no genuine and long-term stability so long
as President Al-Assad remains in power.
This year we saw the illegal annexation of Crimea
and the deaths of 298 people in the shoot-down of
Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 in Ukraine. We have held 27
meetings in the Security Council this year on Ukraine,
and while the situation has indeed evolved over the
year, the root of the problem remains the same. We
are similarly concerned about the situation in Georgia,
and we will need to watch carefully the ramifications
of Russia’s treaty with the Abkhaz region. The United
States supports the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Georgia.
Over the past 12 months, in South Sudan the Council
has witnessed tragic, deplorable and heartbreaking
events caused by the country’s political and military
leaders. The young nation has plunged into a manmade political, security and humanitarian catastrophe.
The international community has responded with a
united voice, strong regional leadership through the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the African Union, hundreds of millions of dollars
in humanitarian assistance, and a United Nations
peacekeeping mission — the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan — made up of 68 troop-contributing
countries, resulting in thousands of lives being saved
and famine averted in 2014. But the coming weeks
and months will be critical. In the absence of the
establishment and implementation of a credible peace
agreement, the risks of famine, State failure and the
regionalization of the conflict are all too real. It will be
incumbent on all of us to make peace in South Sudan a
top international priority in 2015.
On the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
will need to pursue operations against the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR) once
14-71134

22/12/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

the 2 January deadline passes. We understand that
MONUSCO will be in a difficult position in the months
ahead as the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has pushed for a significant reduction in the
Mission’s troop strength, while simultaneously needing
significant logistical support from the Mission to assist
in elections and to combat the Allied Democratic Forces
and the FDLR. Any coming changes to MONUSCO’s
size should be based on a military assessment, and not
on political considerations.
We also urge Council members to continue to
support the Government of Yemen in its efforts to restore
the country’s stability. The peaceful participation of the
Houthis, and that of all of Yemen’s diverse communities,
is important to the ongoing political process, but the
Houthis must engage with the Government in good
faith. The use of violence by any party to achieve
political objectives is unacceptable. This month, the
Council sent a strong message that the international
community is serious about the implementation of
sanctions against those obstructing Yemen’s political
transition. We will continue to identify individuals who
fuel violence and interfere with the transition, and will
impose further targeted sanctions on them.
We also strongly condemn last week’s bomb
attack in Rada, Yemen, which killed dozens of people,
including at least 15 girls riding a school bus. The
Yemeni people have lived with senseless violence for
too long. Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula remains
the gravest threat to Yemen’s security, and we remain
committed to our partnership with Yemen to counter
the shared threat posed by Al-Qaida in the Arabian
Peninsula.
Unfortunately, the vicious attack last week in
Yemen was not the only senseless, large-scale act of
brutal violence perpetrated against children. We were
all horrified by the attacks on the school in Peshawar,
Pakistan, last week that took the lives of so many
innocent children. We condemn in the strongest
possible terms this horrific attack. By targeting students
and teachers, those terrorists have once again shown
their depravity. We stand with the people of Pakistan
and reiterate the commitment of the United States to
supporting the Government Pakistan in its efforts to
combat terrorism and extremism and to promote peace
and stability in the region.
Despite these and other crises faced over the past
year, my delegation continues to believe that through
our collective efforts, we can achieve success in

S/PV.7352

overcoming these challenges. I would like to thank
Argentina, Australia, Luxembourg, the Republic
of Korea and Rwanda for their service to the United
Nations and the international community over the past
two years. My delegation truly appreciates the spirit of
cooperation and professionalism which they and their
Council teams have all exhibited. We wish them well
in the New Year and hope that long vacations for all are
in order.
To our incoming Council colleagues from Angola,
Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and Venezuela, we say
“welcome”. We have much work to do together. I wish
everyone happy holidays and a happy new year.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank Ambassador Cherif and the Chadian
team for the superb work they have done in December.
It is still a little early to uncork the champagne because
our programme has filled up beyond the symbolic date
set by this wrap-up debate, but we know that we are
in good hands in dealing with this late-year urgent
business.
This monthly debate is obviously a bit unusual, and
somewhat moving and special because in a few days
we will say farewell to five marvelous colleagues and
their teams. I tell them all — Maria, Joon, Sylvie, Gary,
Eugène-Richard and Olivier — that I have thoroughly
enjoyed working with them, as has my team. Two years
of shared living in the Council have forged strong
links that will survive the separation. For us, it has
been an honour to work with them in a body that is
so important to our Organization. We have not always
agreed on everything. France, a very active, activist
and even overactive penholder, has asked a great deal
of them with the texts it has submitted, with sometimes
very ambitious deadlines. They have always responded
with great enthusiasm and expertise, faithful to their
interests and values and to the desire to elevate us
collectively. They have taken important initiatives and
contributed their ideas, for which we warmly thank
them. The time allotted to me here does not allow me
to say a word to each of them individually, but we will
have many opportunities to do so in the coming days.
It is also a rather special debate because of its date.
This being December, it is an opportunity to offer a
status update on the past year and to outline prospects
for 2015. I shall begin with two topics on which we
have made insufficient progress because we have been
unable to settle our differences.

14-711343/23

S/PV.7352

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

That is the case of Syria, obviously. Certainly,
the work of eliminating Syria’s military chemical
capabilities advanced in 2014, although there remain
gray areas concerning the regime’s initial statements
and concerning the repeated use of chlorine gas.
Certainly, the Council opened new paths to humanitarian
assistance by adopting important resolutions upon
the initiative of Luxembourg, Australia and Jordan,
to which I pay tribute. However, the Council remains
divided on the political aspect of the crisis. That is
why we must support the ongoing efforts of Staffan de
Mistura. We hope that they will bear first fruits in 2015
and reopen a space for a political settlement.
The same can be said regarding Ukraine, where
Russia’s refusal to listen to the very clear messages of
other Council members and the General Assembly has
contributed to tensions and the impasse. Likewise, we
are concerned about Russia’s initiatives to incorporate
Abkhazia and South Ossetia, efforts that challenge
international norms. We hope that in 2015 Russia will
engage in real de-escalation efforts, both in terms of
rhetoric and in practice; we actively encourage such
de-escalation. President Hollande visited Moscow to
promote a change in Russia’s approach, and France
will continue to seek ways, without undermining its
principles, to improve relations between Russia and its
neighbours.
As significant as they are, those divisions have
not, to date — and I hope also in 2015 — prevented the
Council from acting in many other crises, some of which
sprung up in 2014. Such is the case regarding terrorism,
our mobilization against the terrorist group Daesh and
the Ebola outbreak, which has been judged to constitute
a threat to international peace and security, as well as
the crises in Africa. I will address two examples: the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In the Central African Republic, joint
action on the part of the African, French, European and
United Nations forces have helped to avoid the spectre
of genocide, 20 years after the one in Rwanda. That
mobilization — which took place on the initiative of
France, but with the support of all — is a tribute to the
United Nations. That effort must continue in 2015 to
help the country get out of the rut that it finds itself in.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, vigorous
action on the part of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and the Force Commander has
served to enhance the image of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic

4/23

22/12/2014

Republic of the Congo. Crucial deadlines lie ahead in
early 2015, including on commitments with regard to
military actions against armed groups, starting with
the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda, if
they do not disarm; the reconfiguration of the United
Nations presence, taking into account the strategic
review under way; and the role of the United Nations in
the light of the presidential elections.
Boko Haram’s crimes can no longer go unpunished.
France supports the countries of the region. It encourages
regional initiatives to halt that terrorist organization.
The crisis in Gaza this summer was a new and
tragic reminder that the status quo is not an option.
France believes that the Security Council must play its
part in relaunching the peace process and in guiding the
parties to a negotiated settlement. France will continue
working with all parties in search of a consensus text,
with that in mind.
The year 2015 will be marked by two important
events that we should not miss: the review of
peacekeeping operations and the seventieth anniversary
of the United Nations. In last month’s wrap-up session
(see S/PV.7325), my delegation spoke about the review
of peacekeeping operations, which I will not repeat,
except to highlight its timeliness and state that it
provides a unique opportunity to improve an instrument
that, although it was not foreseen in the Charter, has
become the most familiar face of the United Nations
after, of course, our Secretary-General. France will
make every effort in that regard.
The year 2015 will also mark the seventieth
anniversary of our Organization. France intends
therefore to promote its initiative with regard to the veto
in cases of mass atrocities. It also calls for significant
progress on the issue of the expansion of the Security
Council.
Finally, I will mention a subject close to the heart of
my delegation, namely, the attention focused on human
rights issues in the daily work of the Council, and in
particular, the situation in North Korea. Violations by
the North Korean regime, as reported by the Commission
of Inquiry on human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, constitute, both in their severity
and their magnitude, a threat to international peace and
security. That situation justifies the full mobilization of
the Security Council.
I conclude by again thanking our Chadian
presidency, expressing my gratitude to the outgoing
14-71134

22/12/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

five States and rejoicing in soon be able to welcome,
around the table, the five newly elected members, to
whom I wish good luck and pledge the full cooperation
of my country.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): Let me first of all
congratulate you, Sir, and the entire Chadian delegation
on the great success of this month’s presidency.
Although we have had a very tight schedule, you have
led our work efficiently with your able leadership.
On the Middle East dossier, much work has been
carried out by the Council in December and, indeed,
throughout the year. However, as all who are present
around the table realize, much more work remains to
be done in the year ahead. In Syria, we are particularly
concerned by the continuously increasing humanitarian
challenges and their regional and global repercussions.
In this month’s briefing (see S/PV.7342), UnderSecretary-General Amos reported to the Council
that the number of Syrians requiring humanitarian
assistance has now reached some 12 million people.
In that regard, we welcome the adoption of resolution
2191 (2014), enabling the continuation of critical
cross-border humanitarian access. Of course, without
a negotiated political solution to the present conflict,
no amount of humanitarian support will suffice. We
sincerely hope that the efforts of Special Envoy De
Mistura will establish a basis for a sustainable political
process in the near future.
Turning to African issues, while we continue to
tackle conflicts on a country-specific basis, it is also
important that the Council take a strategic look from
a regional perspective and think of ways to strengthen
collaboration with regional organizations. In that
regard, the open debate on the relationship between
the United Nations and the African Union (AU) (see
S/PV.7343) served as a valuable opportunity to identify
challenges facing peace efforts in Africa and to outline
a joint approach to addressing them. Those discussions
reminded us that the strategic partnership between the
two bodies, especially in the areas of capacity-building
and financing, is instrumental in finding appropriate
solutions to African crises. As stated in the African
Union’s fiftieth anniversary declaration, we hope that
the Security Council and the AU will continue to work
towards achieving the goal of a conflict-free Africa by
the year 2020.
In the same vein, the high-level open debate on
terrorism and cross-border crime also highlighted the
interconnected nature of terrorism and transnational

S/PV.7352

crime in the Sahel region, Libya, Syria and Iraq. It
also demonstrated the great need for such issues to
be addressed holistically. The adoption of resolution
2195 (2014) played an important role in bringing the
Council’s attention to the issue of an increasingly
dangerous and troubling nexus between terrorism and
transnational organized crime.
Before concluding, although we have a few
important meetings ahead, I would like to take the
opportunity to thank all members of the Council as the
Republic of Korea’s term in the Security Council draws
to an end this month. Serving on the Security Council
these past two years has been a great privilege and a
rewarding experience. During the past two years the
Council has collectively made considerable progress
towards building peace and stability in many parts of
the world. But we have also been bogged down by some
of the most pressing crises of our time. My delegation is
honoured and also humbled to have been a part of that
unified effort to bring more peace to the world.
I would also like to express sincere appreciation to
all of the Council members for their close collaboration
and friendship during the past two years. I am also
grateful to the Secretariat staff for their kind assistance
and support. My special thanks go to the support staff,
including the translators, interpreters and security
personnel. Although we will no longer be on the
Council, the Republic of Korea will continue to work
closely with the members of the Council to safeguard
peace and security across the globe. We are confident
that the Council’s ongoing efforts will bring our world
closer to peace. I wish all members the best in their
future endeavours.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): As
2014 draws to a close and the Chadian presidency of the
Security Council reaches the end of its term, I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, and your entire team for
the excellent role you have played in guiding our work.
Since this is the last wrap-up session in which
we are taking part as a non-permanent member of the
Council, I hope you will allow me to look back over
the Council’s activities not only during the month of
December, but also for the period of 2013-2014. A
number of issues that were part of this month’s agenda
have also concerned us over the past two years. That is
the case with Syria, the Sudan, South Sudan, Darfur, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic, the Middle East peace process and Libya, but
also with regard to a number of matters to which Chad

14-711345/23

S/PV.7352

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

quite rightly drew particular attention, such as counterterrorism and cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations.
Throughout Luxembourg’s first term on the
Security Council, we have tried not to lose sight of the
fact that behind every agenda item, and behind every
statistic in the Secretary-General’s reports, there are
human beings and individual destinies that are directly
affected by the results of our action or inaction. Holding
a seat on the Security Council is a very special and
grave responsibility. That awareness has guided our
actions throughout our term, especially with respect to
the question of Syria. Regrettably, the Syrian situation,
which continues to deteriorate, represents the most
egregious failure of the international community with
respect to the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.
The determination of the Syrian regime to repress
all opposition, the subsequent rise of terrorism and
the persistent differences among the great Powers
have prevented a political solution to the crisis up
to this point, plunging the Syrian population into an
endless calvary. In such difficult conditions, we did
everything possible to ensure the right of the affected
populations to humanitarian assistance. The joint work
undertaken, first with our Australian friends and then
with our Jordanian friends, with a view to improving
the situation of civilians and access to humanitarian
aid was reflected in the presidential statement of
2 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15), and subsequently in
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014).
The mechanism for delivering humanitarian aid across
borders and conflict lines established by resolution
2165 (2014) and extended for a year by resolution 2191
(2014) has proven effective. We hope that scaled up
efforts on the part of the international community will
allow more people in need to be reached.
At the same time, we take this opportunity to renew
our call on all parties to the conflict, in particular
the Syrian authorities, to fulfil their responsibility to
protect their population and to end their violations of
international humanitarian law and their abuses of
human rights. We call on them in particular to end
the violations and abuses committed against millions
of children by implementing the recommendations on
Syria adopted on 26 November by the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
But we should have no illusions — absent a political
solution to the Syrian conflict, there can be no end in

6/23

22/12/2014

sight to the tragedy that has befallen the Syrian people.
We hope that the coming year will prove decisive in
that regard and that the efforts undertaken by Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura will allow the contours of a
solution to the crisis to emerge.
Over the course of the past two years, the Council
has taken important decisions, and it can be said that its
action has prevented the worst. By way of example, I will
mention the establishment of an Intervention Brigade
within United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and the creation of new United Nations stabilization
missions, first in Mali and later in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where there was reason to fear
a new genocide, which was an unacceptable risk just as
we were commemorating the twentieth anniversary of
the genocide in Rwanda. We were correct to act, but in
all those cases, sustained and vigilant support from the
international community has been essential. The same
holds true for Somalia.
Our work in the Security Council has been in
keeping with the convictions and priorities that
Luxembourg has long upheld in the United Nations.
Our approach to addressing crisis situations, inspired
by former Secretary-General Kofi Annan, has been
a holistic one that views the links among security,
development and human rights as the best way to
establish lasting peace and maintain peace in postconflict settings. In that context, we have insisted on
the protection of civilians, respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law, the question of women,
peace and security as well as the fight against impunity,
highlighting the fundamental role of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). The fact that the Council was
prevented from referring the Syrian situation to the
Prosecutor of the ICC will surely remain a black stain
for all those who, like us, saw such a referral as part of
a preventive logic that could have dissuaded the parties
to the Syrian conflict, including terrorist groups such
as Daesh, from committing further war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
We have made every effort to use the full array
of tools available to us to promote the protection of
children — first, of course, within the context of
our term as Chair of the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, but also by
ensuring that the language concerning the protection
of children affected by conflict was inserted into all
decisions and positions adopted by the Council. If our

14-71134

22/12/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

statements on the subject struck some as repetitious, it
is because children are unfortunately the first victims
of contemporary conflicts. That is why we stress the
importance of ensuring that the protection of children is
taken into account across the spectrum of the Council’s
work and why we insist on the implementation of the
Council’s resolutions and presidential statements on the
issue, most recently resolution 2143 (2014), adopted on
7 March.
Faced with growing threats to international
peace and security, it is essential to strengthen the
effectiveness of the Security Council. Along with others,
we promoted innovations in the Council’s working
methods to that end. Our time on the Council has also
strengthened our support for the French initiative for
a code of conduct under which the five permanent
members of the Security Council would voluntarily and
collectively commit not to resort to the veto in cases of
mass atrocities. We have come to recognize the degree
to which the use of the veto or even the threat of its use
weighs upon the Council’s work.
The illegal annexation of the Crimea and the
violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine cast a sharp light on the limitations of the
Security Council under its current structure, despite
the provisions of Article 27, paragraph 3, of the
Charter of the United Nations. The example of Ukraine
is unfortunately only one of many that prove that
additional efforts are required to more fully take into
account the importance of conflict prevention in the
work of the Security Council. Preventing conflicts will
certainly contribute to restoring the credibility of the
Security Council. In that regard, we place high hopes
on the Secretary-General’s Rights Up Front initiative.
We hope that more frequent use of briefings by the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special
Envoys of the Secretary-General for the prevention of
genocide and the responsibility to protect will enable
the Council to more accurately anticipate the outbreak
of crises and therefore to take appropriate conflict
prevention measures more quickly. It is also in that
spirit that we welcome the open information meeting
that the Council will hold this afternoon on the situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Over the past two years, Luxembourg has committed
its resources and resolve to the service of international
peace and international security. We end our term
of office with a sense of mission accomplished, but
also with a feeling of humility, more than ever aware

S/PV.7352

of the limits of the Council’s actions and of the fact
that we have assumed that responsibility over a twoyear period on behalf of all the States members of the
General Assembly. We are coming to the end of our
term office with a feeling of great gratitude with regard
to colleagues, permanent and non-permanent members,
with whom we have closely cooperated during this
period of very intense work.
We will now continue to work outside the Security
Council. We hope that the good practices established
in terms of transparency of the Council’s work,
particularly these monthly wrap-up meetings, will be
continued in the future, and that we will benefit in our
turn from the transparency that has characterized our
work with regard to the entire membership over the past
two years
In conclusion, I would just like to wish the newly
elected members — Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand,
Spain and Venezuela — success and satisfaction in
carrying out their mandates. Finally, we would like to
extend our best wishes to Ambassador Barros Melet
and the entire Chilean team during their presidency of
the Security Council in January 2015.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): Mr. President, I
wish to convey my delegation’s appreciation to you and
your team for an efficient and productive presidency
of the Council during this month. We are approaching
the end of 2014, arguably the most intensive year the
Council has ever had. I wish we could conclude this
year with a sense of accomplishment, but that is not
the case. The year 2015 will inherit the largest number
of refugees and displaced people ever, significant gaps
in accountability and ending impunity, a mutating
and expanding threat of terrorism, and an even more
diverse geography of conflicts that demand our urgent
attention.
Six months ago at the Asia Society, the SecretaryGeneral pleaded with the international community not
to abandon the people of Syria and the region to waves
of cruelty and devastation, and offered a six-point
plan ahead. Barely on one point — the destruction of
chemical weapons — progress has been achieved. The
people of Syria continue to suffer displacement, torture,
enforced disappearances, sieges, starvation and barrel
bombs at the hands of the tyrannical Al-Assad’s regime
and murderous terrorist groups. Humanitarian access
continues to be denied, convoys delayed and vital
medicines confiscated, while doctors and humanitarian
workers remain under constant attack.

14-711347/23

S/PV.7352

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

Resolution 2139 (2013) has been ignored or violated
on almost all points. Protected by a series of vetoes,
those who are causing such extraordinary destruction
and devastation continue to enjoy impunity. We
welcome the renewal last week for one year of the
provisions of resolution 2165 (2014), and thank the
penholders, Australia, Jordan and Luxembourg, for
their passionate and patient work throughout the year in
the face of that unprecedented humanitarian crisis. We
hope that the efforts of United Nations Special Envoy
for Syria Staffan de Mistura will lead to life-saving
solutions. We stress, however, that local freezes should
not become just another surrender-or-starve instrument
in the hands of the Al-Assad regime, or anyone else for
that matter.
The year 2014 has reminded us all how easily hopes
can be overturned and tenuous stories of success can
give way to more destruction and bloodshed. Thus, in
spite of the most competent and inclusive Government
in its history, Yemen is again at a dangerous crossroad
where peaceful transition and vital reforms can be
overtaken by more violence, growing sectarianism
and fragmentation of the State. A continued united
and firm stance and action on the part of the Council,
in cooperation with Yemen’s neighbours, the Gulf
Cooperation Council countries, is paramount to
preventing such a negative outcome. If necessary, the
Council should be ready to expand the use of sanctions
regime, including new listings.
For a year now, the Council has been seized of the
situation in the youngest of United Nations Member
States, South Sudan, where personal ambitions and
complete disregard for the needs of the young nation
on the part of the country’s leaders have crippled
the country and caused another major humanitarian
crisis. The continuous calls of the Council and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development to stop
fighting have been ignored. In the absence of tangible
progress, the Council should not shy away from taking
action against those impeding the peace process,
including sanctions and a full arms embargo, as a
means of protecting civilians in a situation where their
own leaders are unable and unwilling to protect.
The transformation of the African-led International
Support Mission for the Central African Republic
into the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic ,
supported by the ongoing efforts of Operation Sangaris
and the European Union, have brought renewed hopes

8/23

22/12/2014

for an end to violence in the Central African Republic.
The much-too-easy access to illicit arms, the control by
the opposing militant groups of the extraction and sale
of diamonds and gold, the weakness of State institutions
and a pervasive sense of impunity remain an explosive
mix, however, that could erupt in renewed violence
any time. It is essential, therefore, that we do not lower
the Council’s guard by indulging in a premature sense
of a mission accomplished. It is also essential that the
sanctions regime, including the arms embargo, be fully
implemented by all, including by the Central African
Republic’s neighbours.
Since the most recent Council meeting on this
issue (see S/PV.7311), the situation in eastern Ukraine
and Crimea has not improved. Russian arms and
ammunition, as well as mercenary fighters, have
continued to cross into Ukrainian territory under
various guises, prolonging the conflict, which has
already displaced over 1 million people. In spite of the
ceasefire, barely a day has passed without casualties
on the Ukrainian side. Russia continues to block
an expansion of the Organizations for Security and
Cooperation border monitoring mission. The signals
that Russia intends to deploy offensive nuclear systems
in Crimea, in contravention of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapon, are profoundly
disturbing.
We reiterate our position that the Minsk agreements
must be implemented in full and by all parties. A
durable solution to that conflict can be based only on
full respect for the independence, sovereignty, unity
and territorial integrity of Ukraine. The issue should
remain on the Council agenda with regular updates,
including on the human rights situation. We welcome
a decision of the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights to continue reporting on the human
rights situation in Ukraine in 2015, because in the
occupied Crimea the indigenous Tatar population
continues to suffer persecution, while the separatistheld areas of eastern Ukraine remain black holes
of impunity and lawlessness, with extrajudicial and
summary killings, torture, intimidation, ill-treatment,
extortion, abductions for ransom and forced labour as
the trademarks of pro-Russian militants.
Lithuania is also deeply concerned by Russia’s
continued efforts to undermine Georgia’s sovereignty
and independence. The so-called treaty on alliance and
strategic partnership signed recently between Russia
and the region of Abkhazia undermines all efforts to

14-71134

22/12/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

find a solution to the conflict based on the principle of
Georgia’s territorial integrity within its internationally
recognized borders, and constitutes a step towards the
annexation of Abkhazia by Russia. There are very real
fears that a similar scenario will be played out in the
Tskhinvali region of South Ossetia.
Let me now briefly move on to a few thematic
issues. In its resolution 2117 (2013), the Council
linked the illicit trade and misuse of small arms and
light weapons with negative consequences on human
rights, humanitarian efforts and development, and in
particular the protection of civilian populations. Next
year the Secretary-General is to submit a report on
small arms and light weapons. This, combined with
the entry into force of the Arms Trade Treaty, offers
an important opportunity to improve the protection of
civilians, as well as those who are there to help them on
the ground — humanitarian workers, medical staff and
peacekeepers.
The open debate on terrorism and cross-border
crime initiated by Chad (see S/PV.7351) reminded us
all of the importance of breaking the nefarious links
between criminality and terrorism and disrupting
terrorism financing, which relies on an increasing
variety of sources. The urgency of working out
effective counter-narratives to expose the terrorists for
what they are — nothing else but despicable rapists,
murderers and executioners of sleeping children,
helpless elderly, women and girls — cannot be stressed
enough. In fact, the need for a breakthrough in the ever
more sophisticated battle for the hearts and minds of
potential terrorism recruits has never been more urgent.
Finally, with regard to the sanctions regimes,
which are more numerous than at any time before in
the Council’s history, we remain of a view that the
Australian draft resolution was a missed opportunity
to improve the application of that important tool
at the Council’s disposal to sharpen the impact on
the perpetrators, while at the same time improving
necessary assistance and capacity building to the
affected States. We appreciate Australia’s efforts in that
direction.
I would like to conclude by joining my colleagues
in welcoming the incoming non-permanent members
of the Security Council, and conveying our deepest
appreciation to the outgoing teams of Australia, Korea,
Rwanda, Argentina and Luxembourg for their dedicated
work and collegiality during this incredibly busy year.

S/PV.7352

They will be missed. And I wish all the best to Chile for
its forthcoming presidency in January.
Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Security Council has had a very intense month. We
adopted eight resolutions, including ones on combating
terrorism and cross-border criminal organizations,
and issued four presidential statements on the Central
African region and the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA),
among other items. China greatly appreciates Chad’s
proactive and effective work at the helm of the Council,
and its successful leadership of our work.
With regard to the Council’s work this month,
I would like to focus on three issues. The first is the
situation in the Middle East. China is deeply concerned
about the continuing tension between Palestine and
Israel and the recurring bloodshed that has resulted in
many innocent civilian casualties. We urge Palestine
and Israel to exercise restraint and take steps to ease
tensions, rebuild mutual trust and restart the peace
talks. China has been closely following the peace
process in the Middle East, and has pushed for peace and
negotiations. We firmly support using the good offices
of the international community and the due role of the
Council. We welcome the draft resolution proposed by
Jordan on the question of Palestine and Israel and hope
the Council will act as soon as possible to respond to
the legitimate concerns of the Arab countries.
Secondly, on the question of Africa, the Council
has discussed items on Libya, South Sudan, the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the situation in Central Africa and the LRA.
At the initiative of Chad, as President of the Council,
the Council held an open meeting (see S/PV.7343)
and adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2014/27
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU), in which the Council expressed
its wish to establish more effective relations with the
Peace and Security Council of the AU and called on
the international community to increase its efforts
to improve peace and security in Africa. China has
always been a constructive participant in that area, and
is ready to work with the international community to
promote enhanced cooperation with the African Union
in peacekeeping and help Africa achieve its goal of a
conflict-free continent by 2020.
Thirdly, regarding the issue of counter-terrorism,
the recent numerous terrorist attacks have taken a
heavy toll. Terrorism now takes place in broader

14-711349/23

S/PV.7352

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

geographical areas, and the means that terrorists resort
to are increasingly cruel. That presents a serious threat
to international peace and security. The international
community must adhere to uniform criteria in dealing
with this and abide by the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, respecting countries’
sovereignty, while the United Nations and the Security
Council must play the leading role. We must take
steps to cut off terrorist financing and channels for
recruiting members and obtaining equipment. We
should recognize the importance of the links between
terrorist and criminal organizations, and prevent and
combat terrorist organizations that use the Internet and
information and communications technology in order to
engage in terrorist activities, with a view to maintaining
international and regional peace and stability.
In conclusion, I would like to wish Chile the very
best when it assumes the presidency of the Council in
January.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and
the Chadian mission, on steering the Council through
a busy and compressed month. The two open debates
(see S/PV.7343 and S/PV.7351) and the Sahel briefing
(see S/PV. 7335) brought the African perspective into
sharper focus.
Holding this wrap-up in public provides an
opportunity for reviewing the year and looking ahead to
2015. Looking back, there have been a number of issues
on which the Council has shown clarity of purpose and
taken decisive action, but there have also been topics
on which it has been divided and therefore unable to
respond effectively. Our work on counter-terrorism, and
in particular in response to the abhorrent threat of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, is an example of an
issue on which the Council has had a shared analysis.
Resolutions adopted this year have sought to address
terrorist financing through kidnaps for ransom and oil
sales. We have also tackled the issue of foreign terrorist
fighters and, just last Friday, the link between terrorism
and transnational organized crime. The Council’s many
press statements in response to terrorist outrages, most
recently following the sickening attack in Peshawar,
Pakistan, are quickly agreed on. Council members
share the same determination to combat all forms of
terrorism, considering it one of the most serious threats
to international peace and security.

10/23

22/12/2014

Another area where we have made progress is on
the issue of Syrian chemical weapons and responding
to the humanitarian crisis in Syria. Both have required
sustained pressure and attention on the part of the
Council in order to ensure follow-up action, and we
will need to maintain that focus following the adoption
of resolution 2191 (2014). There has also been progress
on peacekeeping. In the Central African Republic, the
transition from an African Union mission to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic was
considerably smoother than the equivalent transition
last year in Mali.
More generally, we have held a number of debates
and retreats on peacekeeping this year that have
revealed the shared analysis that peacekeeping needs
a close re-examination. The use of new technology,
the size, configuration and capabilities of missions,
the ever more complex operational environments,
the speed of deployment, exit strategies and effective
planning — all these are challenges that United Nations
peacekeeping will have to address in order to develop
a model of peacekeeping for the twenty-first century.
The Secretary-General’s peace operations review is
looking at all those issues and more. I look forward to
the Council’s consideration of the review next year, and
hope that we can maintain a shared analysis as we do it.
On the debit side of the ledger, the Council has
still not been able to make progress on the political
aspects of the Syrian conflict. We all agree that the
only sustainable solution is a political one, built on the
Geneva communiqué (resolution 2118 (2013), annex II),
but so far we have failed to take the sort of action that
creates conditions conducive to that end. Meanwhile,
President Al-Assad continues to wage an indiscriminate
and brutal war on his own people.
Despite the international outcry at Russia’s
illegal intervention in Ukraine, the situation remains
unresolved. Everybody has lost as a result, and States
with big neighbours will be the warier for it. Nor
have Russian actions been limited to Ukraine. The
signature of an agreement between Russia and the
Georgian region of Abkhazia on 24 November reminds
us that what we have seen over the past year is part
of a pattern by Russia of systematic interference in its
neighbours’ domestic affairs and undermining of their
sovereignty and territorial integrity. The world has to
respond when countries so blatantly disregard respect
for international borders and norms, and the Council

14-71134

22/12/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

should be the guardian of those norms when it comes to
maintaining international peace and security, as set out
in the Charter of the United Nations.
To conclude, I would like to add a third category, in
which the Council shares the same analysis of an issue
but the action it takes does not have the desired effect.
That has been true in Darfur and South Sudan, and so
far, at least, in Libya and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The reasons are different in each case, but
we will need to address each of them in the early part
of 2015.
As this is almost the last meeting in the Chamber
of your presidency and of 2014, Mr. President, I
would like to take the opportunity to note and thank
the five outgoing members — Argentina, Australia,
Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea and Rwanda — for
their extraordinary and valuable contributions over
the past two years. There is not time to enumerate
all the achievements. Suffice it to say that while it
is sometimes alleged that the permanent members
dominate all Security Council business, these members
have all shown that that is far from the case. Let me
also welcome our five new colleagues, joining us on
1 January. We look forward to working with all of them.
I wish the Chilean presidency the best of luck in the
month of January.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): This month, the Council’s agenda has been
unusually dense. We are grateful to you personally,
Mr. President, and to the entire Chadian delegation for
skilfully and effectively discharging your presidential
functions.
As per custom, Council members have been
addressing the issues of the Middle East and North
Africa. In the context of the situation in Yemen, the
pressing task of the international community remains
working with the Yemeni political forces in the interests
of reaching mutually acceptable solutions on the path to
reform and transformation, founded on the international
basis of the transitional period and abstaining from the
use of force.
We believe that the remaining outstanding issues
on the Syrian chemical dossier, which are technical in
their nature, will be successfully and swiftly resolved
with the participation of the competent experts of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
That matter has long ceased being of an emergency
nature and has nothing to do with the Security Council’s

S/PV.7352

mandate. A genuine, as opposed to an imaginary
concern, is the possibility of terrorists and militants
gaining access to chemical weapons. There is growing
proof that they have been using these chemicals. The
main hurdle to the delivery of humanitarian assistance
to the war-ravaged Syrian population is the growing
spread of terrorist groups, above all the Islamic State
and the Al-Nusra Front, and the expansion of the
territory under their control, and as a result, the absence
of humanitarian access to many territories.
Russia supported the adoption of resolution 2191
(2014), extending the mandate of the United Nations
humanitarian mechanism to Syria’s external borders.
We call on United Nations humanitarian structures
to cooperate fully with Damascus, including through
timely notification of the size and nature of the
humanitarian cargoes concerned. The main thing is
not to forget that the key to success and work on the
humanitarian track lies in talks between the Syrian
parties on achieving a political settlement to the crisis.
A growing concern is the situation on the
Palestinian-Israeli track. We are ready to work in
the interests of relaunching negotiations, both at the
bilateral level and in the context of the Middle East
Quartet of mediators. The draft resolution submitted by
Jordan could be a launch pad for resuming PalestinianIsraeli talks. We are ready to support the draft. We
believe that the Quartet needs to be mobilized, not in
its old format but with the involvement of the League
of Arab States as a fully fledged member, since it is
the Arab Peace Initiative that opens the way towards a
sustainable long-term settlement.
In December, the Security Council’s attention
shifted to the issue of Africa. While the overall
positions of Council members converge or overlap on
the situations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Central African Republic and the Central African
region as a whole, the same cannot be said of a number
of other issues. These include the continuing serious
differences on the Sudan cluster, including issues of
settlement of the armed conflict in South Sudan, the
state of inter-Sudanese relations, the problem of Abyei,
the normalization of the situation in Darfur and the
southern states of the Sudan, and the prospects for the
consideration of the Darfur dossier in the International
Criminal Court. There is still no consensus on the
genesis of the current grave crisis in Libya, which
sowed the seeds for many of the problems in Mali and
the Sahara-Sahel zone overall. With the Council so

14-7113411/23

S/PV.7352

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

overloaded with current problems in Africa and beyond,
we find it anachronistic for the Council to discuss and
adopt a biannual presidential statement on the Lord’s
Resistance Army, which has largely been marginalized
and poses no clear or present threat.
We welcome the adoption of counter-terrorist
resolution 2195 (2014), the first to focus the attention
of the international community on the need to
comprehensively combat the financing of terrorism
through various forms of organized crime and illegal
drug trafficking. We have long pointed to the problem
of the nexus of terrorism and organized crime in various
parts of the world, from the Sahel to Afghanistan. We
look forward to the Secretary-General’s report on the
efforts of various United Nations offices in response to
that threat on the basis of information from the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Group,
and other United Nations specialized agencies.
In relation to Ukraine, I call once again for the
full implementation of the Minsk agreement. As to
the signing of a strategic partnership agreement with
Abkhazia, that treaty is part of the framework of
numerous other bilateral agreements that we have
signed with these two independent States. Therefore,
that issue should not be considered within the Security
Council.
The United States delegation’s initiative, supported
by a number of delegations, on holding a yearly outcome
meeting of the Security Council to review the actions of
the past 12 months seems a good idea.
In conclusion, we should also like to express our
thanks for the constructive work in the Council for the
past two years of the delegations of Argentina, Australia,
Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea and Rwanda. We
welcome the delegations of Angola, Malaysia, New
Zealand, Spain and Venezuela, which I am sure will fit
seamlessly into our ranks. We also wish every success
to the Chilean delegation, which will preside over the
Council in January.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to thank you, Sir, for your initiative
to convene this wrap-up session, the tenth this year and
the fifteenth public format of its kind. We hope that
this practice will continue in the future and become an
institutionalized practice of the Security Council, with

12/23

22/12/2014

a view towards ensuring greater transparency to the
entire United Nations membership.
With your permission, Mr. President, since this
is the final wrap-up session in which Argentina will
participate as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council, I should like to briefly review how we believe
the entire Council should work in terms of dealing with
its agenda. Since Argentina assumed a non-permanent
seat in January 2013, we believe that we can draw useful
lessons for the future treatment of issues.
As we prepare to leave the Security Council, we
are committed to recognizing that we face a world with
more conflicts and with the exacerbation of pre-existing
conflicts. We leave a world with greater violence, more
violations of human rights, and more people in urgent
need of humanitarian assistance, especially women and
children. In a world that is more violent than that of
January 2013, we believe that one element to note is
that on more than one occasion, when we have taken
decisions, we have been aware of the tension between
two valid principles.
On the one hand, we need to take decisions on the
understanding that sovereignty cannot be interpreted
in the twenty-first century as totally inviolable; that
is to say, it cannot be absolutely limitless. The United
Nations has sought to see sovereignty in terms of
strict respect, and not as though it extended beyond
all other norms of international law, human rights and
international humanitarian law. On the other hand,
the issue of human rights; there would seem to be a
conflict between sovereignty and the protection and
defence of human rights. I say “conflict” because,
with regard to the protection of peace, our thinking
has often been in terms of prioitizing one or another
of these two principles when the challenge is to find
harmony between them, while respecting the Charter
of the United Nations and international law.
Of course there are gaps. That is why we endeavour
to work better together as we move towards the future.
The gaps appear not only to the broader membership
but to the entire world as the unfulfilled promises
of an Organization that has established principles
and standards but failed to realize their reflection in
practice — in a reality that at times seems entirely yet
to be built.
In March 2013, the fall of the Bozizé Government
in the Central African Republic, as a result of what
were doubtless long-standing causes, led to a conflict

14-71134

22/12/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

claiming more than 5,000 lives and displacing
approximately one-quarter of the national population,
primarily women and children.
A year-and-a-half on from South Sudan’s emergence
as an independent country in December 2013, the
blatant power struggle between President Kiir and his
ex-Vice-President Machar plunged the country into a
civil war that has already claimed more than 10,000
lives, displaced more than 1 million persons within
the country and more than 400,000 into neighbouring
countries, and put more than half of the population,
primarily women and children, at risk of famine.
The conflict in Syria has deteriorated sharply in
these years. Today Syria is a divided country where
terrorists thrive and where conservative estimates put
the death toll at approximately 200,000. Some 9 million
Syrians have been forced to leave their homes since the
conflict broke out in March 2011. The Syrian people
have been the victims of chemical weapon attacks.
I, like my colleagues, will never forget when, on
21 August 2013, we encountered a situation violating
the vow of “never again” — a situation in which an
attacker dared to use chemical weapons, in violation
of international law. Today the conflict has spilled over
into neighbouring countries, including, in particular,
Iraq, where the self-proclaimed Islamic State terrorist
group controls almost half of the national territory,
committing crimes reminiscent of those committed by
the Taliban in Afghanistan during its reign of terror.
Libya is another country divided between Islamist
forces and others allied to the Libyan Parliament and
the General Haftar, a division that can be traced back to
the fall of Al-Qadhafi in 2011 as a result of the NATOled operation.
The security situation in Yemen, which was
considered the success story of the Arab Spring, is
deteriorating, making the collapse of the State along
sectarian and tribal lines more likely and providing a
haven for Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula.
The prospect of an independent Palestinian State,
living in peace alongside Israel, seems ever more
elusive following the 50 days of extreme violence last
summer — the deadliest in recent years — and given
the inaction of the Security Council.
In Europe itself, the situation in Ukraine — where
the indirect consequences of the conflict included the
downing of a plane carrying 298 innocent people of 15
nationalities — has exacerbated tensions and differences

S/PV.7352

among the big Powers, which have manifest themselves
in the dynamics of the Security Council itself, on matters
beyond the situation in Ukraine specifically, such as the
situations in the Sudan, South Sudan, Afghanistan and
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and crosscutting topics such as sanctions imposed by the Security
Council, the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
and the upholding and application of international
human rights and international humanitarian law.
Blaming the Security Council or the United
Nations in general for failing to prevent or solve
these and other conflicts would be unfair and naive.
The Security Council is by its institutional nature a
forum for political consultation among 15 countries,
including the major Powers, with different views and
interests, which, by one form of legitimacy or another,
the international community has entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. But
this should not lead us to forget that the United Nations
and the Security Council were created so as to replace
jus ad bellum with jus contra bellum, and, in this regard,
the achievements of the Security Council over the past
two years have been at best mixed.
I would like to make some brief observations
regarding the Council’s handling of these situations and
others that it addressed in 2013 and 2014. A first lesson
learned is that the Council’s work falls short when it
comes to prevention — preventing situations likely to
endanger international peace and security. It seems
clear that the Security Council did not foresee, never
mind prevent, the outbreak of the crises in the Central
African Republic, South Sudan, Iraq and Ukraine, or
prevent their escalation or help de-escalate them, while
it must be recognized that the Council did closely
monitor these crises from a relatively early stage.
A second lesson learned is that the Security
Council seems to remain tied to a logic belonging to
the twentieth century rather than the twenty-first,
which sees it motivated more by geopolitical and
security considerations than by the concept of an
ethical institution to which we all ascribe as Members
of the United Nations that freely undertake to respect
the Charter. Even in situations of mass, widespread
violations of human rights and of international
humanitarian law, there is disagreement on matters on
which there can be no difference of opinion!
It suffices to compare the attention the Council
devoted to the situations in Syria, South Sudan and the

14-7113413/23

S/PV.7352

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

Central African Republic, on the one hand, and to the
situation in Ukraine, on the other, in any month since
these conflicts broke out. I am not suggesting that the
crisis in Ukraine is not serious, even very serious; I
am simply observing that, beyond the troubling reports
of violations of minority rights, by no measure are we
faced there with the sort of humanitarian tragedy we
are seeing in Syria, the Central African Republic or
South Sudan.
The third lesson learned is that the Security
Council seems to work in fits and starts, generally
compelled by a reflex mechanism, in the spirit of a
volunteer firefighter or medical emergency rather than
preventative medicine. When a conflict breaks out,
the first reaction is to meet immediately in order to
get more information, send messages to the world, or
simply exchange views to determine how we can tackle
a given situation and prevent its deterioration. However,
as time goes by, it seems that we are becoming used
to some horrors of the sort to which we should never
become used. And so what in the past would be deemed
a tragedy that the Security Council should never allow
is now becoming business as usual, and not only
because some new conflict has arisen that demands our
attention meaning we can no longer devote the same
time and dedication to the others as we did in the past.
The fourth lesson learned, which is perhaps the
most worrisome for my country, is the difficulty we
have observed over the past two years in translating
principles into concrete achievements, as if certain
ends justified the means.
The aim of eradicating the scourge of international
terrorism is one to which Argentina is fully committed.
But the pursuit of that objective, even though it
contributes to the realization of other goals deemed
important by the Security Council, has served to justify
decisions to deprive, in large or small part, persons
included on Sanctions Committees’ lists of their due
process rights.
The objective of ending impunity for crimes against
humanity, as in the case of Syria, has served to justify
actions that undermine the Rome Statute through
referrals made in inappropriate terms that are likely
to affect the validity, credibility and effectiveness of
the International Criminal Court. The objective of
ensuring the protection of the human rights of innocent
people and of depriving the parties of the means to
continue hostilities has served to justify the imposition
of unilateral sanctions at odds with the principles of
14/23

22/12/2014

sovereignty and non-intervention in the internal affairs
of States.
The objective of neutralizing armed groups that
attack innocent civilians has served to justify departing,
without an extensive consultation with the expanded
membership at a minimum, from the principles that
have for decades informed peacekeeping operations,
such as the consent of the parties, impartiality and the
non-use of force except in self-defence or in defence
of the peacekeepers’ mandate, as has been the case
with the Force Invention Brigade of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
The urgency of addressing acute situations or
emerging crisis situations with limited human and
financial resources has served to justify accelerating
the drawdown of forces in other situations where peace
is not fully consolidated and where we face the risk
that there will be a return to conflict. The violence
unleashed in the context of the recent political crisis
in Haiti makes us fear that we are facing one of those
situations there. Argentina warned of that trend during
the negotiations on and in the context of the adoption
of latest renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (resolution 2180 (2014)).
The need to deal with problems that alarm us all
and that are even increasing in their severity has served
to justify the Security Council’s encroaching on the
competency of other organs of the United Nations,
notably the General Assembly, as has been the case
with climate change and in some ways, more recently,
the Ebola outbreak in West Africa.
Finally and paradoxically, the goals of exporting
democracy and universalizing the enjoyment of human
rights have served to justify the sending of weapons
to the parties in conflict to achieve peace. I will only
reaffirm that, for Argentina and for many Member
States, normalizing arbitrariness, the phasing out of
legal rights, and unprincipled pragmatism are not valid
options. Not just any means justifies the end sought
after.
In one of my early days in the Council, I said that I
not only had the honour of being the representative of
Argentina but that, as a matter of personal conviction,
I define myself as a feminist. Equality really is a
good objective to achieve between men and women. I
recalled that Alva Myrdal said in 1982, when she won
the Nobel Peace Prize, that women are not so ambitious

14-71134

22/12/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

as to believe that we will find eternal peace in the world
or solve all disputes between nations. The economic
and political conflicts that we are witnessing are very
deep. We do not lay claim to an angelic state of perfect
harmony. Ours is a more modest goal: women believe
that we can do more in concrete terms.
People often speak of increasing devastation,
which is why I believe that we must change the mindset
in order to transform the way we act. When we face
conflict, we keep repeating a false idea. We respond with
militarization, weaponization and violence — those
things do not lead to victory. How could it be possible
that such a path could lead to victory when it is so
costly, when such a victory, if it even existed, would
be built on the destruction of another, who, with
luck, has been destroyed right down to their dignity?
I therefore believe that not only the Council, but our
entire Organization — and all of our time — has to be
dedicated to seeking and thinking otherwise in order to
act differently.
I wish every success to Angola, Spain, Malaysia,
New Zealand and Venezuela, who will join the Security
Council as members. I would advise them not to think
small or be daunted. The challenges are enormous, as
are the obstacles, but also, as a colleague said, the five
permanent members are not our enemies, not even our
adversaries. We are 15 countries working together,
agreeing sometimes and having differences at other
times, but working together, even though we may make
mistakes, as I mentioned. We can make many mistakes,
and we will continue to do so. But where we cannot
go wrong is with respect to the principles that we have
committed to uphold.
As to the current permanent and non-permanent
members, those that are remaining and those that are
departing, it has been an honour for Argentina to learn
and work with them, each and every one of them, where
we have agreed and where we have differed, in the
conviction that beyond our individual visions we have
worked more or less successfully with great effort and
honesty.
We thank the Secretariat, in the person of Mr. Movses
Abelian and the staff who assisted the Argentine
delegation in its two presidencies of the Council and
in leading the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan and the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, for their support and advice.

S/PV.7352

Former
Secretary-General
Hammarskjöld
challenged us when he said that the United Nations
was at a landmark moment in its time, for its future.
The members have to choose between two concepts of
the United Nations — as a static machine for having
meetings or as a dynamic instrument through which
nations can organize a dignified, peaceful, just,
egalitarian and free global community.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank the delegation of Chad
for organizing this wrap-up session, which provides us
with an opportunity to assess the work of the Security
Council in the month of December.
The open debate on peace operations (S/PV.7343)
presented the Council with an opportunity to examine
the evolution of the strategic partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union (AU). It
also underscored the growing significance of the
collaboration between the two organizations. The basis
for that partnership is the mutual recognition that other
international organizations besides the United Nations
can and indeed do make a positive contribution to the
maintenance of international peace and security. Our
examination of the impediments to greater coordination
between the AU and the United Nations provide a
basis for building future responses. It is imperative,
therefore, that the relevant authorities consider this an
opportunity to draw lessons and assess the prospects
for strengthening the strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the AU.
The open debate on terrorism and cross-border
crime (see S/PV.7351) highlighted the intersection
between those two threats to international peace and
security. The fact that cross-border crimes generate
substantial revenues that are being used to finance
terrorism in the subregion and beyond demands that we
strengthen our efforts to combat money-laundering and
the financing of terrorism. Concerted national, regional
and international action to address this challenge is
therefore vital. We commend the delegation for its
leadership role in the adoption of the first-ever Security
Council resolution on terrorism and cross-border
crime (resolution 2195 (2014). Nigeria was pleased to
co-sponsor the resolution, and it is our hope that it will
boost the fact against cross-border crime and terrorism.
The briefing on the Sahel (see S/PV.7335) revealed
that, in terms of the three pillars of the integrated
strategy for the region — security, governance and
resilience — considerable challenges remain. In the

14-7113415/23

S/PV.7352

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

area of security, terrorist groups like Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb and the Boko Haram remain active
and continue to pose a threat to the peace and security
of the region and beyond. The transnational nature
of terrorist threats make it essential for countries
to cooperate. It is in that regard that the Republic of
Benin and the States members of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission have decided to establish a multinational
joint task force to defeat and uproot Boko Haram. We
will continue to count on the support of our bilateral
and multilateral partners in that important endeavour.
We would like to conclude by thanking Chad for
the astute manner in which it has presided over the
Council this month. We extend our best wishes and full
support to Chile as it prepares to assume the presidency
of the Council in January. We bid farewell to Argentina,
Australia, Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea and
Rwanda, and commend them for their significant
contributions to the work of the Council over the past
two years. It has been a pleasure working with them.
We look forward to welcoming Angola, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Spain and Venezuela to the Council in
January, and we assure them of our full support and
cooperation.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to express our deepest gratitude and
appreciation to you, Sir, and your team, for the excellent
manner in which you have managed the work of the
Security Council throughout this month.
We commend the initiative of Chad to organize
the open debate on the theme “Threats to international
peace and security: terrorism and cross-border crime”
(see S/PV.7351). Jordan is fully aware of the magnitude
of the challenges and danger posed to the world by
terrorism, and reaffirms the importance of promoting
international and regional cooperation in developing
effective mechanisms to counter terrorism, crossborder crime, and the ramifications of the nexus
between those two phenomena. We also express our
appreciation for the leading role played by Chad in the
adoption of resolution 2195 (2014) on this subject.
The open debate on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
peace operations and the United Nations-African
Union partnership and its evolution (see S/PV.7343)
provided an opportunity to reaffirm the importance
of integrating the efforts of the Organization and the
African Union in promoting the partnership between

16/23

22/12/2014

them and of cooperation and coordination between the
United Nations Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council in matters affecting the
peace and stability of Africa.
Last week, on behalf of the Group of Arab States,
Jordan submitted a draft text calling for a peaceful, just,
permanent and comprehensive Middle East settlement
that would end the Israeli occupation of Arab lands and
ensure the establishment of two independent States,
Israel and a sovereign and contiguous Palestinian
State. In that regard. Jordan looks forward to working
with Member States towards achieving a consensus
agreement on the draft resolution.
In conclusion, I take this opportunity to
congratulate the incoming Chilean presidency and to
wish it every success in managing the Council’s work
next month. I also express my delegation’s gratitude to
the delegations of Argentina, Australia, Luxembourg,
the Republic of Korea and Rwanda for their efforts and
cooperation on all matters addressed this year. We look
forward to working with the five new members next
month.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this ninth wrap-up session of the year, which
represents an increase of 50 per cent compared to the
six wrap-up sessions organized by Council members
last year. I thank Pakistan for introducing these stocktaking meetings in January 2013, and we hope that
the current format of public briefings introduced
by Rwanda in its presidency of July this year will
encourage more United Nations Member States to
participate in these important meetings, dedicated to
assessing the activities of the Council, including its
progress, challenges and effectiveness.
Rwanda congratulates you, Sir, on your
demonstrated talent in presiding over the Council this
month. We extend our congratulations to Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
African Integration of Chad, who chaired meetings
on the two main topics you proposed to mark your
presidency — namely, the United Nations-African
Union partnership in peace operations, and terrorism
and cross-border crime, both sanctioned by a
presidential statement and a resolution, respectively.
Our appreciation also goes to Bante Mangaral,
Deputy Permanent Representative; Gombo Tchouli,
Political Coordinator; Madeleine Alingue, Alternate
Political Coordinator; and the whole Security Council

14-71134

22/12/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

team of Chad, which has done a tremendous job during
Chad’s first-ever presidency of the Security Council.
I take this opportunity to congratulate Ambassador
Cristian Barros Melet of Chile on his assumption in
a few days of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of January 2015. Rwanda pledges its full
support to Chile, and will contribute as much as we can
to the activities of the Council in January and in the
months and years to come.
As this wrap-up session is our last as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council in the
current term, allow me to make a general assessment
of Rwanda’s contribution to the work of the Council
for the term 2013-2014. During the campaign for this
prestigious seat in 2012, we issued a booklet entitled
Rwanda Values Peace, which we sent to all United
Nations Member States and in which we made seven
specific commitments.
The first commitment, on page 7, was to contribute
meaningfully to the prevention of conflict and the
consolidation of peace and stability in Africa and
globally. In that regard, it will be recalled that in 2013
Rwanda was Chair of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa, and in
that capacity organized several thematic debates on
achieving that goal.
Furthermore, in April 2013, during our first
presidency, we convened a high-level briefing on the
prevention of conflict in Africa by addressing its root
causes (see S/PV.6946), at which presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/4 was adopted. Nonetheless, much more
work by the Council is necessary in the area of conflict
prevention. We believe that the Security Council must
move beyond discussing the issue as the topic of a
thematic debate and consider it as an actual threat to
international peace and security.
The second commitment was to enhancing
partnership between the African Union (AU), other
regional and subregional organizations and the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security. As Chair of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa, that was
our priority. Rwanda played a leading role in preparing
the seventh annual consultative meeting between the
United Nations Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council held in October
2013 in Addis Ababa, and in the drafting of its joint
communiqué.

S/PV.7352

Moreover, resolution 2167 (2014) on regional
partnerships in peacekeeping, introduced by Rwanda
during its second presidency in July, was another
instrument to enhance United Nations-AU cooperation.
It is our hope that the Security Council will pursue
efforts and strengthen cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, including by providing the
necessary support, including predictable funding, to
AU-led peace operations.
The third commitment was to improving the
working methods of the Security Council to ensure
a more inclusive, transparent and effective Council.
That is what we have tried to achieve during our term,
pending the necessary expansion of the Council in both
categories. We introduced an open format of the wrapup session in July, advocated for co-penholdership in
favour of African members of the Security Council,
contributed to more focused, interactive and resultsoriented consultations within the Council, and
supported the French proposal on a code of conduct for
the permanent members to refrain from using the veto
in cases of mass atrocities.
The fourth commitment was to working towards a
more responsive Security Council, including through
implementation of the responsibility to protect (R2P)
doctrine. As co-Chair of the Group of Friends of
the Responsibility to Protect since its creation 10
years ago, Rwanda has consistently advocated for
R2P in the Council. In April, we introduced a draft
resolution, sponsored by all 15 members, which was
adopted as resolution 2150 (2014) on the prevention
of genocide, adopted on the occasion of the twentieth
commemoration of the genocide against the Tutsis in
Rwanda. The resolution reaffirmed paragraphs 138 and
139 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution
60/1), on the responsibility to protect populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleaning and crimes
against humanity, and underscored the importance
of taking into account lessons learned from the 1994
genocide against the Tutsis in Rwanda, during which
Hutus and others who opposed genocide were also
killed.
The fifth commitment was to ending sexual
violence and impunity. Although that commitment was
a little bit ambitious, Rwanda was consistent in pleading
for a global commitment to ending sexual violence in
conflict, especially that perpetrated on a daily basis by
the genocidal movement named Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda, in the eastern Democratic

14-7113417/23

S/PV.7352

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

Republic of the Congo. In an open debate chaired by
Ms. Mushikiwabo, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Regional Cooperation of Rwanda, on 17 April 2013, as
President of the Security Council, she called upon all
Council members,
“to move beyond expressions of outrage and,
instead, to make concrete and measurable progress
towards a world where the bodies of women are no
longer considered a battlefield” (S/PV.6948, p. 29).
In addition, Rwanda has demonstrated its
attachment to the fight against impunity in all its
statements and contributions to the Council’s decisions,
including the vote on 22 May (see S/PV.7180) on draft
resolution S/2014/348 related to Syria, and the letter of
5 September, which we co-signed, requesting that the
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
be placed on the Council’s agenda.
The sixth commitment was to advancing the role of
women in conflict resolution and peacebuilding. In that
respect Rwanda, which has made tremendous progress
since the 1994 genocide against the Tutsis, shared its
20 years of experience in various open debates on
women and peace and security and in the briefing on
post-conflict peacebuilding organized by the Council
presidency in March under Ambassador Sylvie Lucas
of Luxembourg (see S/PV.7143). I take this opportunity
to commend the most assiduous Minister for Foreign
Affairs represented in the Council, Mr. Jean Asselborn of
Luxembourg, who has attended almost every high-level
meeting of the Council, and pay tribute to Ambassador
Lucas and her team for the efficient, persistent and
persevering manner with which Luxembourg pleaded
for the well-being of children in armed conflict.
Lastly, Rwanda’s seventh commitment was to
ensuring sustainable transitions from peacekeeping to
nation-building in countries emerging from conflict.
We believe that this is the ultimate objective of
peacekeeping missions and the raison d’être of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). During both of our
presidencies, in April 2013 and July 2014, we organized
briefings on post-conflict peacebuilding, followed by
interactive dialogues with the countries on the PBC’s
agenda and PBC country-configuration chairs. It is
worth noting that since June 2013, Rwanda has also been
coordinating an expert-level group gathering together
members of the Council, and a PBC organizational
committee aimed at enhancing the advisory function of
the PBC to the Security Council and ensuring a smooth
transition from peacekeeping to nation-building.
18/23

22/12/2014

Let me conclude by wishing all the best to the five
incoming members of the Council: Angola, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Spain and Venezuela. I congratulate the
outgoing members Argentina, Australia, Luxembourg
and the Republic of Korea. I also thank all of those
that have supported Rwanda during its two-year term
in the Security Council. We thank the African Union
for endorsing Rwanda’s candidacy in January 2012, the
United Nations States Members for electing Rwanda
in October of the same year, the 19 Council members
who have served on the Council with Rwanda in 2013
and 2014 for their invaluable support, and the Security
Council Affairs Division, headed by Director Movses
Abelian, for its assistance to our delegation from day
one.
Particular thanks go to the Permanent Mission of
the United Kingdom to the United Nations, to the United
Kingdom Centre for Political and Diplomatic Studies,
and to Sir Emyr Jones Parry for the comprehensive twoday training provided in February 2013 in the Security
Council to our newly appointed staff.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank and commend you, Mr. President, and your
team for guiding the work of the Security Council in
December. We welcome the convening of this open
wrap-up meeting, which we believe to be a vital tool of
the Council that must be maintained in future.
I shall begin by referring to the sanctions
committees and reiterating what we have pointed out
on previous occasions concerning the need to reduce
the gap between the work carried out in New York and
situations on the ground. In that regard, on 5 December
an informal meeting of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Côte
d’Ivoire was held, allowing exchanges of opinions on
the Chair’s recommendations regarding the visit made
to the country in November. Such visits should become
a regular practice, as should the recommendations and
proposals emerging therefrom to improve cooperation
between the Council and the country subject to
sanctions. It should be emphasized that sanctions
regimes are the exception and represent a means rather
than an end in itself.
We welcome the joint closed consultations involving
countries and the sanctions committees on their behalf,
such as those held on 9 December with respect to the
Central African Republic. That new format allows
us to take up related agenda items and thereby avoid
unnecessary duplication and repetition.
14-71134

22/12/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

Considering the insecurity prevailing in the
countries of Central Africa, many of which are facing
near-term elections, we also welcome the 10 December
consultations on the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa and the Lord’s Resistance Army.
Furthermore, with respect to Liberia, the Council has
ended the year by addressing that situation in a timely
manner through resolutions 2188 (2014) and 2190
(2014), in a specific case in which the Ebola crisis
revealed yet again the fragility of the security and
health sectors in Liberia. An analysis of the situation
in Liberia reveals yet again the importance of better
evaluating and analysing the process for the drawdown
and withdrawal of operations and missions established
by the Council so that development and inclusion
indices may be taken into account, thereby providing a
more solid foundation for a smooth transition from the
United Nations country teams and other development
agencies. The same applies to many other situations on
the agenda of the Security Council.
Chile believes that the role the Security Council
assigns to international justice mechanisms is
fundamental. We thank the members of the Council for
their active participation and cooperation and for the
flexibility they have showed in extending the mandates
of the judges and prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the International
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, whose work has
contributed to the development of a particular area of
international penal law and the fight against impunity.
We would also like to highlight the unique
perspective that the Chadian presidency has brought to
the issue of terrorism in its open debate on the theme
“Threats to international peace and security: terrorism
and cross-border crime” (see S/PV.7351). The degree
of interest in the topic was clear from the participation
of authorities from our capitals to attend the meeting.
On that occasion, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2195 (2014) on the link between terrorism
and cross-border time, in support of the strategy
for addressing that matter undertaken by this organ
throughout 2014.
With regard to the Middle East, the briefing given
by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator (see
S/PV.7342) focused again on the protection of civilians,
painting a landscape of death and despair. We welcome
the Council’s unanimous adoption of resolution 2191
(2014), extending the mandate of resolution 2165

S/PV.7352

(2014) for 12 months, The resolution represents relief
for millions of Syrians living in remote areas who will
now receive humanitarian assistance. Its unanimous
adoption is worthy of note because it represents the
spirit of constructive work that should prevail in order
for the Council to fulfil its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations. However, we know all
too well that so long as there is no political solution
to the conflict, there can be no end to this complex
emergency. In that regard, we should not overlook the
repeated message of the Secretary-General and other
United Nations authorities, and in particular of the
Argentine delegation — the flow of arms from abroad
into the conflict zone must stop.
Regarding the issues on which the Council should
conduct attentive follow-up in the future, we note first
the situation in the Middle East, including the peace
process. We hope that this organ will prove equal to
the task of addressing the current challenges and that
it will send a united message that addresses the root
causes of the conflict and seeks a broad solution that
incorporates the political, security and development
aspects of the crisis and that implements the two-State
solution, with Israel and Palestine living in peace and
security within internationally recognized borders. To
that end, we must make use of all existing channels, in
particular the Quartet.
Furthermore, we believe that with the steps it
has taken to address the situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, the Council has assumed
the responsibilities assigned to it under the Charter.
To conclude, while expressing our gratitude for the
wishes for success offered by delegations in advance
of our assumption of the presidency next month, we
wish to acknowledge the contributions made from their
diverse viewpoints of the non-permanent members
whose terms in the Security Council are drawing to a
close: Argentina, Australia, Luxembourg, the Republic
of Korea and Rwanda. It has been an honour for Chile to
work with them. We also take this opportunity to wish
every success to the delegations of Spain, Venezuela,
New Zealand, Malaysia and Angola, which will join
the Council in 2015. We look forward to working
constructively with all of them.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this session and for guiding us so
effectively as President this month. We welcome the fact
that you have focused the Council’s attention on issues
of crucial importance to Africa, including the lethal

14-7113419/23

S/PV.7352

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

threat from the alliance of terrorism and transnational
crime, and that Chad has received recognition for its
commitment to United Nations peacekeeping.
Ambassador Perceval has just quoted probably the
most revered Secretary-General, Dag Hammarskjöld,
and I will too. He famously said that the United Nations
was not created to take humanity to heaven but to save
it from hell. In the past two years of Australia’s term on
the Council, heaven has never been within reach, but
there were many days when it seemed we were already
deep in hell — the massacres and mass rapes in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, the brutal
killings of civilians in South Sudan; the horrific attacks
committed by both Séléka and anti-balaka forces in the
Central African Republic, where we only barely averted
disaster and where the killing in Bangui stopped
because there was no one left to kill; the awful rising
toll of United Nations peacekeepers and humanitarian
workers deliberately targeted and killed in situations
as diverse as Syria, Mali, Iraq and the Sudan; and the
constant drumbeat of horrific terrorist attacks with
children so often the victims.
A number of situations that had appeared to be on
a positive trajectory have deteriorated sharply. In Libya
and Yemen, conflict has broken out. Only a year after
the Council applauded Sierra Leone’s Foreign Minister
in this Chamber for his county’s peacebuilding
achievements at the end of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (see S/PV.7034),
the Ebola crisis threatens the gains that that country,
Liberia and Guinea have made in the past decade.
We have witnessed a deliberate pattern of
provocation, destabilization and outright aggression
that have led to the annexation of Crimea; conflict in
eastern Ukraine, with over 4,500 dead in the past 10
months; and a commercial aircraft shot out of the sky,
with 298 killed, including 38 Australians. There are
ominous indications of a further threat to the territorial
integrity of Georgia.
And then there is Syria — a situation already
extremely grave two years has grown immeasurably
worse two years later. Over 200,000 people have now
been killed, 12.3 million require urgent humanitarian
assistance, and over half the population has been
displaced. The Syrian regime’s deliberate targeting of its
citizens through the use of barrel bombs and siege-andstarve tactics continues to violate every civilized norm,
despite the Council’s unanimous demand that they stop.
We have seen the extremes to which the regime will
20/23

22/12/2014

go: torture on an industrial scale, as evidenced in the
Caesar report, and the use of chemical weapons against
civilians in Guta and on multiple occasions since. That
has spawned the rise of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, with its horrific oppression — an exhibitionist
defiance of the most basic norms of human behaviour.
As Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos told the
Council on 15 December (see S/PV.7342), we have run
out of words to describe this.
Worldwide, almost 60 million people are now
displace by conflict, either internally or as refugees,
which is the highest number since Second World War.
One hundred and twenty million people are in need of
urgent humanitarian assistance, the vast majority due
to conflict. The dimensions of the challenges before
the Council are staggering. We face more simultaneous
conflicts with a bigger impact on a larger number
of people across a wider swathe of the world that at
any time since the Second World War. Terrorism is
resurgent, and in large areas rampant.
It will, of course, always be the case that the
Council will be judged by its failures. Our failure
to break the geopolitical stalemate on Syria will be
a permanent stain, but faced with that catalogue of
crisis and conflict, the Council has sought to respond.
We have not always succeeded, but the Council had
endeavoured to use the tools it has in innovative ways,
and sometimes to decisive effect.
Peacekeeping is the Council’s primordial tool. The
number of peacekeeping missions and the number of
personnel deployed are at record levels. The Council has
taken some crucial steps to strengthen peacekeeping,
and the Secretary-General’s current high-level review
should consolidate these. The establishment of the Force
Intervention Brigade in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in March last year took robust peacekeeping for
the protection of civilians to a new level. The mandates
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic confirm that trend. The
decision of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
to shelter 80,000 civilians initially in its bases when
violence broke out a year ago demonstrated, we hope,
a new mindset.
As we commemorated the twentieth anniversary of
the genocide in Rwanda a few months later, there seemed
to be some sign that the international community now
14-71134

22/12/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

recognized that we had a responsibility to protect that
requires us to respond in the face of mass atrocity,
and that this might mean something in practice. Later
today, we must act to help the people protect the people
of North Korea by inscribing a new item on our agenda,
“The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea”. That is a situation of a totalitarian State
systematically and grossly violating the most basic
human rights of its citizens in a way unparalleled in
today’s world.
In the past two years, the Council has used
another key tool, sanctions, as a response to threats
to international peace and security. The Council has
applied sanctions to two new situations, in the Central
African Republic and Yemen, while calibrating
existing sanctions regimes to better respond to evolving
situations. New listing criteria have been developed
with more direct focus on listing perpetrators of crimes
against humanity and war crimes. We have also pursued
accountability. While the Council has been unable to
provide the International Criminal Court the support
it deserves and needs, it is paying closer attention to
the link between human rights and conflict. Some resist
this, but the linkage is as linear as it is unassailable. The
just-published report of the International Commission
of Inquiry on Serious Crimes Committed in the Central
African Republic provides ample demonstration.
Australia came on to the Council convinced that
elected members could and should contribute across
the whole Council agenda, but we also knew that it
was important to identify practical issues that required
Council attention and on which we could focus in
order to try and make a difference. Our initiatives
on small arms, which resulted in the adoption of
resolution 2117 (2013) in September 2013, and on
policing, which resulted in the adoption of resolution
2185 (2014), adopted last month, sought to fill gaps
in the most defining Council task — the prevention
or control of conflict. Our ambition, shared with
Luxembourg and Jordan, to tackle the humanitarian
crisis in Syria — the single greatest humanitarian
crisis the world faces — reflected the determination
of three elected members to find a way through the
political gridlock of the permanent five members (P-5).
We succeeded certainly because we were determined,
but fundamentally also because the P-5 needed us to
succeed. There is a lesson for elected members in that.
Resolution 2191 (2014), adopted last week, was our
third Syrian resolution since February and has renewed

S/PV.7352

the historic mandate of resolution 2165 (2014), on
access across borders. As penholder on Afghanistan we
have sought to ensure strong Council support for that
country’s transition to a democratic future. Resolution
2189 (2014), adopted 10 days ago, is designed to
underwrite that through a continuing international
presence to assist the Afghan security forces following
the conclusion of the International Security Assistance
Mission’s combat mission at the end of this month.
Our experience as Chair of the Sanction Committees
on Al-Qaida, Taliban and Iran confirmed our view
that the United Nations system needs to modernize
and professionalize its approach to sanctions. We have
worked hard to that end in chairing our committees;
as a co-sponsor with Sweden, Greece, Germany and
Finland; at the high-level review of United Nations
sanctions; and in regular Council negotiations. There
is a strong and growing demand among affected States
and United Nations Members in general — since all
are obligated to implement the Council’s sanctions
decisions — to engage with relevant committees and to
access technical assistance.
Australia intended to put forward a draft resolution
that would provide the United Nations system with
the capacity it needed to respond to that demand.
Unfortunately, despite the overwhelming support
of the United Nations membership for assistance, a
Council consensus has not been achievable, but that of
course is not the end of the matter. The conversation
has started; Member States will demand more by way
of participation and technical assistance from the
Council and the Secretariat; and the delivery of the
recommendations at the high-level review shortly will
be the next important phase in that work, and we will
continue to pursue it after the conclusion of our term.
As we approach the seventieth anniversary of the
Charter of the United Nations next year, it would be
nice to think that the fundamental norms it contains are
unversally accepted and no longer require protection,
but, ominously, that is not the case. Key precepts
of the Charter — including respect for sovereignty
and territorial integrity, the prohibition on the use of
force in inter-State relations, and the legal framework
for the protection of individuals in conflict and in
peacetime — have been dramatically defied in the past
year. The Council must continue to be vigilant and work
continuously, whatever the obstacles, to ensure that
those fundamental norms are protected for all Member

14-7113421/23

S/PV.7352

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

States and for the hundreds of millions of individuals
who look to the United Nations for protection.
To conclude, as Australia finishes its term, I would
like to thank the entire membership of the United
Nations for giving us the privilege of representing them
on the Council for the past two years, and convey our
uninhibited support to members of the Council for 2015
as they take over what is an immense responsibility. We
also convey our deepest gratitude to all United Nations
personnel at Headquarters and in the field who work
so hard and often in great danger to fulfil the tasks
the Council gives them and to realize the ideals of the
Charter. They are truly the custodians of the best of
humanity.
Finally, I would like to thank all Council
members, the Security Council Affairs Division for the
remarkable experience of working with them. Whatever
the Council’s failures, we have also achieved a great
deal together and the whole Australian team is deeply
grateful for that.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
It is my genuine pleasure to take stock of the
Council’s work this month, during which we have held
the presidency. As Council members have known from
the outset, the December agenda has not only been
busy, but also condensed, due to the periodicity of the
reports due this month, and also because the end of the
year is approaching. We were scheduled to close our
work on 22 December, but constraints and unforessen
circumstances have forced us to delay our closure to
23 December.
During our presidency, we have adopted four
presidential statements and eight resolutions, including
our own. Two public debates were held, on 16 and
19 December. The first, under the presidency of His
Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and African Integration of the Republic
of Chad, addressed cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
with particular stress on the United NationsAfrican Union partnership, particularly in the field
of peacekeeping operations. Presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/27 was adopted at that debate. We trust
that the report requested of the Secretary-General on
the question will allow this strategic partnership to
develop further to the benefit of the two organizations.

22/23

22/12/2014

The participation did not meet our expectations.
However, some 40 delegations attending stressed
the importance and relevance of the theme, and we
commend them for that. We also regret the fact that
after the expiry of the silence procedure, we returned
to the halted negotiations on the presidential statement.
We would like to emphasize that the silence rule was
thus bent, a bad precedent that unfortunately threatens
to set a precedent itself.
The second open debate (see S/PV.7351), also
presided over by His Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat, was devoted to the growing and dangerous
intersection between terrorism and cross-border crime.
The resolution adopted unanimously at this highlevel debate (2195 (2014)) emphasizes strengthening
cooperation between States and United Nations
capacity and coordination in efforts to combat these
two phenomena. In that regard, it is important that
Member States be called on to reinforce the mechanisms
available to fight those scourges, which requires serious
synergy and close cooperation in the actions of all those
involved. The huge participation of Member States in
this debate was a clear demonstration of the subject’s
importance and underlined the serious threat posed by
terrorism and transnational criminal networks not just
for Africa but for the whole world.
Beyond these two high-level debates, another on
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(see S/PV.7347) was also presided over by our Minister
for Foreign Affairs in accordance with resolution 2145
(2014), which provides for quarterly reports from
the Secretary-General and a briefing by his Special
Representative in Afghanistan on the situation in the
country. Our Foreign Minister’s participation in three
debates has affirmed our firm commitment to the cause
of peace and is an achievement that will go down in the
participation record books, as the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Australia highlighted.
We considered it important to give the Force
Commanders of the United Nations the opportunity
to participate in consultations, including through
video teleconferencing, in order to be able to respond
directly to questions. Similarly, we made an exception
in order to enable the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to take part in almost all our
consultations, thus giving it the opportunity to ensure
that a closed debate did not mean that humanitarian and
human-rights issues were short-changed.

14-71134

22/12/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

Besides the two aforementioned major debates,
during our presidency the Security Council examined
other current situations of no less importance. The
first week was devoted to the situation in Syria, more
particularly the implementation of resolution 2118
(2014), focusing on all the equipment and material
linked to chemical weapons, as well as the situations
in Darfur (see S/PV.7326) and Kosovo (see S/PV.7327).
During the second week, we looked at the situation
between the Sudan and South Sudan and held three
briefings on the United Nations Multidimensional
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
Yemen, the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa, and the Lord’s Resistance Army. We
also adopted a resolution on sanctions relating to
Liberia (2190 (2014) and devoted two meetings to the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013) concerning the Central African Republic (see
S/PV.7329) and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014), on Yemen (see S/PV.7336).
In the same week we held a debate on the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(see S/PV. 7348), as well as three briefings on the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel (see
S/PV.7335), the International Criminal Court vis-à-vis
the Sudan and Darfur (see S/PV.7337), and the subsidiary
organs of the Security Council (see S/PV.7331). Two
meetings with countries contributing contingents to
the United Nations missions in Liberia (see S/PV.7330)
and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) in the Golan Heights (see S/PV.7333) were
held with the participation of military attachés.
Last week we held three briefings on the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine (see S/PV.7339)
and the humanitarian situation in Syria (see S/PV.
7342), as well as consultations on UNDOF. During
that week, we adopted two resolutions extending
the mandates of the judges and prosecutors of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (2193
(2014) and 2194 (2014), both introduced by Chile, as
well as others renewing the mandates of UNDOF (2192
(2014)) and the United Nations Mission in Liberia (2190

S/PV.7352

(2014)), with one member abstaining on the first of
these. The Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006) also gave his quarterly report
on nuclear non-proliferation in Iran (see S/PV.7350).
Regarding sanctions regimes, the Chairs of the
2127 Committee, on the Central African Republic, and
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya also presented their
committees’ reports. The programme of work was
strictly observed and carried out and the meetings were
held on time. We note that at the request of 10 members
of the Council we have added the question of the
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to the agenda in a meeting scheduled for this afternoon.
During our presidency we concluded the efforts
begun by Australia regarding the issue of the
Peacebuilding Commission. The mandate that began
in 2010 will end on 31 December and had to renewed
with new pilot countries for a case study. To that end,
together with the President of the General Assembly we
signed a joint letter addressed to the Secretary-General.
Before concluding my remarks, I should express my
heartfelt thanks for members’ valuable contributions to
all the debates. My thanks also go to the Secretariat
of the Council and the entire staff, without forgetting
the interpreters and the security officers who have
supported us throughout our presidency. I would also
like to pay warm tribute to our colleagues from the
delegations of Argentina, Australia, Luxembourg, the
Republic of Korea and Rwanda, who are leaving us after
completing their two-year term on the Security Council
with brio. We will console ourselves with the arrival
of five new members, who are Angola, Malaysia, New
Zealand, Spain and Venezuela. They can count on our
full support.
In conclusion, I wish every success to the delegation
of Chile, which will preside over the work of the Council
in January, and assure them of our unreserved support.
And I wish everyone a great holiday and my very best
for the new year.
There are no more names inscribed on the list.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

14-7113423/23
