S/PV.7245

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7245th meeting

Tuesday, 19 August 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Bliss
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Adamu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Dunn

Agenda
Security Council mission
Briefing by Security Council mission to Europe and Africa (8 to 14 August 2014)

14-51042 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1451042*

S/PV.7245

Security Council mission to Europe and Africa

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council mission
Briefing by Security Council mission to Europe
and Africa (8 to 14 August 2014)
The President: At this meeting the Security
Council will hear briefings by the representatives of
Australia, Chile, the United States of America and
my own delegation on the Security Council mission to
Europe and Africa.
Mr. Bliss (Australia): I am pleased to provide a
brief report on the Council’s visit to Belgium on 9 and
10 August, the first leg of our recent visit to Europe
and Africa. The purpose of our visit to Belgium was to
commemorate the centenary of the commencement of
the First World War, to pay tribute to the sacrifice of all
those who served their countries during that conflict
and to draw lessons from the conflict that could assist
the Security Council in discharging its mandate to
maintain international peace and security.
A visit to the town of Dinant, the site of a massacre
early in the First World War, provided a solemn start. On
23 August 1914, 674 civilians were killed in a deliberate
attack by invading German forces. The Council viewed
the museum commemorating that incident and learned
that in 2001, 87 years after the incident, a reconciliation
ceremony had been held, with Germany formally
apologizing to the people of Dinant for the attack.
The Council’s visit to the city of Leuven underlined
the crucial importance of protecting cultural heritage in
times of armed conflict. In August 1914, the deliberate
destruction of the 600-year-old Leuven University
Library and its unique 300,000 volume collection
shocked the world. The stunning reconstruction of that
building served as the venue for a stimulating discussion
between Council members and academic experts on the
lessons from the First World War, conflict prevention
and approaches to reconciliation.
The Last Post ceremony at Menin Gate in Ypres
on the evening of 9 August was a revelation. The brief
and powerful ceremony, which consists of the playing
of the Last Post, a recitation for those who fell in the
First World War and the laying of wreaths, has taken
place every single evening since 1928 — a remarkable

2/6

19/08/2014

act of commemoration by the people of Ypres and of
Belgium. The laying of a wreath by Australia and the
United Kingdom on behalf of the Security Council
constituted a formal act of remembrance for the losses
of that conflict.
The Council’s visit to Lijssenthoek Military
Cemetery, outside Ypres, on 10 August emphasized the
horrific consequences of armed conflict. The cemetery
contains the graves of over 10,700 soldiers killed in
the First World War. A visit to the In Flanders Fields
Museum provided further evidence of the magnitude of
the destruction of that conflict and poignantly reminded
us that, although said to be “the war to end all wars”,
the subsequent 100 years have been repeatedly marked
by armed conflict.
The final component of our visit to Belgium — a
visit to the Poelkapelle military base, where chemical
weapons from the First World War continue to be
dismantled and destroyed — served to underline the
devastating impact of those weapons. Almost 100 years
after their first use, ordinance from the First World War
is still being uncovered every day. That was a timely
reminder to the Council of the need to ensure the
complete elimination of all chemical weapons and to
reinforce the absolute prohibition of their use.
The visit to Belgium starkly underlined for the
Council the inherent futility of armed conflict and
the dramatic scale of losses in the First World War.
The Council witnessed the remarkable commitment
by the people of Belgium to commemoration and the
importance of the protection of cultural heritage. We
were compelled to recall the first line of the Preamble
to the Charter of the United Nations — “determined to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
which twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to
mankind”. And, crucially, we were motivated to reflect
on what more the Council can and must do to effectively
discharge its conflict prevention responsibilities.
In conclusion, I would like to express the Security
Council’s sincere thanks to the Government and the
people of Belgium, to the mayors of Dinant, Leuven
and Ypres, to the Permanent Representative of Belgium,
Ambassador Frankinet, and her Mission, and to the
Secretariat colleagues who facilitated our visit. I would
also like to thank the United Kingdom for arranging
the visit and for extending to Australia the privilege of
co-leading the Belgian component.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Mr. President, for your leadership, as well
14-51042

19/08/2014

Security Council mission to Europe and Africa

as the Security Council Affairs Division, which made
this historic mission possible.
I will now present the report on behalf of the
delegations of Chile and Luxembourg, which co-led
The Hague component of the Security Council mission.
On Monday, 11 August, members of the Security
Council held a meeting at the Peace Palace, The Hague,
where they exchanged ideas with Judge Peter Tomka,
President of the International Court of Justice, and
Judges Christopher Greenwood, Joan E. Donoghue,
Giorgio Gaja and Julia Sebutinde, in addition to the
Registrar of the Court, Mr. Philippe Couvreur. The
purpose of the meeting was to express the Security
Council’s support for the work of the International
Court of Justice and to receive updates on its cases
and other developments. Chile, which co-chaired the
meeting, appreciated the opportunity to have an active
interaction between the members of the two major
organs.
The President of the International Court of Justice
welcomed the visit and noted that the Court supported
the work of the Security Council through international
law, referring to the current and historical development
of cases that have been under the Court’s consideration.
He stressed that, in addition to traditional topics such
as sovereignty and matters of border delimitation, the
International Court of Justice had devoted itself to
addressing emerging issues.
The discussion included the issue of the recognition
by Member States of the compulsory jurisdiction of the
Court and the execution of its judgments, regarding
which the Court’s interlocutors confirmed that most of
the judgments had immediate effect. They also cited
examples of recent successful executions. Some Council
members were interested in the relationship between
the Court and other international tribunals, such as
the International Criminal Court and the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea. Others referred to the
International Court of Justice’s advisory functions.
The members of the Security Council reiterated
their support for the work of the International Court
of Justice and noted the importance of continued
cooperation by conducting similar exercises, the next
meeting of which could be held in New York.
The members of the Security Council the held
a meeting with judges and representatives of the
international criminal tribunals and courts at The

S/PV.7245

Hague established under a Security Council mandate
or with its support. The purpose of the meeting was
to reaffirm the relationship of the Security Council
with those tribunals and to receive first-hand, updated
information on their activities. Chile, as co-Chair of
that meeting, highlighted the work of the tribunals
that had contributed to developing a specific area
of international criminal law and the fight against
impunity.
The President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia said that the
creation of special courts represented a commitment
on the part of the Security Council with international
justice. The President also referred to the Tribunal’s
completion strategy for its cases. Meanwhile, the
President of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon noted
that his work was related to strengthening the rule of
law and the fight against terrorism from the perspective
of international justice. With regard to the Residual
Special Court for Sierra Leone, the interlocutors
discussed current challenges. The issue of funding the
courts was addressed, and views were exchanged with
regard to the tribunals’ independence. The members of
the Security Council and judges and representatives
of the tribunals welcomed the prospect of continuing
mutual cooperation.
With regard to the meeting with the International
Criminal Court, the members of the Security Council
had an exchange of views with Judge Sang-Hyun
Song, President of the International Criminal Court,
Mr. James Stewart, Deputy Prosecutor of the Court, and
Mr. Herman von Hebe1, Secretary of the Court, as well
as with the Chief of Staff of the President and the Head
of the Jurisdiction, Complementarity and Cooperation
Division. The purpose of the meeting was to reaffirm
the relationship between the Security Council and the
International Criminal Court, to receive an updated
report on its work and to look into the interaction
between the Security Council and the Court. President
Song highlighted the contribution of the International
Criminal Court to the fight against impunity and the
prevention of mass atrocities. He said that the Security
Council could use its unique prestige to support the
Court and the international system of justice.
The three interlocutors of the Court focused
their observations on various suggestions for closer
cooperation between the Security Council and the
International Criminal Court. They stressed the
importance of expanding communication between the

14-510423/6

S/PV.7245

Security Council mission to Europe and Africa

two organs, in particular when the Security Council
addresses situations in which the Court was conducting
a preliminary examination. They also said it would
be useful to involve the Court in the thematic debates
of the Council, especially when it considered the
issue of sexual violence in conflict orthat of children
in armed conflict. Improving communication with
regard to sanctions and situations in countries could
lead to greater synergies than currently exist between
the Security Council and the Court. The Court
interlocutors stressed the need for effective support for
the implementation of Council resolutions that refer
situations to the International Criminal Court. It is
clear that the Court depends upon the cooperation of
Member States.
The Court’s interlocutors expressed their satisfaction
with the support to international justice and to the
work of the Court, included in the mandates given by
the Security Council to missions, such as the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic.
Finally, they welcomed any Council initiative
to support requests for cooperation with the Court.
It was pointed out that the Court had sent various
communications to the Council with regard to verifying
Member States’ lack of cooperation, all relating to the
situation in Darfur.
The members of the Security Council had an
exchange of views with the Deputy Director-General,
accompanied by the Chief of Staff of the DirectorGeneral of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and Mr. Malik Azhar
Ellahi, Political Adviser of the Director-General and
head of the fact-finding mission in Syria on the alleged
use toxic chemicals, reportedly chlorine. The aim
of the meeting was to thank the Security Council for
the close cooperation between the United Nations and
the OPCW. An example of such cooperation was the
joint mission OPCW-United Nations established to
implement resolution 2118 (2013) and so that the Council
could receive updated information on the progress in
eliminating the chemical weapons programme of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
The Deputy Director-General of the OPCW
thanked the Council for its congratulations and gave
an updated report on the removal and destruction of
chemical weapons in Syria. In response to questions
4/6

19/08/2014

raised by members of the Council on the deadline for
the destruction of the 12 facilities for the production of
chemical weapons, the interlocutors from OPCW stated
that the destruction would be completed by the first
quarter of 2015, but it was still a complex operation.
Much remained to be done, and the Director-General
of the OPCW would continue to provide updated
information on that work in his reports to the Security
Council. The support of the United Nations continued
to be important to manage security matters.
The Deputy Director-General stressed that there
were many lessons to be learned from the joint mission
of the OPCW and the United Nations. The OPCW
fact-finding mission in Syria on the alleged use toxic
chemicals, reportedly chlorine, is continuing and a
report was expected shortly, while the safety of mission
staff remain the highest priority.
The Deputy Director-General recalled the clear
mandate given to the OPCW in Syria: to guarantee the
full destruction of chemical weapons, nothing more,
nothing less. In addition, when it came to Syria, the
Organization was interested in achieving universal
adherence to the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction.
Finally, the members of the Security Council
warmly thanked the Government of the Kingdom of
the Netherlands for its generous hospitality and for
facilitating its first visit to The Hague. During the visit,
the members of the Security Council discussed issues
of common interest with the Dutch Government. They
were received by the Secretary-General of the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, Her Excellency
Mrs. Renée Jones-Bos, and later by the Prime Minister,
His Excellency Mr. Mark Rutte, who thanked the
Security Council for its adoption of resolution 2166
(2014) following the downing of the Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17, in Ukraine.
In memory of the victims of the shootdown of
the Malaysia Airlines plane, and expressing their
condolences to the families of the victims, members of
the Security Council laid a wreath at the commemorative
monument for Flight MH-17 at Schiphol Airport before
leaving for Africa.
Mr. Dunn (United States of America): Thank you,
Mr. President, for scheduling today’s meeting and for
initiating this very worthy mission by the Security
Council. On behalf of Ambassador Power, let me thank

14-51042

19/08/2014

Security Council mission to Europe and Africa

all Council members for contributing to a timely and
constructive visit to South Sudan. Special thanks go out
to Ambassador Gasana and the Rwandan delegation for
their strong partnership as co-leaders of that portion of
the trip.
The Council is a long-time friend of South Sudan.
It is therefore fitting and fair to characterize the visit
as an emergency call, given that the deteriorating
political, humanitarian and security crisis unfolding
there. In less than 24 hours on the ground we were able
to hear from many key stakeholders and to convey the
Council’s concern over the direction events had taken.
We held candid and tough exchanges with
President Kiir and Riek Machar and their senior advisers,
delivering a number of key messages, including that
there was no military solution and that the fighting must
stop; that it was time to resume the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD)-led peace talks
and to develop plans for a transitional Government of
national unity; that there must be accountability for
perpetrators of human rights violations; and that there
must be respect for and cooperation with the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), including
by not interfering with humanitarian access. We also
clearly signalled that the Council was prepared to
impose consequences on spoilers of the peace process.
At the conclusion of those discussions, there was a
sense of hope, but not confidence, that those leaders
would take positive action.
In one of the most striking portions of the trip, the
Council travelled 325 miles to the north to Malakal
to see the plight of the internally displaced firsthand. Imagine 17,000 civilians, across all ethnicities
and demographics, living in the most difficult of
circumstances at an UNMISS protection of civilians
camp. We were struck by their resilience as they
engaged with the Council on politics, security and the
leadership of women, all while making their case for
peace.

S/PV.7245

General, Ellen Margrethe Løj, joined the programme
in her designated capacity before officially starting
work on 1 September. We were able to offer our
staunch support for her throughout the visit. We also
were able to see new UNMISS Force Commander,
Lieutenant General Johannes Tesfamarium, and our
troop-contributing countries in action, as well as to
be briefed by Deputy Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General Raisedon Zenenga and Toby Lanzer
on UNMISS operations and the humanitarian situation.
Our message to all of UNMISS was to thank them for
their courageous work and to tell them that they had the
Council’s full support.
Before I conclude, let me mention that the Council
also used its transit time in Nairobi to meet with
Kenyan President Kenyatta and to hold a joint meeting
of the Council and IGAD ministers and representatives
to discuss South Sudan and Somalia. Both meetings
provide valuable insights as we continue to work
closely with the region to bring peace and security in
both countries.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
The Somalia leg of the trip was co-led by the United
Kingdom and Nigeria. The visit focused on progress
towards elections in 2016, including the participation
of women; the security situation, in particular the
campaign against Al-Shabaab; and the humanitarian
situation. It was the first Security Council visit to
Somalia since 1994.

Similarly, we heard very clear messages from
faith-based civil society and women’s leaders during
a meeting in Juba. In that dialogue, leaders stressed
the importance of holding inclusive political talks. As
well, they called on their leaders to allow humanitarian
access to fight acute malnutrition, to commit to full
accountability and to stop the war now.

President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, Prime
Minister Abdiwali Sheikh Ahmed and Speaker of the
Parliament Mohamed Osman Jawari warmly welcomed
the historic visit and hailed the United Nations as a key
contributor to the protection of Somalia’s sovereignty.
Council members welcomed the progress Somalia
had made over the past two years. We underlined
the importance of unity in the Federal Government
of Somalia. We reiterated the importance of the
Government of Somalia holding a referendum on the
Constitution in 2015 and democratic elections in 2016.
We look forward to the Government of Somalia adopting
key legislation, including on establishing the electoral
commission. We also underline the importance of
women’s participation in the peace and reconciliation
process.

Let me conclude on South Sudan by reporting
that the new Special Representative of the Secretary-

Turning to the military situation, Council members
were united in their praise for the bravery and sacrifices

14-510425/6

S/PV.7245

Security Council mission to Europe and Africa

that the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
and the Somali National Army had made in the pursuit
of peace in Somalia. We reiterated our determination to
end the threat posed by Al-Shabaab to Somalia and the
region. We underscored in particular the importance
of stabilization and the provision of basic services in
areas recovered from Al-Shabaab. AMISOM and the
head of the Somali National Army briefed the Security
Council on plans for the next phase of their operations
against Al-Shabaab. The AMISOM Force Commander
reminded Council members of the importance of
sourcing attack helicopters for their operations against
Al-Shabaab.
The Government of Somalia updated the Security
Council on the measures it had put in place to
manage the flow of arms in a more effective manner.
In response, the members of the Security Council
underlined the importance of complying with the
Security Council’s requirements in the management of
arms and ammunition.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
briefed the Security Council on the humanitarian
situation in Somalia. Council members expressed
concern that the United Nations consolidated

6/6

19/08/2014

humanitarian appeal for Somalia was significantly
underfunded, and committed to urging Member States
to make a contribution to the humanitarian fund.
Security Council members left Somalia with the
feeling of optimism. There are undoubtedly immense
challenges that remain, in particular on security. But
I think it is fair to say that, if the Government follows
through on its commitments to govern in the interests
of the people of Somalia and puts aside its differences,
then the Somali people could have the increased peace
and prosperity that they so richly deserve.
Finally, in my capacity as President of the Council,
I take this opportunity to thank the Secretariat and all
the co-leaders for their support in organizing the trip.
I know that it was a gruelling five days, but I think
that many of the themes, including around conflict
prevention and accountability, are vitally important for
our work here in New York. Travelling to South Sudan
and Somalia has given all of us added insight into two
conflict areas that we are directly addressing in the
Council.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 3.25 p.m.

14-51042
