S/PRST/2000/24

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 July 2000
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4173rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 17 July 2000, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Sierra Leone”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses its full support for the decision taken by
the Secretary-General to mount a military operation by the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) to relieve its surrounded peacekeepers
and military observers at Kailahun. It expresses its satisfaction at the
successful outcome of the operation, with the minimum of casualties among
United Nations personnel. The Security Council expresses its admiration for
the professionalism, determination and robustness displayed by all the
UNAMSIL forces involved in this difficult and dangerous operation, and for
the leadership and skill of the Force Commander, General Jetley, under whose
personal command it was carried out.
“The Security Council believes that the hostile stance taken by the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) towards UNAMSIL personnel at Kailahun
had become intolerable. It fully concurs with the Secretary-General’s
assessment in this regard. It is firmly of the view that, after over two months’
denial of freedom of movement by the RUF; the exhaustion of intensive
diplomatic and political efforts; and the recent decision by the RUF to impede
the resupply to Kailahun, the Force Commander, under these circumstances,
had no choice but to take resolute action to restore the security and freedom of
movement of UNAMSIL personnel, as authorized under the mandate of
UNAMSIL.
“The Security Council pays tribute to the forces of the Indian contingent
of UNAMSIL, who took the lead in the execution of the operation. The
Council expresses its profound condolences to the family of the Indian
sergeant, Krishna Kumar, who gave his life in the cause of peace. It also
expresses its sympathies to those who were wounded. The Security Council
commends equally the critical role played by the Nigerian and Ghanaian
contingents who provided essential flank and rear support, without which the
operation would not have been possible; as well as the contribution of the
force as a whole. The Council also expresses its appreciation to the United
Kingdom for the valuable logistical support provided. The cooperation,
coherence and sense of common purpose displayed by all concerned should be

00-53614 (E) 170700
`````````

S/PRST/2000/24

considered an example of the very best in United Nations multilateral
peacekeeping.
“The Council believes that there is now a firm foundation on which
UNAMSIL can build as it continues to implement its mandate and work
towards a lasting peaceful settlement to the conflict in Sierra Leone. While
noting these positive developments, the Council recognizes that there is still
much to be done, and expresses its full support to UNAMSIL in its efforts to
implement its mandate.”

2
