204

General Assembly - lhirty-eighth Session

social and political factors of a structural naturc, and that
within that conflict thc security forces and government
institutions had not rcspected the norms of international
humanitarian law,
t:xprcssinx ils satisfaction at the appointmcnt of a Special Rapporteur of thc Commission on Human Rights and
taking note of the co-operation extended to thc Special
Rapporteur by the Government of Guatemala,
Taking note of the interim report by the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Guatemala, 11 '
submitted in aceordance with Commission on Human
Rights resolution 1983/3 7.
vVclcoming the lifting ol'thc statc ofsiege ancl thc abolition of the special tribunals,
Disturbcd at the large number of persons who have disappeared, including thosc rcported to havc bccn tricd by
the special tribunals, and who, dcspite appeals from various international organintions, rcmain unaccounted for.
l. Expresscs its dccp conccrn at the continuing massi ve
violations of human rights in Guatemala, particularly the
violence against non-combatants, and the widespread
repression, killing and massive displacemcnt of rural and
indigenous populations, which are reportcd to havc
increased reccntly:
2. Calls upon thc Government of Guatemala to refrain
both from forcefully displacing people belonging to rural
and indigenous populations and from the practice of
coercing people into participation in civilian patrols. lead-ing to human rights violations:
3. Urf{es the Governmcnt of Guatemala to take effcetivc measures to ensurc that ali its authoritics and agencies, including its security forces, fully rcspcct human
rights and fundamental frecdoms:
4. Requcsts thc Govcrnmcnt of Guatemala to invcstigate and clarify thc fate of pcrsons who have disappeared
and are still unaccountcd for, including thosc reportee! to
have been tried by thc spccial tribunals:
5. Cal/s upon the Government of Guatemala to establish a system for thc revocation of convictions and
sentcnccs passcd by the spccial tribunals, now abolishecl:
6. Appea/s to the Government of Guatemala to allow
international humanitarian organizations to render assistance in invcstigating the fate of pcrsons who havc clisappeared, with a vicw to informing their rclatives of their
whereabouts, and to visit dctainccs or prisoners, and to
allow them to bring assistancc to the civilian population in
arcas of conflict:
7. Appea/s a/so to ali partics concerned in Guatemala
to cnsure the application of thc relevan! norms of international humanitarian law applicablc in armcd conflicts of a
non-international character to protect thc civilian population and to seek an end to ali acts of violcncc:
8. Ca/Is upon Govcrnments to rcfrain from supplying
arms and othcr military assistance as long as serious
human rights violations in Guatemala continuc to be
rcported:
9. Invites thc Governmcnt of Guatemala and othcr
parties concerned to continue co-operating with the Spccial Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights:
10. Rcquests the Comm1ssion on Human Rights to
study carefully the report of its Spccial Rapportcur, as wcll
as other information pcrtaining to thc situation in Guatel l 5 See A/38i48'i.

116 Resolutíon 217 A (111).

117 See Ofhc,a/ RffurJs o/thl' Lco1u11111c a11J Soua/ ( ounul, i 'JS I, Su¡,¡,/('
ment No.5-(E/1981/25 and Corr. l ). chap. XXVIII, sect. A.
11 8 /hiJ .. 19/i:'. Su¡,¡,ll'lncnt \'o :' (F l 'IX~ 1 ~ and ( orr.1 l. cha p. X X\' 1
scct. A.

mala, and to consider furthcr steps for securing effective
rc~pect for human rights ancl fundamental freedoms for ali
in that country;
11. Decides to continue its examination of the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Guatemala at its thirty--ninth session.
100th p/enary meeting
16 Deccmher 1983

]8/101. Situation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in El Salvador
/'he <icncra/ . 11·.1·e111h/_r,
Uuidcd by the principies embodied in the Charter ofthe
l lnited Nations and in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 1'"
( 'om·c,ous of its responsibility in ali circumstances to
promote and cncourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for ali,
Rc1tcrating that the Governments of ali Member States
have an ohligation to promote and protect human rights
and fundamental freedoms and to carry out the responsihilitics they havc undertaken undcr various intemational
human rights instrumcnts,
Dc1crm111cd to rcmain vigilan! with regard to violations
ofhuman rights wherever they occur and to take measures
to restorc rcspcct for human rights and fundamental freednms,
Rccalling that, m its rcsolutions 35/ l 92 of 15 December
1980. 36/155 of 16 Dccember 1981 and 37/185 of 17
Dccember 1982, it cxprcsscd cleep concem at the situation
of human rights in El Salvador, especially in view of the
death of thousancls of pcoplc and the climate of violence
ancl insecurity prevailing in that country, as well as the
,mpunity of paramilitary forces and other armed groups,
Bearinx in mind Commission on Human Rights resolut1ons 32 (XXXVII) of 11 March 1981, 117 in which the
<'ommission clecidcd to appoint a Special Representative
on thc situation of human rights in El Salvador, 1982/28
of 11 March 1982 118 and 1983/29 of 8 March 1983, 119
whercby the Commission extended the mandate of the
Spccial Represcntativc for another year and requested him
to rcport, ínter afia, to thc General Assembly at its thirtycighth session,
Taking note wilh grave concern of the interim report of
thc Spccial Represcntative of the Commission on Human
Rights, 12 º in which the continuation of aclimate of violencc and insccurity in El Salvador, characterized by
armcd clashcs, acts of economic sabotage and grave and
large-scalc violations of human rights, as well as the failure
of the Salvadorian authorities to prevent these constant
violations of human rights in that country, are confirmed,
Bcaring 1n 111111d that in its resolution 37/185 the General Assembly obscrved that thc elections which were held
in El Salvador in March 1982 had not led to the cessation
of violcnce or to improvement in the situation of human
rights ancl fundamental freedoms in that country;
Noting with satisfaction that thc El Salvador Peace Commission, officials and special envoys of other Govemments
within and outside thc region, as well as the rcpresentative
political forces, have initiatcd talks in the scarch for a
negotiatccl comprehcnsivc political solution,
119 //,,d .. /9,H s,,,,¡,/,•J11,·111 .\o 3 (E'1983/13 and Corr.l). chap. XXVII.
'-l"l'I.

\.

l .?n Sc:e :\ ;~ 50_\

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

l. Commends the Special Representative of the Commission on Human Rights for his interim report on the situation of human rights in El Salvador;
2. Expresses its deepest concern at the fact that, as indicated in the report of the Special Representative, the gravest violations ofhuman rights are persisting in El Salvador
and that, as a result, the sufferings of the Salvadorian people are continuing, and regrets that the appeals for the cessation ofthe acts ofviolence made by the General Assembly, the Commission on Human Rights and the
international community as a whole have not been
heeded;
3. Again draws the attention of the Salvadorian parties
concerned to the fact that the rules of international law, as
contained in article 3 common to the Geneva Conventions
of 12 August 1949 121 and Additional Protocols I and 11
thereto, 122 are applicable to armed conflicts not of an
international character, such as that in El Salvador, and
requests all parties to apply a mínimum standard of protection of human rights and of humane treatment of the
civilian population;
4. Takes note of resolution l 983/18 of 5 September
1983 of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, 123 in which the SubCommission suggested that the Special Representative
give attention in his report to respect for or violation of
humanitarian law in armed conflict;
5. Recommends that the reforms necessary for the
solution of the economic and social problems which are at
the root of the interna! conflict in El Salvador should be
put into effect so as to allow the effective exercise of civil
and political rights in that country, and reaffirms the right
of the Salvadorian people freely to determine their political, economic and social future without interference from
outside and in an atmosphere free from intimidation and
terror;
6. Cal/s upon the Government of El Salvador and
other political forces to intensify their talks and to work
towards the creation of suitable conditions in the common
search for a negotiated comprehensive political solution
which will put an end to the interna! armed conflict and
establish a Iasting peace which will allow the full exercise
both of civil and political rights and of economic, social
and cultural rights by ali Salvadorians;
7. Once again urges ali Sta tes to abstain from intervening in the interna) situation in El Salvador and to suspend
all supplies of arms and any type of military assistance, so
as to allow the restoration of peace and security and the
establishment of a democratic system based on full respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms;
8. Expresses its deep concern at reports which prove
that government forces regularly resort to bombarding
urban areas in El Salvador that are not military objectives,
and its concern for the fate of severa! hundred thousand
displaced persons who are currently located in camps in
which they are subjected to abuse and in which not even
the minimum conditions of internment, in terms of either
humane treatment or material needs, are observed;
9. A/so expresses its deep concern at the resurgence of
disappearances and murders of persons belonging to various sectors of the civilian population, for which the socalled "death squads" claim responsibility, and urges that
these activities be investigated with a view to punishing
those responsible;
1O. Expresses its concern at the consequences of the
damage done to the economy of El Salvador as a result of
121 United Nations, Treatv Series, vol. 75. Nos. 970-973.
122 N32/144, annexes I a·nd 11.

205

the attacks on the economic infrastructure attributable for
the most part, according to the report of the Special
Representative, to the opposition forces;
l l. Reiterates its urgent appeal to the Government of
El Salvador to fulfil its obligations towards its citizens and
to assume its international responsibilities in this regard
by taking the necessary steps to ensure that ali its agencies,
including its security forces and other armed organizations
operating under its authority, fully respect human rights
and fundamental freedoms;
12. Urges the competent authorities of El Salvador to
establish the necessary conditions to enable the judiciary
to uphold the rule of law, prosecuting and punishing
speedily and effectively those responsiblc for the grave violations of human rights which are being committed in that
country:
13. Reiterates its appeal to all Salvadorian parties in
the conflict to co-operate fully and not to interfere with the
activities of humanitarian organizations dedicated to alleviating the suffering of the civilian population, wherever
these organizations operate in the country;
14. Deplores the violent death of Marianela García
Villas, President of the Commission of Human Rights of
El Salvador, and, given the contradictory reports on the
matter, requests the Special Representative of the Commission on Human Rights to investigate the circumstances
of her death;
15. Renews its appeal to the Government of El Salvador, as well as ali other parties concerned, to continue to
co-operate with the Special Representative of the C'ommission on Human Rights:
16. Decides to keep under consideration, during its
thirty-ninth session, the situation ofhuman rights and fundamental freedoms in El Salvador, in order to examine
this situation anew in the light of additional elements provided by the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and Social Council.
100th plenary meeting
16 December 1983

38/102.

Situation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Chile

The General Assembly,
Aware of its responsibility to promote and encourage
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for ali
and determined to remain vigilant with regard to violations of human rights wherever they occur,
Stressingthe obligation ofGovernments to promote and
protect human rights and to carry out the responsibilities
they have undertaken by virtue of various international
instruments,
Recal/ing its resolutions 3219 (XXIX) of 6 November
1974, 3448 (XXX) of 9 December 1975, 31/124 of 16
December 1976, 32/118 of 16 December 1977, 33/175 of
20 December 1978, 34/179 of 17 December l 979, 35/188
of 15 December 1980, 36/ 157 of 16 December 1981 and
37/183 of 17 December 1982, relating to the situation of
human rights in Chile. as well as its resolution 33/173 of
20 December l 978 on disappeared persons.
Recal/ing a/so the resolutions of the Commission on
Human Rights on the situation of human rights in Chile,
in particular resolution 1983/38 of 8 March 1983, 119 in
which the Commission decided. inter afia, to extend for a
123 See E/CN.4/1984/3-E CN.4/Sub.2/1983/43 and Corr. 1 and 2. cha p.
XXL sert. A.
