S/PV.4921 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-ninth year

4921

st meeting
Thursday, 4 March 2004, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De La Sablière . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (France)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Aho-Glele
Mr. Valle
Mr. Muñoz
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Akram
Mr. Baja
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Arias
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Negroponte

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Letter dated 19 February 2004 from the Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2004/124)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

04-26034 (E)

*0426034*

S/PV.4921 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Egypt, on
whom I now call.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We
wanted to participate in today’s meeting because we
believe that this issue, and the debate that is taking
place on it within the United Nations, are of great
importance, given the threat posed by international
terrorism — a threat that has been manifested in a
number of different ways. Peace, security and
economic and social development have been
jeopardized. All parts of the international community
must therefore come together to show their
determination to confront terrorism. A high degree of
international involvement is required if we are to
combat that scourge in all of its manifestations.
I would like to take up a number of points that we
believe are essential in the context of this debate.
First, terrorism has forcefully imposed itself on
the United Nations agenda, as it represents an
international threat that makes no distinction among
peoples, countries, religions or cultures. Egypt was,
and remains, among the first countries to affirm that
terrorism is an international phenomenon to which we
must develop a common response in order to defeat it
and that we must do so while avoiding unilateral
measures or actions directed against any particular
culture, civilization or religion.
Secondly, in the past two years the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) has succeeded in
reaffirming that the United Nations, through its various
bodies, is in a position effectively and resolutely to
deal with the varying and growing international threat
posed by terrorism. In that context, Egypt has done its
utmost to cooperate with the CTC, having submitted
three reports to date. We are fully committed to
following up on them and to strengthening our
cooperation in that respect.
Thirdly, the United Nations has shown that it is
the most effective instrument for combating terrorism.
It can coordinate and consolidate efforts, whether
within the General Assembly — which has always
played an important role as an effective legislative
instrument in fighting international terrorism — or in
the Security Council. In this context, I would like to
stress that while we fully support the efforts of the

2

Security Council in this respect, the General Assembly
has a role to play in thwarting the international scourge
of terrorism.
We are all well aware of the fact that terrorism
manifests itself in a number of different ways, and that
we must therefore respond to it on various levels. In
order to counter this scourge, we must not confine
ourselves to a purely security-oriented approach,
adopting mere surveillance or monitoring measures.
The actions we undertake must also have a political
dimension, and must address the legal system and
social and economic issues. It is very important to take
all of those aspects into account if we are to succeed in
depriving the terrorists of support and to tighten the
grip around them so that they cannot gain access to
financial or political support. It is vital, therefore, to
ensure complementarity between the efforts of the
Security Council and those of the General Assembly.
The General Assembly must play an important
role because it deals with the aspects of terrorism to
which I have referred and should not therefore be
dismissed or sidelined. We must avoid the duplication,
fragmentation and tinkering that can have a negative
impact on international cooperation in the fight against
the pernicious activity of terrorism. Thus, we need
integrated, unified strategies and visions that will
enable us to deal with this growing threat in a
coordinated and effective way.
Fourthly and lastly, there have been a number of
proposals for revitalizing the CTC and making it more
effective. The issue of technical assistance to States
should be included in those proposals. Our experience
shows that, due to a lack of technical assistance, some
Member States are not always able to submit their
reports to the CTC. As a result, those States are unable
to take the necessary measures under resolution 1373
(2001) at the national and international levels.
In conclusion, I stress the importance of
complying with the provisions of the Charter regarding
institutional issues, in particular Chapter XV and the
relevant financial, administrative and legal rules and
regulations. Those provisions should be complied with
by the organs and agencies of the United Nations, and
we must take them into account when we consider
proposals for assisting and enhancing the role of the
CTC. That way, the revitalization process will be able
to move forward soundly and firmly, as it should,

S/PV.4921 (Resumption 1)

giving the CTC the necessary momentum for achieving
its objectives.
I thank the members of the CTC for their efforts
in the negotiations and for their proposals. I also thank
Ambassador Inocencio Arias, the Chairman of the
CTC, for devoting his energy, dedication and
experience to ensuring the future success of the CTC.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Liechtenstein, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): This debate
coincides with the final stages of a long and intense
process of negotiation on the framework for CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) reform. Thus, it is our
hope that this open debate will be a further source of
inspiration for Council members.
In that sense, we would like to offer a few brief
comments on the envisaged reform. At the outset, it is
important to note that, as outlined in the report on the
revitalization of the CTC (S/2004/124, annex), the
reform would not alter the substance of resolution 1373
(2001), in particular, the obligations placed on Member
States. The reform is intended merely to make the
institutional changes necessary to bring the CTC’s
structure and expert capacity in line with the challenges
lying ahead.
There continue to be intense discussions about
the institutional implications of CTC reform. We share
the view of those who emphasize that any revitalization
measure must uphold the institutional balance of the
Organization, and the integrity of the Secretariat in
particular. We have taken note of the views expressed
by the Secretariat in that respect, which were also
referred to earlier in this debate, and we are confident
that the Council will find agreement on reform that is
in conformity with the principles mentioned earlier.
We welcome the intention to increase the CTC’s
capacity, in particular in the field of the coordination of
technical assistance. In that respect, the strictly
consensual nature of technical assistance needs to be
underlined, as well as the particular role of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), based
in Vienna. Notwithstanding the global coordinating
role of the CTC, the UNODC continues to be the prime
United Nations body for the actual delivery of
technical assistance.

In the past, we have stressed that the work of the
CTC, in particular in the field of technical assistance,
should be tailored to meet the needs of human rights
and the rule of law, which must be reconciled with
measures aimed at effectively countering terrorism.
That becomes all the more important in the light of
visits by CTC experts to States to discuss the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), as foreseen
in the revitalization report, and in the light of the future
reports of the proposed Executive Director on the
implementation of that resolution. It is therefore crucial
that the staff of the assessment and technical assistance
office possess the necessary qualifications and
awareness in this area and that the envisaged liaison
with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights be thoroughly put
into practice. We believe that the recruitment of a
human rights adviser would be a good way to achieve
that goal.
Finally, let me express once again Liechtenstein’s
commitment to international cooperation in the fight
against terrorism and to cooperation with the Security
Council, and in particular with the CTC and with the
sanctions Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999).
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Argentina, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): My
country is speaking on behalf of the States members of
the Rio Group: Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, Venezuela and, of
course, Argentina.
First, we thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting. It is particularly important to endorse the
legitimacy of the process of revitalizing the CounterTerrorism Committee through a meeting open to all
States Members of the United Nations.
The members of the Rio Group reaffirm their
resolute support for the efforts undertaken by the
Security Council in the global fight against terrorism. It
was a little less than three years ago that the CounterTerrorism Committee was created. Under the
leadership of its two Chairmen, Ambassador Jeremy
Greenstock of the United Kingdom and Ambassador
Inocencio Arias of Spain, the Committee has achieved

3

S/PV.4921 (Resumption 1)

unprecedented success in the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) through the examination of the
existing legislation and administrative norms of all
States, the facilitation of technical assistance and the
establishment of monitoring and coordination networks
in the global fight against terrorism.
Let us recall that this fight encompasses all
organs and agencies of the United Nations system. In
addition to the intense efforts of the Security Council,
there are the responsibilities of the General Assembly,
which has made notable progress in international law,
and of other United Nations bodies, such as the Vienna
Office, which has a programme devoted specifically to
terrorism. Let us also recall that important activities
have been carried out at the regional level. In our
region, the Inter-American Committee against
Terrorism of the Organization of American States
works to enhance cooperation, coordinate national
focal points for the fight against terrorism and improve
the capacity of State officials to deal with this issue. As
a result, universal action should be coordinated and
uniform at every level in order to ensure its maximum
impact.
Let us recall that terrorists often co-opt causes
and use them as a pretext to carry out their criminal
actions. For that reason, the fight against terrorism
cannot be allowed to affect, nor cause us to neglect, the
importance attached to the other priorities of this
Organization, especially those that are linked to the
promotion and protection of human rights and to
economic and social development.
The Committee now intends to review a series of
measures designed to facilitate the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). One of the salient measures is
the establishment of a new structure. This initiative,
which is time-bound and of an experimental nature, is a
very important one, in our opinion.
The new structure will institutionalize, for the
first time, the link between this Committee and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
as well as with other competent bodies in this area. The
countries of the Rio Group would like to express their
satisfaction at this step forward, which we have been
awaiting for some time. We believe that a next step
would be to include in the Committee an expert who
would deal exclusively with this matter — that is,
human rights — as has been suggested by

4

organizations such as Human Rights Watch and
Amnesty International.
Of course, a fundamental aspect of the
Committee’s role involves technical assistance. This
essential function, in our opinion, should continue to
be improved and expanded. We believe that this reform
represents an excellent opportunity to see if any
inadequacies exist and to take appropriate measures to
remedy them.
The countries of the Rio Group believe that the
establishment of an Executive Directorate will provide
flexibility, vitality and a greater ability to follow up on
the work of the CTC, and for that reason we support it.
The establishment of structures within the Secretariat,
especially through a decision of the Security Council,
warrants special attention. We believe that the
Executive Directorate should be properly integrated
into the Secretariat, without preventing it from
following the policy guidelines be transmitted to it by
the plenary. We believe that it is essential, in order to
ensure the transparency and legitimacy of this
initiative, strictly to abide by the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations in appointing staff to this
new structure.
The Rio Group would like once again to welcome
this initiative to revitalize the Committee’s work and
would like to reiterate once again the commitment of
all its members to continue to ensure the greatest
possible success in the fight against terrorism.
Before concluding, I would like to say, on behalf
of my country, Argentina — which was the victim of
cruel attacks which, in addition to killing hundreds of
innocent people, destroyed the embassy of Israel in
Buenos Aires and the AMIA building — that the
Government of Argentina is ready to make every effort
and provide every possible form of assistance to the
Committee in the fight against terrorism.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Mexico, to
whom I give the floor.
Mr. Berruga (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, we would like to express our appreciation to
you, Mr. President, for having convened this timely
meeting. Let me stress that the delegation of Mexico
endorses the statement just made by the Ambassador of
Argentina on behalf of the Rio Group.

S/PV.4921 (Resumption 1)

Nevertheless, we would like to make a few
observations and proposals in a national capacity.
Meeting the challenges we face in the struggle
against terrorism requires the coordinated and
integrated action of States. It involves not only the
Security Council but also the General Assembly and
other organs of the multilateral system. Above all, it
requires international cooperation in the broadest sense
of the term.
My delegation has participated in this process and
has followed with interest and in a constructive spirit
developments and proposals aimed at strengthening
institutional mechanisms designed to increase the
effectiveness of the United Nations in its fight against
terrorism.
In that context, we would like to express our
gratitude for the intensive work done by the CounterTerrorism Committee and in particular by its current
Chairman, Ambassador Inocencio Arias, in submitting
the document entitled “Proposal for the revitalization
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee”.
We are pleased that the proposal takes as its
reference point the strengthening of international
cooperation and assistance to States within the
framework of resolution 1373 (2001), without
neglecting the principle of the sovereign consent of
States. Our experience inside and outside the
Committee has convinced us that the fight against
terrorism cannot be effective, nor can it enjoy the
necessary cooperation of the international community,
if we do not develop transparent mechanisms that
guarantee observance of the Charter of the United
Nations and in particular the protection of human
rights.
Mexico has stressed the importance of
strengthening the link between the machinery
established for the protection of human rights and that
designed to combat terrorism. For that reason, we are
pleased to see that the proposal considers making the
Assessment and Technical Assistance Office the link
with the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and with other competent bodies,
including special rapporteurs.
Along those same lines, we believe that the
revitalization of the Committee will facilitate the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1456
(2003) and of General Assembly resolution 58/187,

entitled “Protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in the fight against terrorism”, which, as the
Council is aware, was promoted by Mexico and
sponsored by a substantial number of States.
Without minimizing any of the aforementioned
considerations, Mexico believes that the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons requires priority
attention. That reality has a devastating effect on the
civilian population in various parts of the world,
especially when terrorist acts are involved.
In the light of these considerations, Mexico
believes that revitalization should be based on the
following criteria.
First, in addition to the link with the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, a human rights
expert should be appointed to the Assessment and
Technical Assistance Office. Secondly, we should also
have an expert in the area of the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons. Thirdly, the new Office should
be an integral part of the structure of the Secretariat,
under the competence of the Secretary-General with
respect to the appointment of personnel. In that respect,
we feel that it would be extremely positive if broadbased consultations could be held before we appoint an
Executive Director.
Fourthly, we believe that the appointment of staff
and experts envisaged in the context of the
revitalization should be based
on
regional
representation criteria. Mexico believes that this will
not be sufficiently guaranteed if we rely solely on the
proposed criterion of representativity of the principal
legal systems.
Fifthly, and lastly, the budgetary aspects of
revitalization must be transparent and disseminated in a
timely fashion to all of the members.
In conclusion, it is clear that a resolution on the
revitalization of the Committee will be limited to
issues of administrative structure and that we will have
to begin the discussion on whether or not it is
necessary to adopt it under Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of Israel.
Mr. Gillerman (Israel): Allow me at the outset to
pay tribute to the Spanish Ambassador, Mr. Arias, for
his stewardship as Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism

5

S/PV.4921 (Resumption 1)

Committee (CTC). The CTC, under his leadership,
continues to assume a vanguard role in the global
campaign against terrorism by assisting and monitoring
State implementation of Security Council resolution
1373 (2001). Israel would like to take this opportunity
to reaffirm its support for the work of the CTC and to
assure it of our full cooperation.
In our fight against terror, we should not forget
the faces of the victims. Lior was a happy boy and one
of the most popular students in his class. His friends
described him as the class clown, a boy who was
always making everyone else laugh. He was a forward
on the school soccer team and had dreams of a career
in the sport. “Lior excelled at keeping control of the
ball and loved dribbling it in front of everyone else,”
his coach has said.
Lior Azulai, age 18, a 12th-grader at the
Gymnasia School in the Rehavia neighbourhood of
central Jerusalem, was killed on the morning of 22
February in a homicide attack on the bus that took him
and dozens of his classmates to school every
morning — but not on that morning. Eight Israelis were
killed and over 60 wounded when a Palestinian
terrorist from Bethlehem detonated a bomb hidden in
his backpack, mangling the crowded bus and scattering
body parts and wreckage throughout the area of the
blast, creating a scene of despicable horror.
The Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade of Yasser Arafat’s
own Fatah movement claimed responsibility for the
attack. It was the same terror cell responsible for the
grave homicide attack that killed 11 passengers on a
bus in Jerusalem less than one month earlier, on 29
January.
Since we last met in October 2003 to convene an
open debate in the Security Council on the threat of
terrorist acts, Israel has witnessed the murder of 66
Israelis and the injury of 224 in a continuous onslaught
of terrorist attacks. These figures, by the way, do not
include three United States citizens and a European
tourist who were killed during that period.
But these numbers are just the tip of this
horrendous phenomenon. In this same period alone,
217 terror attacks — including numerous homicide
bombings — have been thwarted by the Israeli security
forces. They would have cost the lives of hundreds of
innocent people, if not more. The terrorists target the
most defenceless in our society, such as Lior Azulai,
other young boys and girls, women and the elderly

6

alike. Homicide bombings have orphaned our children
and widowed our husbands and wives. They have
denied us life, peace and hope. What Israel faces today
in its most potent and sustained form has shown itself
to be nothing less than the first world war of the
twenty-first century. This new and horrendous
phenomenon is now revealing itself to the rest of the
world.
Recent global attacks have demonstrated that
extremist elements continue to be willing and able to
strike at any target, in any hemisphere, without concern
or regard for human life. In New York, Washington,
D.C., Mombassa, Bali, New Delhi, Casablanca,
Jerusalem — no part of the world is immune from the
scourge of this global threat. Israel would like to
express its condemnation of recent terror events in
Russia, Iraq, Pakistan and other areas of the world.
Those despicable acts, unfortunately, demonstrate once
again the long road still ahead in the fight against
terrorism. We send our condolences to the bereaved
families and our wishes for a speedy recovery to the
injured. The war on terrorism is far from won.
Steadfast political will constitutes a potent
instrument of power, ensuring a united front of
international counter-terrorism cooperation based on
two essential components: the adoption of a zerotolerance attitude towards terrorism in all its forms and
the elimination of safe havens and support
infrastructure for terrorists provided by any
Government. The States that continue to harbour
terrorists and abet their activity must be named and
shamed. In that respect, our tone must be strong and
unmistakable.
Today, it is clear that the success of the global
counter-terrorism campaign will depend both on
sustaining international political will and on enhancing
the capacity of all States to fight terrorism, including
assisting those well-intentioned States that want to
fight terror but lack the necessary tools and experience
to meet the challenge. It has never been more clear that
the international community must pool its resources. In
the absence of close coordination, unwavering political
will and enhanced capacity-building among States,
terrorists will succeed in taking advantage of every
weakness, vulnerability and disagreement.
We must also re-examine our capacity to deal
with a second category of States — those that possess
the means to fight terrorism but lack the will to do so.

S/PV.4921 (Resumption 1)

In many cases, it is not a question of capability, but a
question of willingness. I would like to share with
Council members what I see as a troubling
contradiction in the letter and spirit of resolution 1373
(2001) and the ability of the CTC to take the necessary
actions to implement its objectives. Whereas resolution
1373 (2001) was adopted unanimously under Chapter
VII of the United Nations Charter, it seems that
implementation depends upon the consensus support of
the members of the CTC. I believe that this stipulation
may present a serious obstacle to the current direction
of the CTC’s work and our potential to effect real,
tangible results in the area of counter-terrorism. In
order to better serve the cause of resolution 1373
(2001), decisions should be taken by majority —
relative or absolute — and not by consensus. The
requirement of a consensus vote could impede crucial
actions taken by the Committee.
It is in this spirit that Israel has been and
continues to be supportive of ongoing efforts to
strengthen international counter-terrorism cooperation
in general and the work of the CTC in particular. In the
past year alone, we have witnessed increasing interest
on the part of Member States to work more closely
with us against terrorism and we have responded by
readily sharing our painfully gained experience in that
difficult sphere. We are equally willing to increase our
role in the work of the CTC, both at the administrative
level as well as in the field. No country can be left out
if international counter-terrorism efforts are to truly
succeed.
We agree with the current direction of the
Committee’s work, which seeks to move from
formulating guidelines to practical implementation
with a view to attaining tangible results on the ground.
Two years after the horrifying terrorist attacks of 9
September 2001, the international community is still
formulating its counter-terrorism agenda. The existing
agenda — gleaned from the landmark Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001) — already rests on critical
counter-terrorism pillars, inter alia, enhancing
capacity-building and pooling resources, implementing
national legislation, increasing information exchange,
reinforcing land and sea security, and combating
terrorist financing. It is crucial that these elements also
be implemented on the ground.
In that context, we would like to draw attention to
comments included in the report of the Chairman of the

CTC with regard to the continuing challenge of
combating terrorism financing:
“Certain non-profit associations have been
used by terrorists, either to disseminate terrorist
propaganda or by collecting funds that are
diverted for the benefit of terrorist groups.”
(S/2004/70, p. 6)
We would hope that those wise words will be taken on
board and acted upon by Member States.
However, in our view, efforts cannot stop here.
There is a continuing need to update the international
counter-terrorism agenda in order to deal with
emerging threats in an attempt to keep pace with an
increasingly sophisticated terrorist world. Agenda
items that deserve increased attention include, among
others, blocking the financing of terrorism, suicide
terrorism, Man-Portable Air Defence Systems,
terrorism using weapons of mass destruction, and the
nurturing of a culture of violence and hatred. We look
forward to working with the Committee in its new
phase of implementation, and we wish members of the
Committee much success in achieving their noble
aspirations.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): I would like to
convey my delegation’s appreciation to you, Mr.
President, for convening this important debate on
threats to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Arias of Spain for the exemplary manner in which he
has chaired the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).
South Africa, which is already party to 9 of the
12 United Nations conventions on terrorism and is in
the process of ratifying the remaining three
conventions, remains fully committed to the collective
effort of the international community to address the
threat of terrorism. However, we meet today at a time
when the Security Council has already completed its
review of the strategic direction, structures and
procedures of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
has even commenced negotiations on a new resolution.
We would hope that it is not too late for the views of
the wider United Nations membership to be taken into
consideration and that we can accurately express our
views in the few short minutes allocated to us.

7

S/PV.4921 (Resumption 1)

My delegation is encouraged by the efforts to
make the CTC more proactive in facilitating the
provision of technical assistance to Member States and
in promoting closer coordination and cooperation with
relevant international organizations. At the same time,
we believe it would be important for the Council to
acknowledge, on behalf of Member States, the great
lengths already gone to by many Governments around
the world in bringing their national legislation in line
with the requirements of the Security Council. We
believe it is necessary that those factors be taken into
account when deliberations on any new counterterrorism measures are being considered.
The long-term sustainability of our collective
effort against terrorism will also depend upon the
Security Council taking into account the different
capacities and capabilities of individual Member
States. We should avoid placing unachievable
administrative, technical and financial burdens on
Member States. Inability by Member States to
implement Chapter VII decisions of the Security
Council not only would undermine the effectiveness of
those particular measures, but also could have negative
implications for the future application of measures
adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter.
South Africa supports the approach always
followed by the CTC — that of adopting decisions by
consensus. The Committee’s practice of promoting
cooperation and dialogue among sovereign and equal
Member States is also commendable and should
continue to inform the Committee’s work.
One of the challenges that the CTC has faced is to
offer a cost-effective and financially transparent
service to the Security Council and to Member States
as they seek to implement resolution 1373 (2001). The
proposal to create one centralized structure for the
expert and Secretariat support staff — to be known as
the
Counter-Terrorism
Committee
Executive
Directorate — may help to address that challenge. Any
Council decision to give effect to that proposal should,
however, be in accordance with the Charter and with
the financial rules and regulations of the United
Nations.
We note that the CTC anticipates that the
establishment of the new structure should not increase
the budget and the resources already generously
allocated to the CTC in a way that would be
detrimental to the other priority programmes and

8

initiatives of the United Nations. That is particularly
pertinent at a time when the Organization is required to
address the needs of millions of people afflicted by
poverty and conflict within its already constrained
budget. In restructuring the support unit for the CTC,
care should also be taken to ensure that the principle of
preserving the integrity and representativity of the
Secretariat — and the authority of the SecretaryGeneral over the Secretariat — is maintained, in
accordance with Chapter XV of the Charter. Deviating
from those provisions would set unwanted precedents.
The South African Government is concerned
about perceptions that are created by unsubstantiated
statements or advisories by other Governments and the
media regarding the potential of terrorist activities in
third countries. Such unsubstantiated and selective
statements or advisories could negatively affect not
only a country’s standing, but also its security
situation. There is a danger that terrorists and terrorist
organizations may either exploit such statements or
advisories or view them as providing indications of
opportunities to conduct terrorist activities.
The South African Government therefore calls on
the Security Council to bring these concerns to the
attention of Member States and to impress upon their
Governments the need to act responsibly when dealing
with such sensitive issues, which have potentially
serious consequences. States should desist from issuing
general warnings and other statements, including travel
advisories, about unsubstantiated threats of terrorism in
other countries. When States obtain information about
potential terrorist activities, it is essential for the
Governments of those States to alert the Governments
of the States where the potential terrorist activity is to
take place, rather than proceeding to issue a statement
or travel advisory without any such consultation. Prior
and confidential consultation would allow the States
concerned to first verify the information and then take
the necessary steps to prevent and act against the
terrorist threat. The objective here should be to prevent
and combat terrorism without creating a climate of fear
and insecurity.
The South African Government has made
significant progress in further refining and improving
its national counter-terrorism capabilities, and
comprehensive new counter-terrorism legislation is
currently before our Parliament. However, we are well
aware that terrorism is a complex global phenomenon
that can often be linked with other forms of organized

S/PV.4921 (Resumption 1)

transnational crime. We therefore acknowledge that it
can be addressed effectively only through sustained
international cooperation, including in fields such as
intelligence sharing, police action and technical
assistance.
Such
a
comprehensive
approach
necessitates understanding and addressing the root
causes of terrorism. That would include the need to
resolve conflicts in all parts of the globe and a joint
commitment by the international community to
eradicate poverty and underdevelopment.

My delegation agrees with that principle, and we
affirm that it is necessary to abide by it. International
consensus on Security Council resolution 1373 (2001)
and the work that has been done are a matter of prime
importance that should not be neglected, regardless of
any wish to do so. We also agree with paragraph 3 of
the report, which relates to the objectives of
revitalization. We hope that Council members will
discuss that paragraph with all the necessary scrutiny
and care.

The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

The Committee proposes the establishment of
new structures, and there are also references to sound
financial accountability. We are confident that the
proposals to revitalize the Committee are, in every
respect, consistent with the Charter, the financial and
administrative rules and regulations of the United
Nations and with the priorities contained in the
medium-term plan.

Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): It gives me pleasure to express our satisfaction
at the convening of this meeting, which is being held
within the framework of our collective follow-up on
the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
I would like to thank Ambassador Arias,
Permanent Representative of Spain and Chairman of
the Committee, and the other members of the
Committee for the efforts they have been making to
muster the efforts of all States Members of the United
Nations, in particular, and of the international
community in general, in combating terrorism.
This is our first statement on the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) since the end of
our term as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council. I mention that only to recall that Syria has
participated effectively in the work of that important
Committee. It worked with other Council members to
crystallize various proposals and ideas concerning the
revitalization of the Committee. It gives us pleasure to
note that the 19 February report on the revitalization of
the work of the Committee (S/2004/124, annex)
reflects a number of the opinions we had expressed.
Here, I would like to reaffirm that Syria supports the
role of the United Nations in combating international
terrorism, based on the purposes and principles of the
Charter — which become even more important when
the world faces new challenges and dangers.
The report on the revitalization of the work of the
CTC notes that revitalization is justified by the need to
safeguard and strengthen the relevant legal framework.
The report’s proposals should be viewed as a means to
support what has already been accomplished, and to
reinforce the work of the Committee and the Security
Council in that respect.

Syria condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, and calls for serious discussion of its
roots and causes. Such treatment should not be
superficial or limited by time. In order to achieve this,
Syria, which has fully cooperated with other countries
in combating terrorism, thus thwarting many terrorist
acts, renews it principled readiness to strengthen that
cooperation, which serves our common interest and the
interest of international peace and security. We believe
that any party that kills innocent people, destroys
houses upon the heads of women and children, creates
faits accomplis in occupied territories and builds
settlements is practising terrorism, regardless of the
nomenclature. In fact that is more than terrorism.
Syria reaffirms the linkage between terrorism and
weapons of mass destruction. We call upon the
international community to combat both terrorism and
weapons of mass destruction in tandem.
As an expression of our sound intentions, we
submitted last year a draft Security Council resolution,
on behalf of the Arab Group, in which we called for the
Middle East region to be made an area free of weapons
of mass destruction, including nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons. No country would be exempt from
implementing such a resolution: it would be
implemented in accordance with the rules of
international legitimacy and without double standards.
Our draft resolution is still before the Council, and we
hope it will be adopted by consensus as soon as
possible.

9

S/PV.4921 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker is the representative of Costa Rica, to whom I
give the floor.
Mr. Stagno Ugarte (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me first of all to thank Ambassador
Inocencio Arias, the Permanent Representative of
Spain, for his excellent work as Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), and for the
briefing he just gave us on the report concerning the
revitalization of the Committee (S/2004/124, annex).
My delegation also associates itself with the comments
made by the representative of Argentina on behalf of
the Rio Group.
The fight against terrorism is one of the major
challenges facing the international community. That
crime victimizes the innocent civilian population and
endangers the political stability of all nations. We
therefore flatly condemn terrorism in all it forms and
manifestations, no matter where or by whom it is
committed. At the same time, we affirm that there can
be no political, philosophical, racial, ethnic or religious
justification for the crime of terrorism. In that context,
we welcome the efforts of the Security Council to
revitalize the work of the CTC in preventing acts of
terrorism.
Over the past three years, the CTC has collected a
great quantity of information on the legislative and
administrative measures that States are implementing
in the fight against terrorism, and in the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001). The Committee, acting as an intermediary, has
facilitated the provision of technical assistance to
countries that require it, and has cooperated with
various international organizations in disseminating
information on its assistance programmes. However,
the CTC must take some proposals into account in
order to make its work more effective.
My delegation, as an interlocutor and as a
beneficiary of the CTC’s services, would like to note a
few of those proposals. First, the establishment of
stages in verifying implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) seems to have made it difficult to obtain
assistance. The fight against terrorism requires the
simultaneous
development
of
legislative,
administrative and operational measures against that
crime. The Committee’s primary emphasis on
legislative aspects and on technical assistance in the
drafting of laws, although very necessary, should also

10

be accompanied by the provision of materials in an
operational framework, which is now also required. In
the future, the CTC should focus on providing
technical and material assistance in an operational
framework.
Secondly, the system of reports and additional
requests for information can also have contradictory
effects. States that have presented exhaustive and
timely reports and have adopted additional measures
against terrorism have been overwhelmed by new
increasingly detailed questions which penetrate ever
further into the framework of the exclusive jurisdiction
of States. Regrettably, some requests for information
seem to reflect a lack of sensitivity to the unique
conditions and specificities of the judicial,
administrative and legislative processes in the most
open and democratic of societies.
In particular, it would be desirable for the
Committee to take into account the standards and
principles in force in each State in the area of due
process and judicial guarantees, since those would limit
what measures can be imposed by a given State in the
fight against terrorism.
Furthermore, the CTC should focus primarily on
those States whose reports have been deficient, or for
which there is evidence that the measures implemented
have clearly been inadequate.
Thirdly, the CTC should respond to the appeal of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to make human rights the cornerstone of the
international strategy in the fight against terrorism. The
Committee should ensure that measures adopted by
States in the fight against terrorism are in full
conformity with applicable international law, especially
with human rights and refugee law, international
humanitarian law and the principle of non-refoulement.
Even though it is true that resolution 1373 (2001) does
not dwell on these aspects, it should be interpreted
within the framework of international law as a whole.
We should point out that the 12 international
conventions on terrorism contain carefully balanced
norms, which guarantee respect for fundamental rights,
international refugee law and due process. The CTC
should not only verify the implementation of the
punitive or preventive provisions of those conventions,
but should also verify the implementation of standards
that protect the human rights of the victims and of the
accused. Furthermore, the Committee must promote

S/PV.4921 (Resumption 1)

respect for fundamental rights and guarantees as a way
of preventing terrorist acts.
My delegation welcomes the proposals to
reorganize and revitalize the CTC, contained in the
annex to document S/2004/124. Those proposals point
in the right direction. However, there are other aspects
that should be considered.
With respect to the revitalization objectives, we
believe that in the future, the CTC should place more
emphasis on cooperation on operative aspects, should
focus its attention on States that have not complied
with their obligations in conformity with resolution
1373 (2001) and, above all, give respect for and
promotion of human rights priority as an essential part
in the fight against terrorism.
With respect to the establishment of a CTC
Executive Directorate, we believe that, this should be a
temporary measure, while a permanent body is
established within the United Nations to fight
terrorism. Indeed, the fight against terrorism should
become an ongoing activity of the United Nations.
Terrorism has adverse effects not only on international
peace and security, but also in the areas of human
rights, governance and economic and social
development. From that point of view, the coordination
of the international fight against terrorism must be
assigned to an independent and permanent body
located within the organic structure of the United
Nations. We believe that the time has come to seriously
study the possibility of establishing the office of a
United Nations high commissioner against terrorism,
which could also assist not only the Security Council
but also the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council. Only in that way can we properly
respond to the challenge of international terrorism.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Indonesia, to
whom I give the floor.
Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): I would like, Mr.
President, to express to you my delegation’s
appreciation for your having convened this open debate
on the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and on the proposal for its revitalization. Before
I go further, let me express my Government’s
commitment and determination to combat terrorism,
and its support for the work of the CTC.

The report of the CTC’s Chairman (S/2004/124,
annex) has described the main problems encountered in
the effort to fully comply with resolution 1373 (2001).
The report has advanced a package of measures aimed
at overcoming those problems and mitigating the
procedural and substantive difficulties already
identified.
The rationale for the CTC’s revitalization has
been its need for a more proactive role in dialogue with
Member States, in order to further facilitate technical
assistance and to promote closer cooperation and
coordination with other relevant international
organizations. In recognizing such a need, we believe
that the current challenges faced by the CTC in
implementing its mandate, contained in resolution 1373
(2001), will have to be addressed comprehensively. In
this case, the proposal for the establishment of a
Counter-Terrorism
Committee
Executive
Directorate — and the appointment of an executive
director as its head — need to be considered and
judged in the context of strengthening the CTC’s
effectiveness and efficiency in combating terrorism.
My delegation believes that although the rationale
for revitalizing the CTC is valid, it must nonetheless be
considered in the context of other important issues
which have equal validity and need to be approached in
a balanced manner.
We are gratified to note that the task of
revitalization, including the establishment of the
Executive Directorate within the existing United
Nations structure, will not become a burden or set a
precedent. It will also be subject to review by
December 2005, with a sunset clause set for December
2007. Based on those considerations, my delegation
endorses, in principle, the revitalization of the CTC.
Finally, I would like stress Indonesia’s conviction
that terrorism is a problem facing every nation and that
we can best fight and vanquish that menace through a
comprehensive approach that includes addressing the
root causes of terrorism and, ultimately, its eradication.
Development is among the other issues that need to be
approached in a balanced manner, so as to ensure that
terrorism has nowhere to hide and is defeated.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Canada, to
whom I give the floor.

11

S/PV.4921 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Rock (Canada): I am grateful for the
opportunity to speak today on behalf of Canada on the
important issue of revitalizing the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC). I want to first join with other
colleagues in expressing our gratitude and admiration
for the skilful and effective way in which Ambassador
Arias is discharging the complex and important work
of the Committee.
Since the Committee’s inception, Canada has
recognized the CTC as the focal point of the efforts
both to implement resolution 1373 (2001) and to make
the resources of donor States available to assist others
in meeting their international counter-terrorism
responsibilities. We believe the CTC should continue to
play a leading role in that respect.
We appreciate the progress the CTC has made,
particularly in promoting the importance of
implementing resolution 1373 (2001) and the 12
United Nations counter-terrorism conventions and
protocols.
We share the concern expressed by others about
the sustainability, effectiveness and continued
relevance of the CTC in the fight against terrorism. We
agree that the process of revitalization undertaken by
the Committee is important. The evaluation of reports,
coordination and expert needs assessments are all
critical activities. But we must take the measures
necessary to move beyond assessment to action, so that
identified gaps may be filled and required follow-up
activities may take place.
(spoke in French)
Some of these measures relate to the very
structure of the CTC. In this regard, the creation of an
Executive Directorate would be worthwhile, since it
could provide critical technical support to the Chair
and ensure continuity when the CTC’s chairmanship
changes. Measures that streamline decision-making,
facilitate communication and enhance flexibility should
also be welcomed.
(spoke in English)
We would hope, however, that restructuring
measures do not disproportionately increase the budget
and resources already allocated to the CTC, but rather
facilitate a more effective use of those resources. A
number of the challenges that the CTC faces are of
course mirrored at the national level. So much of
coordination and leveraging of resources is about

12

identifying and engaging the right people — and
getting them, of course, to talk to one another. This is
especially important when the activities are more
technical than political in nature.
Close cooperation at all levels between the CTC
and the Secretariat is as essential as that between the
CTC and Member States for maintaining the full
support needed to successfully enhance the work of the
CTC through the proposed Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate.
We can also make the CTC more action-oriented
by further enhancing its joint activities and interaction
with other organizations. To this end, we have
welcomed the CTC’s increased outreach to
international, regional and functional organizations. We
look forward to the results of the 12 March meeting cohosted by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime.
We support the proposal to strengthen the CTC’s
contacts and coordination with other United Nations
bodies. We consider the current collaboration between
the CTC and the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to be
exemplary. It is, indeed, a best practice.
Increased interaction of the CTC with the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and other human rights organizations in matters
related to counter-terrorism would also be welcomed
by Canada. Like others who have spoken today, we
support the inclusion of a human rights expert on the
staff of the CTC, because we believe that the fight
against terrorism must be conducted in accordance with
international commitments on human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
In this regard, I want to stress that Canadian
counter-terrorism capacity-building assistance is
provided in a manner consistent with respect for
international human rights norms and standards, and
that specific human rights components are integrated
into counter-terrorism initiatives where possible.
As originally conceived, the CTC should do more
to ensure that it is the central clearing house for the
many needs assessments, evaluation mechanisms and
counter-terrorism action plans that are being conducted
in regional and functional organizations. In our view,
this information should be in one place and accessible

S/PV.4921 (Resumption 1)

to donors, so that we may be in a position to respond.
As long as the CTC is not playing that central role,
some duplication is inevitable, creating additional and
unnecessary demands and burdens on developing
countries.

respect the Charter. But I repeat my firm conviction
that without serious revitalization, the Committee and
the United Nations run the risk, in the medium term, of
becoming ineffective. We must not allow that to
happen.

(spoke in French)

Secondly, the reform effort — and the necessary
draft resolution — will in no way modify the
philosophy or the substance of resolution 1373 (2001).
I repeat: it will in no way do so.

More can be done to improve information
exchange and communication with those major donor
States that, like Canada, are not members of the
Security Council. The demands on those donors to
provide assistance are increasing. However, we cannot
respond effectively if we do not have full access to the
information that our technical experts require in order
to meet the identified needs of recipient countries. For
our part, we are ready to expand our efforts to share
information about the assistance that we currently
provide.
(spoke in English)
In closing, let me underline again that Canada
supports the work of the United Nations CounterTerrorism Committee. We are pleased that the CTC
itself has taken practical steps towards revitalization so
as to ensure its continued relevance and central role in
the global fight against terrorism, drawing together all
Member States as active and full participants.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Inocencio Arias to respond to questions
and comments.
Mr. Arias (spoke in Spanish): I will be brief in
my response, but I will try to provide a few
clarifications.
First of all, I would like sincerely to thank all
those who have spoken today for their support for the
report of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), and
all those who expressed kind words to me.
I will go over a few of the points that were made.
First, the ultimate reason for the reform effort is that it
is an absolute necessity. That is the opinion of the
members of the Committee; it was also the opinion of
the previous Chairman, Ambassador Greenstock, who
was very familiar with this issue; and it is my opinion,
after 10 months as Chairman of the Committee. We
have listened to the Member States. We must pay
attention to the concerns of the Secretariat. We must be

Thirdly, in my opinion, the reform or
revitalization effort has two goals. On the one hand it
must result in increased and enhanced technical
assistance. We know that that is a very important issue;
many States react slowly to our requests because of a
lack of resources, and we must try to resolve that
problem. On the other, it must increase the
effectiveness and visibility of the Committee. We
believe that both of those goals can be achieved
through the revitalization exercise.
Fourthly, the new unit that we intend to create
will be temporary. Fifthly, revitalization will clearly
help us to avoid duplication of effort. Sixthly, the
revitalization exercise is not an attempt to establish a
precedent and will certainly not — I repeat, will not —
impose a financial burden of any importance on the
Organization. The increase in cost will be truly
minimal, as compared with what has been spent to
date.
Lastly, the revitalization exercise that is being
proposed, which is in conformity with the spirit and
letter of resolution 1373 (2001) and fully respects the
Charter, will strengthen, without great cost, the
effectiveness of the Council and of the United Nations
in the fight against the very serious threat of terrorism.
When the Committee points out that revitalization is
crucial, it does not do so lightly. We are convinced of
its necessity.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Arias for the clarifications that he has
provided.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

13
