132 (II). Conference on Freedom of Information

132 (II). Conference sur la liberte de l'information

L' Assemblee generate,

The General Assembly,

Takes note of the provisional agenda of the conference and invites the attention of the Economic
and Social Council to the discussion on this matter in the Third Committer 1 of the General
A,;sembly.
1/undred and seventeenth plenary meeting,
17 Nm·ember 1947.

Ayant examine la partie du chapitre III du rapport du Conseil economique et so<'ial qui a trait
a la reunion d'unc conference sur la libertc de
!'information,
Prend acte de l'ordre du jour provisoire de la
conference et recommande a l'attention du Conseil cconomique et social les debats de la Troisicme ~:ommission' de l'Assernblec gencrale relatifs a cette question.
Cent-dix-septieme seance pleniere,
le 17 novembre 1947.

133 (II). Exchange of workers

133 (Ill. Echange de travailleurs

Having considrred that part of chapter II I of
the report of the Economic and Social Council
which deals with the convening of a conference
on freedom of information,

The General Assembly,
Having examined chapter III of the report of
the Economic and Social Council;
Considering that among the functions of the
Economic and Social Council is that of de\'elopin~
international co-operation "with re~pect to economic, social, cultural and educational matters";
Considering that such international co-operation
must be based on a better mutual understanding
among peoples;
Considering that the proper method of achil'ving such understanding is to increase direct coll··
tacts between the various elements of the popu1:1tions of all countries, and
Considering that workers too often lark means
of learning about technical and social experiments
which are being carried out in foreign comitr;e,.
Urges those ::vfembers which are agreeable to
arrange with each other, by direct agreement.
such terms and conditions as will fa( ilitate the
maximum possible exchange of workers wishing
to take a period of training in order to improve
their knowledge of their trade and to study on the
spot the economic and social problems confr0nting their comrades in other countries.

J,' Assemblee generale,

Ayant examine la chapitre III du rapport du
Conseil economiquc et so<'ial;
Consider ant que le Conseil economique et social
a pour tache notamment de "developper la cooperation internationale clans Jes domaines economique, social, de la culture intellectuelle et de
!'education";
Considerant que cettc cooperation internationale doit se fonder sur une mcilleure connaissance
mutuelk entre Jes peuples;
Consideran.t que pour arriver a cette comprehension il convient de multiplier Jes contacts directs entre les divers elements des populations de
chaque pays;
Considerant que les travailleurs sont trop souvent prives des moyens de connaitre les experiences techniques et so<'iales qui sc deroulent dam
Jes pays etrangers;
Pric instammcnt Jes Membres qui y consentcnt
I1 fixer entre cux, par accords directs, des condition~ prnpres a faciliter au maximum l'echange
des travailleurs qui desireraient faire des stage.,
pour se perfectionncr dan~ Ll connaissance de lenr
metier et etudier sur place Jes problcmes economiqucs et sociaux qui se posent a leurs camaracles
d'autres pays.

Hundred and seventeenth plr:nary meeting.
17 November 1947.

Cent- dix-septieme seance pleniere,
le 17 novembre 1947.

134 (II}. Enquete relative a la mastication
de la feuille de coca

134 (II). Enquiry concerning the mastication of coca leaves
The General Assembly,
Taking note that the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs has, in its report 2 to the Economic and Social Council on the second se~sion of the Commission, adopted a resolution concerning the request
made by the Government of P<'ru that a Committee of Experts should be sent to study the effects
of chewing coca leaves on the inhabitants of certain zones of the Andean region,
Expresses its intere~t in this important subject,
and

f,' Assemblee generate.

Prenant acte que la Commission des stupefiants, dans le rapport" sur ~a deuxicme session
adressf au Conseil economique et social, a adopte
une resolution concernant la demande faite par le
Gouvernement du Perou d'envover un comite
d'expe,ts etudier les effets de la ~astication des
feuillcs de coca sur les habitants de certaines regions de.<i Andes,
Exprime l'interet qu'elle porte a cctte question
importante, et
'Voir ks 53emc, 55cme, 57emc, 58eme, 59<'me et
60/-me seances de l« Troisieme Commission.
"Voir l,• donmwnt E/575.

' See the 53rd, 55th, 5 7th, :,8tb, 59th and 60th meetinl(s of the Third Committee.
'See document E/575.

4'.J
