SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
SI:COND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

l\-~o. 41

135th meeting
20 May 1947

135eme seance
20 mai 1947
Lake Success
New York

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Hundred and thirty-fifth meeting

Cent-trente-cinquieme seance
Page

Pages

150. Provisional agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 863

150. Ordre du jour provisoire

151. Adoption of the agenda. . . . . . . . . . . . .. 863

151. Adoption de l'ordre du jour

"

863
863

152. Continuation of the discussion on the
152. Suite de la discussion sur la question
Greek question ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 864\
.grecque
864

Documents

Documents
4nnex

The following documents relevant to the hundred and thirty-fifth meeting appear in Supplement No. 11, 'Second Year:

. 4nnexes

Les documents suivants, se rapportant a la
cent-trente-dnquieme seance, figurent au
Supplement No 11, Deuxieme Annee:

Cablegram dated 5 May 1947 from the
Chairman of the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the President of the Security
Council (document S/343)........... 27

Cablogramme,.. en date du 5 mai 1947,
adresse au President du Conseil de securite par le President de la Commission
d'enquete sur les incidents survenus a la
frontiere grecque (document S/343) . ... 27

Letter dated 7 May 1947 from the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics to the Secretary-General (document S/347)
~.. 28

Lettre, en date du 7 mai 1947, adressee au
Secretaire general par le representant de
l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques (document S/347)
28

Letter dated 2 May 1947 from the liaison
representative of Yugoslavia on the Commission of Inv~tigationconcerning Greek
Frontier Incidents to the Principal Secretary of the Commission (document S/341) 30

Lettre, en date du 2 mai 1947, adressee au
Secretaire principal de la Commission
d'enquete sur les incidents survenus a la
frontiere grecque par l'agent de liaison
yougoslave (document S/341/Corr.l) ... 30

Letter dated 2 May 1947 from the Haison
representative of Albania on the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek
Frontier Incidents to the Principal Secretaryof the Commission (document S/342) 31

Lettre, en date du 2 mai 1947, adressee au
Secretaire. principal de la Commission
d'enquete sur les incidents survenas a la
frontiere grecque par l'agent de liaison
albanais (document S/342/Corr.l) ..... 31

Letter dated 6 May 1947 from the liaison
representative of Bulgaria on the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek
Frontier Incidents to the Principal Secretaryof the Commission (document S/345) 32

Lettre, en date du 6 mai 1947, adressee au
Secretaire principal de la Commission
d'enquete sur leg incidents survenus a la
frontiere grecque par l'agent de liaison
bulgare (document S/345) ..... ,... .... 32

UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY
COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL
DE SEClJRITE
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS

No. 41

I DEUXIEME ANNEE

No 41

HUNDRED AND THIRTY·FIFTH MEETING

CENT·TRENTE·CINQUIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Tuesday, 20 May 1947, at 10.30 a.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, 7IJew~York,
le mardi 20 mai 1947, a10 h. 30.

President: Mr. A. L6PEz (Colombia).

President: M. A. L6PEz (Colombie).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombi~, France, Poland, Syria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom, Unit~d
States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
Etats-Unis d'Amerique, France, Pologne,
Royaume-Uni, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques.

150. Provisional agenda
(document 5/353)

150. Ordre du iour prOVISOlre
(document 5/353)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. The Greek question:

2. La question grecque:

(a ) Letter, dated 7 May 1947, from the

representative of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics to the SecretaryGeneral (document S/347) .1
(b) Cablegram, dated 5 May 1947, from
the Chairman of the Commission of
Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the President of the
Security Council (document S/343)
ana documents S/341 , S/342 and
S/345 referring to the situation explained in the cablegram. 2

. -

151. Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 11, Annex 23.
21bid., Annexes 27, 30, 31 and 32.

b~",",o,_",,_,

a) Lettre, en date du 7 mai 1947,
adressee au Secretaire general par le
representant de l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques (document
S347)1.
b) Cablogramme, en date du 5 mai 19{7,
adresse au President du Conseil de securite par le President de la Commission
d'enquete sur les incidents survenus.3la frontiere grecque (document S/343), et documents S/341, COIT. 1, S/342, Corr. 1 et S/345 se rapportant a
la situation exposee dans le cablogramme2 •

151. Adopfion de I'ordre du iour
L'ordre du jour est adopte.
1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de stfcurite
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 11, Annexe 28. .
>21bid., Annexes 27, 30, 31 et 32.

864

152. Continuation of the discussion on the
Greek question

152. Suite de la discussion sur la question
grecque

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kahreman Ylli,representative of Albania; Mr. Athaassov, representative of Bulgaria; Mr. Dendra•.ds, representative of Greece; and Mr. Krasovec,
representative of Yugoslavia, took their seats at
the Gouncil table.

8'l/,r l'invitation du President, M. Kahreman
Ylli, representant de .1'Albanie, M. Athanassov,
representant de la Bulgarie, M. Dendramis, representant de la Grece, et M. Krasovec, representant de la Y ougoslavie, prennent place ala table
du Gomeil.

Mr. KAHREMAN YLU (Albania) (translated
from French) : Some days ago the attitude of the
Albanian representative attached to the Commission of Investigation, which is at present meeting
in Geneva, was referred to in the Press, and it is
now under discussion by the Council.
To be precise, the question at issue is the reply
of the said representative to the Secretariat of
the Commission, regarding the liaison officers to
be attached to the Subsidiary Group which would
remain in Greece.
, In our opinion this aspect of the question has
arisen as a result pf the situation created. by the
decisions of the Commission of Investigation. I
am happy that· the problem is to be discuesed
today, in orr\er to clear up any misunderstanding
or any interpretation likely to lead to situations
which would be highly undesirable for the countries concemed, and even for the Secu..~t'l COlL."lcil itself.

M. KAHREMAN YLLI (Albanie): n y a quelques jours, il a ete question dans la presse, et on
en discute maintenant devant le Consei1, de l'attitude pris~ par le representant de l'Albanie aupres
de la Commission d'enquete qui siege actuellement a Geneve.
Pour etre precis, il s'agit de la reponse du dit
representant au secretariat de la Commission au
sujet des agents de liaison qu'on voudrait attacher au Groupe subsidiaire qui resterait en Grece.

A notre avis, cet aspect de la questio~ est la
consequence d'une situation creee par les decisions de la Commission d'enquete. Je suis heureux que ce probleme soit mis aujourd'hui en
discussion, afin que tout malentendu soit cfusipe,
et que soit eIucidee toute interpretation de nature
a creer des situations qui ne sont certainement
desirables, cl pour les pays interesses a ce probleme, ni, peut-etre, pour le Consei1 de securite
lui-meme.
The Albanian Government, which has always
Le Gouvernement albanais, s'inspirant toubeen guided by the principles of the Charter of jours des principes de la Charte des Nations
the United Nations, is anxious to abi~e, by the Umes, desire rester fidele a tout ce que prescrit
Charter and all that it implies.
celle-ci et a tout ce qui en decoule.
At the proper time the Albanian -Government
Le Gouvemement albanais avait attire, en
drew the Security Council's attention to the main temps voulu, l'attention du Conseil de securite
issue of the Greek'question; wtimately it bowed sW' le fond de la question' grecque; finalement,
to the decision of 19 December 1946.1 In compli- il s'est soumis ala decision du 19 decembre 19461 •
ance with the latter, .and especially on the. ba.sis Conformement a cette derniere, et se fondant surof paragraph 10 of that. resolution, it sent the tout sur le paragraphe 10 de cette resolution, il
Commission, to assist it in its work, a delegation a ete envoye aupres d~ la Commission, pour l'aiof considerable size, whose members acted as der"une delegation suffisamment nombreuse,
liaison officers. That delegation did everything dont les membres faisirlent fonction d'agents de
in its power to facilitate the Commissi.on's task liaison. Qette delegation a fait tout son possible
and to help it fulfil its mission.
pour faciliter la tache de la Commission et l'aider
a s'acquitter de la mission Gont elle etait chargee.
On 18 April .1947 the, Secuxity Council
Le 18 avril 1947, le Conseil de securite a
adopted .another resolution,2which laid down adopte une autre resolution instituant un Groupe
that a subsidiary group should be maintained in subsidiair~ qui resterait en Grece apres le depart '
Greece after the· departure of the Commission . de la Commission d'enquete2•
of Investigation.
In the course of the cijscussions here, our deleAu cours ,des discussions qui se sont deroulees
gationexpressed its views on the subject and ici, notre delegation a eJq>rime son point de vue
stated that it considered the maintenance of such et declare qu'elle considerait I'envoi d'un te1
a group usel~, and that any suggestions along groupe inutile,, et toute proposition clans ce sens
that line were premature for the following prematuree, ce, pour les raisons suivantes:
reasons:
(a) The Security Council had not at that time
a) Le Conseil de securite n'avait pas encore
received from the Commission any report giving re~u, a ce moment, un ,rapport quelconque de la
a survey of the question enabling it to .decide on , Commission pouvant llii donner un aper~u de
the necessity of maintaining a subsidiary group la que,stion et lui permettre de conclure ou non
1 See Official Records of the Security Council, First Year,
Second Series, No. 28, 87th meeting.
21bid., Second Year, No. 87, 181st meeting.

rn

' H l l l . ,• •

rpflHe

iF

1 Voir Ies Proces-verbaux officiels'du Conseil de securit&,.
Premiere Annee, Seconde Sene, No 28, 87eme seance.
21bid., Deuideme Annee, No 37, 131eme seance.
I!ii

'WMtttz.-"}~t"*i?tt~~;"'I§>4S9'-ifi'f¥f¥?""'fA+itt.Mtiikd-1II1IIlI!I

pes

865
in Greece; the Council was likewise not in possession of any report recommending or even suggesting the setting up of such a group.

a la necessite de laisser un groupe subsidiaire en
Grece; le Conseil n'etait pas non plus en possession d'un rapport, quelconque recommandailt, '
ou suggerant simplement, la creation d'un tel
groupe.
For such a case the Commission had been given
La Commission avait, dansce cas, un mandat
special terms of reference. Indeed, paragraph 4 particulier. En,!,ffet, le paragraphe 4 de la
of the first resolution states that: "The Commis- premiere resolution stipulait: ''La Commission
sion shall, if it deems it advisable or if requested adressera, si elle le juge convenable ou si elle en
by the Security Council, make preliminary reports ' est requise par le Conseil, des rapports prBiminaires au Conseil de securite."
to the Security Council."
Or~ de tels rapports preliminaires n'etaient
Now, as far as we know, no such preliminary
reports were submitted to the Security Council, pas, a notre connaissance, parvenus au Conseil
which, no doubt, included the above-mentioned de securite qui, en mserant le paragraphe ci-desparagraph in the resolution expressly to provfde sus dans la resolution, a eu, je pense, precisement
for specific cases for which special ,measures a l'esprit des cas particuliers pour lesquels des
might be necessary.
mesures speciales pourraient etre prises.

b) En l'absence de tels rapports preliminaires
(b) In the absence of such preliminary. reports, and particularly in the absence of a final et, a plus forte raison, d'un rapport definitif, nous
report, we considered the proposal'submitted to avions considere que la proposition qui etait dethe Council unnecessary, as its implications vant le Cons~ etaitinutile, qu'elle tendait imtended to prejudge the substance of the question plicitement a prejuger le fond de la question et
and directly affected the parties concerned in "qu'elle touchait directement les parties interessees
au probleme.
the problem.

(c) Finally, since the Commission had just
concluded a visit to the areas concerned and had
collected all the necessary data, and since its report to the Council was thought to be forthcoming, a subsidiary group could not give any useful
assistance to the Commission or to the Security
Council.

c) Enfin, le travail. d'un groupe subsidiaire
ne pouvait etre d'une aide effective pour la Commission 1l'enquete ou pour le Conseil de securite
lui-meme, puisque laCommissionvenait devisiter toutes les regionsinteressees, avait reuni
toutes .les infornutions, et qu'on s'attendait a
ce que toute cette documentation fUt soumise
au Cqnseil.

Nevertheless; the Security Council adopted the
above-mentioned resolution, and it was our duty
to conform to its decjsion.
Itwas after the-adoption of the resolution, and
especially after the decisi!Jns taken by the Com-:mission of Investigation, that it was asserted that
the Albanian delegation was not conforming to
the Council's decisions. Such publicity see~
inopportune before an exact interpretation has
been given by the competent organs. In the cir-.
cumstances, there' are other aspects of the ques.tion, which are much more important and which
are closely Imked to respect for the principles of
the United Nations Charter and to the desire to
ensure that decisions taken should conform to
fhose·principies. The attitude' of the Albanian
representative a.t Geneva was only a reflection of
the situation created within the Commission by
an entirely different interpretation of the procedure that had been followed, and the misunderstanding arising from the resolution of 18
April 1947.
,
You are all' familiar with this resolution which
states among other things: ". . . a subsidiary
group, composed of a representative of each of
. the members of the Commission, to continue to
fulfil such functions as' the Commission may pre-

Neanmoins, le Conseil de securite adopta la
resolution dont je viens de parler, et il etait de
notre devoir de nous conformer a sa decision.
C'est -apres l'adoption de cette resolution, et
surtout a la suite des decisions prises par la Commission d'enquete, qu'on apretendu que la delegation albanaise n'agissait pas conformement aux
decisions du Conseil. Une telle publicite, avant
qu'une interpretation exacte aitete donnee paT
les organes competents, nous parait inopportune~
Dans les conditio~ ou se presente .la question,. il
est d'autres aspects beaucoup plus importants,
intimement lies au respect des' principes inscrits
dans la Charte des. Nations Unies ainsi qu'au
souci de veiller a ce que les decisions prises soient
comormes aces prfucipes. L'attitude du -representant albanais a Geneve n'est que le reflet de
la situation creee au sein·de laComfuission par
une interpretation toutedifferente donnee a la
procedure suivie, et par'les malentendus 'decoulant de la resolution du 18 avril1947.

scribe
This resolution, which clearly defines the con-

assigner ..."

0

•

• ",

•

Vous connaissez tous cette resolution qui, entre
autres, dit: ",; .. un groupe subsidiaire, compose
d'un representant de chacun des Etats membres
de la Commission,en vue de <:ontinuer a remplir
les fonctions que la Commission pourrait lui

Cette resolution, qui definit clairement la consstitution of the Group, makes no mention, how- titution de ce Groupe, ne fait pas mention,
ever, even by implication, of the participation of meme implicitement, de la participation des Etats
the States concerned in tt~e work of the Sqbsidi-interesses aux trava]lX du Groupe subsidiaire, ni
ary. Group, nor of the fact that the work of in- du fait que les travaux de l'enquete proprement

b .......

5 ..•,

-",," e • ,,·'W"-

.

-,od.-"" r

.......'- .... .,_.•._ " . . . .

· • ..· .._H··· - "

._. . . .

866
vestigation proper, as provided for in the resolu- dite, au sens de la resolution du 19 decembre
tion of 19 December 1946, was already finished. 1946, etaient alors termines. La Commission avait
The Commission had visited all the areas where -traverse toutes les regions OU e11e avait juge nece!!it thought it necessary to investigate; it had gath- saire d'enqueter; elle avait reuni des temoignages
ered evidence and proof; and after the conclusion et des preuves, et, apres tout ce travail, on attenof its work, results were expected in the shape of dait les resultats, c'est-a-dire les deliberations et
a debate and decision by the Security Council. la decision du Consei1 de securite.
Dans ces conditions, la demande relative aux
. In these circumstances, the request for liaison
officers should not have been made, since in doing agen.ts de liaison n'aurait pas da etre faite, parce
so the Commission was, stri~tly speaking, going· que, en presentant cette demande, la Commission, d'un point de vue de stricte procedure, debeyond its terms of reference.
passait les termes de son mandat.
Dans cette meme resolution du 18 avril, il est
This same resolution of 18 April provides for
the creation of a subsidiary group whose func- question de la creation d'un Groupe subsidiaire
tions would be prescribed by the Commission, in auquel la Commission assignerait des fonctions
accordance with the terms of reference contained conformes au mandat prevu par la resolution du
19 decembre 1946.
in the re!':oluti~n of 19 December 1946.
La Commission, adoptant une interpretation
In adopting a different interpretation, the
Commission took a decision which was beyond its differente, a pris une decision hors des limites de
competence; it simply handed over its· task to sa competence et a deIegue purement et simplethe Subsidiary Group. Thus it set up a second ment son mandat au Groupe subsidiaire; elle a
.organ enjoying the same authority as it itself cree ainsi un deuxieme organe jouissant de la
possessed, and above all, it created a situation meme autorite et, surtout, e11e a provoque une
complicated by the fact that a single and iden- situation compliquee du fait qu'un seul et meme
tical mandate issued by the Security Council, mandat du Conseil de securite a ete devolu, par
had, by.successive transfer, devolved upon two transfert successif? a deux organes; cette decision
organs. This decision was taken without any effort a ete. prise sans souci de savoir si ce transfert de
to ascertain whether the transfer of power was pouvoirs etait fonde, sur la presomption' qu'un
iustified:it was merelY ass\U"ned that the terms mandat, cree pour une situation determinee, pouof reference laid down for a definite sit.uation vait etre valable pour une alitre situation sans
would be valid in a different situation, although que le Conseil de securite en ait fait la consthe Security Council had neither taken cogniz- tatation et sans qu'il ait pris des m~ures en
ance of the latter, nor had it taken any measures consequence.
to deal with it.
'
Analysant le fond de la question grecque au
Mter analysing the substance of the Greek
question in December 1946, the Security Council mois de decembre 1946, le Conseil de securite
adopted a resolution under which a Commission adopta une resolution aux termes de laque11e une
was set up. This Commissio:q had specific terms Commission fut creee; cette Commission avait un
of reference draWn up at a specific time to deal mandat determine, etabli a un mome~t deterwith a specific situation, which had its origin in mine, et pour une sitllation determinee; cette
the--I quote the resolution, " ... alleged border situation avait son origiJ le dans les incidents qui
- je cite les termes de la resolution " ... auraient
incidents . . ."
en lieu ..."
Avant d'arriver une conclusion, le Consei1
Before reaching a conclusion, the Council
therefore noted the existence of certain facts, on fit donc une constatation et, se fondant sur un
the basis of which it ret up a Commission to in- fait, crea une Commission pour enqueter sur" la
vestigate the situation. Such a task assigned by situation. Or, un te1 mandat, donne par le Con
the Security Council to an auxiliary organ can- seil Qe securite. a Un organe a~aire, ne saurait
-'!1 '
,..
1
'
51 sunp ement a un autre organe, surnot beshllplyhanded over to another orgal·l, etre ?elegt..!e
especially if this is not done by the Security Coun- tout lorsque ce n'est pas le Conseil de securite
cil itse1f.'rhe problem became even more deli- lui-meme qui deIegue ce mandat. Le probleme est
cate when it was proposed to conduct investiga- devenu plus delicat quand il s'est agi de proceder
a des enquetes sur les territoires des quatre pays.
tions in the territories of the four countries.
1
The Commission's decision of 29 Apri1 proves
La decision de la Commission en date du 29
that the terms of reference as laid down in the avril1 prouve que le mandat defini par la resoluresolution of 19 December have been transferred tion du 19 decembre a ete· transfere en totalite
in their. entirety to the Subsidiary Group. The au Grotlpe subsidiaire. Les reserves exprimees
reservations contained in points 1, 2 and 3 of aux points 1, 2 et 3 du paragraphe V des instrucparagraph V of the directive to the Subsidiary tions au Groupe subsidiaire ne sauraient guere,
Group cannot be considered as reservations, en raison du travail antcrieur de la Commission
in respect of the original terms of reference, in et du temps qu'eUe y a consacre, etre considerees
v:ew of the previous work done by the Commis- comme des reserves par rapport au premier
·sion and the time it has spent on it. In fact, the mandat. En· fait, elles laissent intact le fond
substance of the terms of reference is not affected du mandat. De plus, le fait de les inserer au

a

u

A

1 See Official Records of the s.ecurity Council, Second·
1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Year, Supplement No. H, Annex 26.
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No Il, Annexe 26.
...~

-

867
by these reservations. Further, their inclusion in paragraphe V indique que la Commission parparagraph V indicates that the Commission is of tait de l'idee que ce Groupe devait etre invest! de
the opinion that this group should be assigned tout le mandat de la Commission, et meme de
not only the whole of the Commission's.terms of quelque chose de plus.
reference, but even something more.
We consider that even with regard to the reso-,
Meme en ce q~ concerne la resolution du 18
lution of 18 April 1947, the Security Council d.vril1947, nouscpensons que le Conseil de secushould have followed the procedure prescribed by rite ,devait suivre la procedure prescrite par la
Articles 39 and 40 of the Charter, that is to say, Charte dans ses Articles 39 et 4.0, c'e-st-a-dire
it should have first determined whether any kind determiner tout d'abord s'il existait une situation
of situation existed which warranted taking ap- quelconque justifiant la prise de mesures appropropriate measures. Now in the present case the priees. Or, dans ce cas concret, le document le
most official document, which might have served plus officiel qui eut pu permettre de. faire une
as a basis for a finding, was the report of· the constatation etait le rapport de la Commisison
Commission of Investigation, which, however, d'enquete, mais ce rapport n'etait pas encore
had not yet come to hand. In spite of this the parvenu. Malgre ce1a, le Conseil a pris une deciCouncil took a decision on the matter.
sion en la matiere.
It is evident from this that, on the whole,
D'une telle situation, il ressort que l'on n'a pas .
Articles 39 and 40 of the Charter were not taken tenu compte, dans leur ensemble, des Articles 39
into consideration.
et 40 de la Charte.
The procedure laid down in the Charter
n etait necessaire de suivre strictement la proshould have been strictly adh~red to, since the cedure prescrite par la Charte puisque le mandat
terms of reference laid down in the resolution of determine dans la resolution du 19 decembre ne
19 December could not apply to a situation pouvait s'appliquer a une situation ayant deja
which had already been the subject of an in- fait l'objet d'une enquete.
vestigation.

I

.

Having made a careful examination of the
question: the Security Council itself should have
determined, for this new organ, terms of reference suitable to its subsidiary character.

Apres avoir procede a un examen attentif de
la. question: il etait egaleme.nt nece.<:'Cl~ireque le
Conseil de securite determinat .lui-meme, conformement au caractere subsidiaire du Groupe,
le mandat de ce nouve! organe.

Since the procedure I have indicated was not
followed, the Commission of Investigation, putting itself in the place of the Security Council,
declared itself competent to create, so to speak,
new terms of reference to deal with a situation
into which an inquiry had already been made,
whereas all that it could do was to instruct the
Subsidiary Group within the bounds of its own
terms of reference; and even this procedure and
the power conferred on the Commission by the
resolution of, 18 April 1947, were not compatible
with the spirit of the resolution of 19 December
1946, which referred to a quite specific situation.

En l'absence de ce que je viens d'indiquer,la
Commission d'enquete, se substituant au Conseil
de securite, se declara competente pour creer
en quelque sorte un nouveau mandat a l'egard
d'une situation qui avait deja fait l'objet d'une
enquete, alors que tout ce qu'elle pouvait faire
etait de donner au Groupe subsidiaire des instructions dans le cadre de son propre mandat; d'ai!leurs, meme cette maniere d'agir et ceclroit donne
a la Commission par la resolution du 18 avril
1947 n'etaient pas compatibles avec le sens de
la resolution du 19 decembre .1946, qui s'appliquaita une situa~on bien determinee.

D'autre part, l'Albanie, en tant que partie
Moreover, in accordance with the Council's
decision based on Article 32 of the United Na- interessee au probleme, a ete invitee aparticiper
nons Cha.>1:er,' .t\JbarJa, as an interested p~"ty, aux debats sur la questiongrecque, conformewas invited to take part in the discussion of the ment a la decision prise par le Conseil en appliGreek question. It is true that our participation cation de l'Article 32 de la Charte des Nations'
in these discussions does not imply any particu- Unies. nest vrai que notre participation aces
lar agreement on our part with the decisions debats n'imp~que pas consentement special de
which the Security Council· may deem it neces-· notre part awe decisions que le Conseil de securite
sary to make. I feel, however, that the Security jugera utile de prendre; je crois cependantque
Council will always try to take into consideration, le C6nseil de securite s'efforcera toujoursde tenir
as far as possible, our declarations and our point compte, dans la mesure du possible, de nos· declaof view. It is in that way that our participation rations et de notre point de vue. C'est en ce sens
in the work of the Commission might be useful. que notre participation auxtravaux. de la ComHowever, this right has not been respected by mission pourrait etre utile. Cependan:t, un td
the Commission, in so far as ,the Albanian repre- droit n'a pas ,ete respecte par la Commission a
~entative is concerned, particularly at the meet:. l'egard du representant de l'Albanie, en particulUg of 29 April, when the terms of reference of lier lors d~ la seance du 29 avril OU il a ete questhe Subsidiary Group were discussed. The records tion d'etablir les instructions a donner au Groupe
show that this point was raised by certain dele- subsidiaire. n resulte des procesgverbaux que la
gations, but that without any foundation and question ~ etesoulevee par certaines delegations
<

b contr~?~~~~:,~~_~_~~~~eC,h~~er ~n~ t~~~~ que la Commission s'y est opposee sans rai-

868
procedure followed by the Security Council itself, the Commission opposed it.
It is clear from what I have said that the Commission's decision hate .10 legitimate foundation,
and did not conform to the Charter, nor was it
within the framework of the terms of reference
it had received from the Security Council. In
these circumstances our delegation was unable
to confOrIr.. to its decisions or participate in its
work. This is plainly 110t a case of refusal to cooperate with the United Nations, and we hope
that there will be no misunderstanding on this
point.
In these circumstances, the Security Council
should carefully examine the problem submitted
to it, in order to clarify the new situation which
has arisen as a result of these decisions, and that
a definite and exact interpretation be given of all
its actions, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, which forms the basis of all the
deliberations and decisions of the Security Council.
Albania is anxious to see the Greek question
settled as soon as possible, so as to put an end to
the repeated provocations on her southern
borders.
We are desirous to see all these problems resolved, so that healthy ang sound relations may
be established between democratic nations and
so that all possible sources of trouble and misunderstandings may be reduced.
It was in this spirit that my Government assisted the United Nations in rrery possible way,_
facilitated the task of the Commission of Investigation, and placed ~t its disposal all the relevant
document<J in its possession. My country now
awaits the Council's decision on this fundamental
problem, and the elucidation of the unfowlded
accusations levelled against it.
Although Albania is not a Member of the
United Nations, since her application for membership has not yet been accepted, it will act, as
it has done in the past, in strict conformity with
the roms and principles of the United Nations
('''harter.

son, contrairement a l'Article 32 de la Charte,
et contrairement ala procedure suivie par le Con~
seil de securite lui-meme.
De tout ce qui precede, il resulte .que la decision prise par la Commission n'a pas eu de base
legitime, conforme a la Charte, et qu'elle est
hors du cadre du mandat que la Commission
avait re~u du Conseil de securite. Devant une
telle situation, nQtre delegation ne pouvait se
conformer a ses decisions, ni participer a ses travaux. n est clair qu'il ne s'agit pas la d'un refus
d~ coope.iation avec I'Organisation des Nations
Unies, et nous desirons qu'il n'y ait pas de malen.
tendu sur cc point.
Dans ces conditions, il est necessaire que le
Conseil de securite examine attentivement le probleme porte devant lui, de fa~on que la nouvelle
situation ereee par ces decisions soit eclaircie, et
qu'une interpretation exacte et precise soit donnee a tous ses actes, conformement aux termes
de la Charte des Nations Unies qui constitue la
base meme de toutes les deliberations et de toutes
les decisions du Conseil.
L'Albanie desire que la question grecque soit
resolue le plus tot possible, clans I'espoir que prendront fin les provocations reiterces le long de sa
frontiere sud.
Nous desirons que tous le... problemes soient
resolus, en sorte que les relations entre les nations
democratiques deviennent sames et fortes, et que
soit reduit tout foyer de troubles et de malentendus.
C'est dans cet esprit que mon Gouvemement
a apporte tOilte I'aide possible aux Nations Unies,
qu'il a facilite la tache de la Commission d'enquete et qu'illui a remis tous les documents qu'il
possedait. n attend maintenant les decisions du
Conseil sur ce probleme fondamental; il.att.end
que la hmnerc soit faite sur les accusations non
.
fondees portees con'i:re mon pays.
:Sien que l'Albanie ne soit pas Membre des'
de; Nations Unies, sa demande n'ayant pas
encore re~u de suite favorable, elle agira, comme
nous l'avons declare tant de fois, en stricte con- ,
formite des buts et des principes de la Charte
des Nations Unies.

. Mr. DENDRA~IIS (Greece) (translated from
French): I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for the kiml invitation which you extended
to me, at the meeting of 12 May, l to define the
Greek position regarding the question submitted.
to the Council by the Commission of Invf-·~~ga­
tion.
The Greek position is defined in Article 25 of
the Charter. Greece accepts and will apply the
decisions of the Security Council, the Commission of Investigation and the Subsidiary Group,
set up in accordance with the SecUrity Council's
resolutioh of 18 April. .
In considering the Soviet Union representative's proposal regarding the Subsidiary Gro1,lp,
it is important to bear in mind the aim of the
Security Council, which is to bring ab()Ut a peace-

La position de la. Grece se trouve definie par
l'Article 25 de la Charte. La Grece accepte, et
appliquera, les dcScisions· du Conseil de securite,
de la ColllltliSsion d'enquete et du Groupe'subsidiaire etabli a la suite de la resolution prise le
18 avril par le Conseil de securite.
En considerant la proposition du representant
de rUnion sovietique concernant le Gronpe subsidiaire, .il. importe de garder present a I'esprit
I'objectif du Conseil de securite. Le but du Con~

1133rd meeting. &ee Official Records of the Security
Council, Second Year, No. 39.

1133eme seance. Voir les Proces-verbaux o(ficiels au
.Conseil de Securitt!, Deuxieme Annee. No 39.

M. DENDRAM:IS (Grece): Je vous remercie,
Monsieur le President, de l'aimable demande que
vous m'avez adressee au cours de la seance du
12 mail pOUf que je definisse la position de la
Grece au sujet de la question deferee au Conseil
par la Commission d'enquete.

869
sell i' . d~2
.. ~ le reglement pacifique de la dispute en mettant un terme a.l'ingerence etrangere
et aux mddeni",g de frontiere incessanl:s contre
lesquels plainte est portee,
Ce ne sont pas sewement les incidents du
passe qui mettent en danger le maintien de la
paix internationale, mais aussi - et particulierement -les incidents qui ont lieu en ce moment
mem.e.
A la suite du depart de la Commission d'enAfter the departure of the Commission of Investigation, Greece's northern neighbours re- quete, les voisins de la Grece du Nord ont repris
sumed their intervention with even greater in- avec une intensite accrue leurs interventions. Le
tensity. The presence of the Subsidiary Group in Groupe subsidiaire est necessaire en Grece du
northern Greece, Albania, Bulgaria and Yugo- Nord, en Albanie, en Bulgarie et en Yougoslavie,
slavia is necessary in order to discourage, as much pour decourager, dans toute la mesure du posas possible, any further attacks on Greek inde- sible, tout nouvel acte dirige contre l'indepenpendence and integrity, to carry out immediate dance et l'integrite de la Grece, pour faire prompinvestigations on the spot, and to report on any tement une enquete sur les lieux, et pour souincidents which may occur in spite of its presence mettre un rapport sur les incidents qui, en depit
de sa presence, pourraient avoil" lieu.
there.
If the contention of the Soviet representative
Si la these du representant de la Russie sovieand his supporters that these k.cidents were pro- tique et de ceux quil'appuient, selon laquelle
voked by the Greeks themselves had any founda- les incidents sont provoques par les Grecs, avait
tion, they would surely not attempt to impede une base quelconque, ils ne se seraient certainethe effective functioning of the Subsidiary Group. ment pas evertues a. entraver le fonctionnement
efficace du Groupe subsidiaire.
The effectiveness of the Subsidiary Group
Or, le fonctionnement efficace du Groupe subwould be seriously impaired. if it were required sidiaire serait entrave si celui-ci etait requis, dans
to remain inactive until the Commisson of In- chaque cas, de demeurer inactif jusqu'a. ce que
vestigation had been informed of any new inci- la (Jo~ion d'enquete ait ete saisie des noudents, had had a dilatory discussion on the sub- veaux incidents, se soit engagee dans des debats
ject and had finally issued specific instructions to dilatoires et, finalement, lui ait transmisdes
the Group. Any evidence which the Group ffistructions specifiques. Les p.-'euves, qu'il est du
should have gathered would have disappeared in devoir du "Groupe de recueillir, auraient ete dissithe interim.
mulees dans l'intervalle.
.
The effectiveness of the Subsidiary Group
Le fonctionnement efficace du Groupe subsiwould likewise su.ffer if its headquarters were far diaire serait entrave si celui-ci etait requis d'avoir
away from .the area in which the incidents were son siege loin de la region ou les incidents ont
occurring. The continual interventions of which lieu. Les interventions continuelles contre les- ,
Greece is complaining are organized beyond her queUes la Grece porte plainte sont organisees au
northern borders but they occur principally in dela de ses frontieres du nord; mais eUes se mam.northern Greece and along her frQntiers. The festent principalement en Grece du.Nord et le
pre.sence of the Subsidiary Group in Salonika, long des frontieres du pays. La presence du
near the border8, is more than ever necessary for Groupe subsidiaire a. Salonique, pres des fronthe reasons which led to the setting up of the tieres,. est plus que jamais necessaire, car lesraiCommission by the Security Council are still sons qui ont amene le Conseil de securite a. consti..
.valid. The Greek military auth.orities daily re- tuer la Commission existent toujours. Les autoceive information that a number ofanned bands, rites militaires heUeniques re~oivent journellecoming from the Balkan States, infiltrate. into ment ·des· informations selon lesqueUes plusieurs.
Greek.territory,
seek shelter in the saidcoun- bandes armees,. venant .des pays balkaniques,
tries when pursued by our armed forces.
s'infiltrenten territoil"e hellCnique, ou cherchent
asile dans les dits pays 10rsqu'eUes sont poursuivies
par nos forces armees.
nest une seconde raison peremptoire pour
There is another urgent reason why the Subsidi~ry Group should not be moved to Athens. laqueUe le Groupe subsidiaire ne devrait pasetre
While the Conunission of Inquiry was ID ~at transferea Athenes. Quandla Commission <fencity, the Greek Government had to protest, on quete se trouvait dans cette 'ville, le Gouverneseveral occasions, against the way in which the ment hellenique Jut, a plusieurs reprises, oblige
liaison officers and the representatives of the de protester contre l'abus fait, par les agents de'
disputant countries· abused their privileged status. liaison et lesagents des pays parties an differend,
. They took advantage of their presence at the seat de leur statut privilegie. Ceux-ci profiterent de
of the Greek Government to launch new.' cam- leur .presence au s~ege du Gouvernement helIepaigns designed to aid those who would forcibly nique pour selivrera. de nouveUes interventions
drive Greece into the communist camp'. Since the destinees a aider ceuxqui pousseraient de force
Greek protests failed to put a stop to such. inter- la Grece· dans le. camp communiste. Commeles
hven~~,~re is little reason to beli~v~_~~~_~_~~~testa~ti~o~helIeniques neparvinrentpas a metfu! settIement of the dispute by putting an end
to foreign intervention and to the continual border incidents which form the subject of this
complaint.
It is not only the incidents which occurred in
the past that threaten the peace of the world,
but also, and in particular, the incidents which
are occurring at the present time.

or

870

It is also true that a traditional friendship existed between Yugoslavia and Greece;. the Yugos!tav people showed that friendsh~9 in the days
when they were free. It is not true to say that the
dictatorial Government which represents Yugoslavia today has the same sentiments towards
democratic Greece. for if this were so, the Security Council would not now be faced with the
"Greek question".

tre un tcrme a de telles interventions, il y a tres
peu de raisons de croire que de nouveaux abus
ne se produiraient pas si. le Groupe subsidiaire
demeurait a Athenes.
La proposition sovietique, en cc qui concerne
la duree pendant laquelle le Groupe subsidiaire
devrait continuer a fonctionner, n'est pas parfaitement claire. n parait neanmoirr~ evident que
ce Groupe devrait rester en fonctions jusqu'a ce
que les mesures qui seront adoptees par le Conseil
.de securite sur la base du rapport de la Commission d'enquete aient mis un terme a l'ingerence
constante qui met en danger le maintien de la
paix et de la securite internationales, dans le sudest de l'Europe.
Je n'ai pas dessein de repondre aux attaques
dirigees centre ]r: Gouvernement hellemque par
le representant de la Yougoslavie.
nest vrai, commel'a dit le representant yougoslave, qu'en Grece, plusieurs· pal-tis constituant
l'opposition formulent des critiques a l'endroit
du Gouvernement. Mais, s'il en est ainsi, c'est
parce que la Grece jouit du droit de libre critique,
et beneficie du vote au scrutin secret. Aussi n'est-il
pas surprenant de voir expnmer des opinions
tres differentes dans un pays ou la liberte de la
presse est de regIe, et la vie parlementaire libre.
n se peut qu'il y ait la quelque chose d'etrange
aux yeux du representant yougoslave, mais aucun
de ceux des membres du Conseil qui representent des pays jouissant de la liberte de la presse
ne s'etonnera de telles poIemiques sous un regime
politique democratique et parlementaire.
nest vrai egalement que l'amitie a ete de tradition entre la Yougoslavie et la Grece; le peuple
yougoslave, alors qu'il etait libre, a manifeste
cette amitie. 11 n'est pas exact d'affirmer que le
regime dictatl)rial.qui parle actuellement au nom
de la Yougoslavie eprouve un sentiment de cette
nature pour la'democratie en Grece car, s'il en
etait ainsi, le Conseil de securite n'auraitpas eu
a s'occuper de la "question grecque".

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America) :
The question which is now before the Security
Council is essentially one which has been raised
by the Yugoslav, Bulgarian, and Albanian ,Governments through their representatives. Those
Governments have chosen to take an independent
stand on a decision made bv a Commission created by this Council. It is entirely within their
rights to have their own opinion regarding the
substance of that decision. The representative.of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics supported
their point of view and submitted a resolution, l
now before the Council, which is d~igned to
change the terms of reference of the Subsi.diary
Group.
If the members of the Council. since the Soviet
resolution was placed before us: have taken the
occasion to re~ew the records of our proceedings
when the resolutions of 19 Dece:rnber 1946 and
18 April 1947 were adopted, ithink they will
h~ve to agree that, although there was not a

M. JOHNSON- (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de f anglais): La question qui se trouve
maintenant devant le Conseil de securite releve
essentiellement du probleme qui a ete souleve par
les representants des Gouvernements de la Yougoslavie~ de la Bulgarie et de l'Albanie. Ces Gonvernements ont decide de ne pas Se laisser lier par
une decision prise par une Commission creee par
le Conseil. Ils ont tout a fait le droit d'avoir
leur opinion personnelle sur le fond de cette decision. Le representant de rUnion des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques a appuye leur point de vue
et presente une resolutionl, dont le Conseil est
J11aintenant- saisi, qui tend a modifier le mandat
du Groupe -subsidiaire.
Si, depuis que la resolution de l'Union sovietique nous a ete soumise, les membres du Conseil
se sont reportes aux comptes rendus des· debats
qui ont abouti a l'adoption des resolutions des
19 decembre 1946 et 18 avril 1947, ils conviendront~ je pense, que~ si l'accord n'a pas ete una-

1 see Official Records of the Security Council, Second
year, No. 39.

1 Voir ifS Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de seeurite,
Deuxieme Annee,. No 89.
.

similar abuse would not occur again. should the
Subsidiary Group be sta1;ioned in Athens. '
The Soviet proposal regarding the length of
time during which the Subsidiary Group should
continue its functions is not altogether clear. It is
nevertheless evident that the Group should continue to function until such time as the measures
to. be adopted by the Security Council. based on
the report of the Commission of Investigation,
have put an end to the constant interference
which is endangering btemational peace and the
security of south-east Europe.
I do not propose to answer the Yugoslav representative's attacks on the Greek Government.
It is true. as the Yugoslav representative
pointed out. that there are, in Greece. several
parties representing the opposition which criticize
the Government. If this is so, it is only because
Greece enjoys freedom to criticize and the advantage of a secret ballot. It is therefore not surprising to hear widely different opinions expressed
in a country where freedom of the press and a
free parliamentary life exist. This may seem
strange to the Yugoslav representative, but none
of .the members of the Council who represent
countries which enjoy freedom of the press would
be surprised by such polemics under a political,
democratic and parliamentary regime.

_..-IIi

p.

871
nime, au sein du Conseil, sur tous les details re1atifs a la creation et a la composition du Groupe
subsidiaire figurant dans la resolution du 18 avril
1947, l'iI}.tention generale du Conseil etait assez
claire.
Divers membres du Conseil ont, a la seance
du 18 avril 1947, exprime tres succinctement
leur point de vue sur la raison d'etre du Groupe
subsidiaire. Le representant de l'Australie, par
exemple, a declare: "n nous semble que ce
Groupe subsidiaire pourrait fort bien exercer une
influence stabilisatrice a la frontiere1 ." Cette remarque s'adressait au President.
Le President du COl1seil de securite, qui etait
a l' epoque le representant de la Chine, a prononce, entre autres, les paroles suivantes: "Les
Etats-Unis ont propose que la Commission d'enquete qui a ete envoyee en Grece pour e..Tlqueter
sur les incidents de frontiere et les troubles qui
sevissent, maintienne apres son depart un groupe
subsidiaire en Grece septentrionale. Je suis d'avis
qu'un groupe de cette nature serait utile pour
se tenir au courant sur place et au jour le jour
des nouvelles violations de frontiere ou des troubles qui pourraient survenir dans les que1ques
semaines a venir, pendant que la Commission
redige son rapport a Geneve et que le Conseil de
securite examine la question grecque2."
Apres qu'on eut donne lecture de la resolution
dans son entier, en y incorporant l'amendement
propose par le representant de la France qui demandait que le mandat du groupe ffit mis en
harmonie avec la resolution du 19 decembre
1946, M. Austin s'adressa au President dans les
termes suivants: "Monsieur le President, j'ac,
.1:1:
ti'on d u t ext e3 ."
cepte cette
amCllora
Les Etats-Unis ont es-dIne que leur resolution
initiale avait le defaut de ne pas preciser le mandat du Groupe subsidiaire.

unanimous opinion in the Council on all the details concerning t..'J.e establishment and membership of the Subsidiary Group contained in the
resolution of 18 April 1947, the general purpose
of the Council was quite clear.
At the meeting of 18 April 1947, several members of the Council expressed, very briefly, their
views as to the purpose of this Subsidiary Group.
For instance, the representative of Australia said:
"It seems to us that the Subsidiary Group may
well exercise a stabilizing influence on the frontier".l That remark was addressed to the Chair.
The President of the Council, at that time the
representative of China, said, inter alia: "The
United States has proposed that the Commission
of Investigation which has been sent to Greece to
investigate border violations and disturbances
should, after its departure, maintain a spbsidiary
group in northern Greece. I am of the opinion
that such a subsidiary group would be useful in
making further day to day on-the-spot investigations of any border violations or disturbances
which might occur during the next few weeks,
when the Commission is drafting its report in
Geneva and while the Security Council is considering the Greek question."2
Mr. Austin, after the reading of the entire resolution as amended by the representative of
France, who had suggested that the terms of
reference should be in accordance vJith the resolution of 19 December 1946, addressed the Chair
as follows: "Mr. President, 1 accept that as it
improves the language."3
The United States felt that its original resolution was defective in not specifically stating 'Nhat
the terms of reference of the Subsidiary Group
would be.
Then the representative of Syria, in the course
of his statement regarding the duration of the
Commission, said: "I meant by that that the
Commission should certainly continue in the exercise of the task assigned to it by the Security
Council until the report is presented. Then the
Security Council will take a decision on the dissolution of the Commission or the maintenance
ofits existence. If we review the resolution of the
Security Council, it is quite obvious that no time
limit has been set for the period in which the
Commission is to continue its functions, and it
goes without saying that the Commission shall
continue to function. until its report is received
here and a decision is taken concerning it".4

I am not trying to tie the Council down to any
previous decision, or even to embarrass the representa~ves who made those statements, by saying:
"You said that; you cannot go back on it", or
.

I

Puis le representant de la Syrie, au cours de
sa declaration sur la duree de l'activite de la
Commission, a declare: "J'entendais par la que,
jusqu'a ce que le rapport soit presente, la Commission devrait, sans aucun doute, continuer a
remplir la tache que le Conseil de securite. lui
a assignee. Celui-cl prendra alors une decision
sur la question de savoir si la Commission doit
etre dissoute ou si e1le doit etre ,maintenue. Si
nous examinons a nouveau la resolution du Conseil de securite, il est bien evidentqu'aucune
limite n'est fixee a la periode durant laquelle
cette Commission doit continuer a remplir ses
fonctions, et il va sans dire qu'e11e continuera a
fonctionner jusqu'a ce que le Conse~ ~~ securite
ait re~u son rapport et pris une decl3lon a ce
•
sujet4".
Je n'essaie pas de forcer le Conseil a respecter
une de ses precedentes decisl~__, ni meme d'embarrasser les representants qui ont fpit ces declarations, en leur disant, par exemple: "Cesont

.
1 See Official

Records of the Security Council, Seccmd
Year, No. 37, 131st meeting.
2 Ibid., page 1&0.
8 Ibid., page 186.
4Ibid., page 196.

..............

1 Voir les Proce's-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securiM,
Deuxieme Annee, No 37, 13leme seance.
2 Ibid., page 180.
3 Ibid., page 186.
4 Ibid., page 196.

VI'"

"anything to that effect. I merely quote those very
clear statements to make a point which I t..1Unk
is legitimate: namely, that, in ~etting up the Subsidiary Group, the Council felt that· the purpose
of the -original resolution of 19 December 1946
would be better served if, after the main Commission had completed its principal investigation,
when it was in Geneva writing its report, there
should be a holding group in the area concerned
acting as a deterrent on elements which might
wish to make trouble nf create new situations.

vos propres paroles; vous ne pouvez vous dedire."
J e me borne a citer ces declarations l;xtremement
claires, pour arriver a la conclusion suivante,
mon avis tout a fait legitime: le Conseil, en
creant le Groupe subsidiaire, a estlme que les
buts de la resolution primitive du 19 decembre
1946 seraient plus facilement atteints, si, au momf".nt ou la Commission proprement dite, ayant
termine son enquete principale, etait a Geneve
occupee rediger son rapport, un groupe fixe
restait dans la region interessee pour prevenir
l'action d'elements peut-etre desireux de fOffi{'nter
des troubles ou de creer de nouvelles situation:;.

It is true that the representatives of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics and Poland abstained in the vote on the resolution of 18 April
1947 setting up this Subsidiary Group, and that
they did not t:l$lk the Group was necessary. That
is entirely within the right of those delegations;
but the Security Council, nevertheless, did decide
to set up this Subsidiary Group. I think that there
can be little doubt, from any fair 'examination
of the record, that the term "area concerned"
was thought by the Security Council, at the time
it was formulated and placed in the resolution,
to refer to the area described in the resolution pf
19 December 1946. It seems to me that this is
hardly arguable.

Les representants de 1'Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietique.s et de la Pologne se sont'
abstenus, il est vrai, de voter sur la resolution du
18 avril1947 qui a etabli ce Groupe subsidiaire,
et n'ont pas estime que la creation de ce demier
s'imposait. Ces delegations etaient parfaitement
en droit de le faire; mais le Conseil de securite
a, cependant, decide de constituer le Groupe subsidiaire. Je crois qu'a lire impartialement le proces-verbal, on ne peut guere douter que les mots
"region interessee" designaient, dans 1'esprit du
Conseil, a l'epoque OU ils ont ete choisis et inscrits
dans la resolution, la region indiquee dans la
resolution du 19 decembre 1946. TI me semble
que ,c'est la un point qu'on ne peut guhe
contester.

a

a

Dans la resolution dont nous sommes actuel\eIn the resolution at present before us, the representative of the Unian of Soviet Socialist Re,. ment saisis, le representant de l'Union des Republics suggests that lhe decision of the Commis- publiques socialistes sovietiques propose au Consion itself to have the Subsidiary Group stationed seil de securite de modifier, par une nouvelle
in Salonika should be changed by a further deci., decision, la decision de la Commission elle-meme
sion of the Security Council requiring the Sub- fixant Salonique comme siege du Groupe subsisidiary Group to remain in Athens. That is a per- diaire, et il propose de faire rester le Groupe a
fectly regular suggestion. I do not criticize in any , Athenes. Cette sugg~tion est parfaitement regnway the propriety of the Soviet representative's liere. Je n'entends, d'aucune fa(,;on, contester le
action in making that proposal. I do, however, fait que le representant de 1'Union sovietique,
suggest that, in the judgment of my delegation, en presentant cette proposition, est parfaitement
no substantial reason has been advanced, for dans les regles. Mais je declare, toutefois, que,
which the Security Council, by affirmative ac- de l'avis de ma delegation, on n'a pas avance de
tion, should now repudiate the action of the raison serieuse pour amener le Conseil de securite
Commission. In drawing up its terms of reference a desavouer, par une action positive, la decision
for the Subsidiary Group, the Commission, in de la Commission. De l'avis de la delegation des
the iudgment of the United States delegation, was Etats-Unis, la Commission etait tout a fait en
enurely correct and within its right in designating droit, en redigeant le mandat du GrOl.:pe subsi.Salonika as theplace where the Subsidiary Group diaire, de lui assigner Salonique comme lieu dx
should· be stationed during the forthcoming residence pour les semaines a venir. Pourquoi
weeks. Why should this Council arbitrarily re- le Conseil devrait-il arbitrairement eloigner le
move the Group from Salonika, which is in the Groupe de Salonique, qui se trouve dans la "re"area concerned" in tlle most literal sense~ and gion interessee" au sens le plus litteral du terme,
have it sit in Athens? Why, also, should we limit et le faire sieger Athenes? Pourquoi, d'autre
, the initiative of that Group to investigating only part, devrions-nous obliger le Groupe a. limiter
f,.:'!'w incidents which it ie:; specifically directed to uniquement son enquete aux incidents" que
inv~'tigate by the main Commission? It seems to la Commission principale l'aurait specialement
me tnat this would stultify the very purpose of charge d'etudier?I1 me semble que ce serait la
maintaining the Subsidiary Group there.
aUer totalement a l'encontre de la rai<:on veritable
du maintien' en Grece du Groupe subsidiaire.

a

The Subsidiary Group was given its terms of
reference by the main Commission and it is
nothing but an offshoot of that Commission. It
is not a new commission. The Security Council
auPtorized the creation of the Subsidiary Group
ana, subject to any changes which it might itself
. introduce later, also instructed the main Commis-

Le Groupe subsidiaire a re(,;u son mandat de
la Commission principale, et n'est rien d'autre
qu'un derive de cette Cormpission~ Ce n'est pas
tine'nouvelle commission. Le Conseil de securite
a autorise la creation du Groupe subsidiaire, et,
sous. reserve des changements qu'il pourrait luim@me apporter par la suite, a egalement charge

p

873 .

sion to give it terms of reference, within the limits
set by the resolution of 19 December 1946.

It would seem to me that, regardless of the
purpose of the Soviet resolution, its effect would
be to paralyse the activities of the Subsidiary
Group. How could the main COll1IDJssion, which
has been instructed to come to New York to assist
the Council in its examination and study of the
main report, usefully give directions to the Subsidiary Group in Greece on each particular incide..l1.t which might occur?
As I understand it, it is in the interest of peace
and security that the Subsidiary Group should be
able to act quickly and :report to the Security
Council, which will be examining the main Commission's report, its findings on any incident
brought to its attention. The Subsidiary Group
is not given any e.'Cecutive functions; it is merely
instructed to report each individual case, as it
occurs, to the main Commission.
I should greatly regret to see the Council limit
the possible usefulness of the Subsidiary Group
which it has authorized by so restricting the
latter's activities that it could act on each specific
case only when it might be too late to act effectively or to obtain the necessary facts.
The present arrangement, if the Coup.cil decides not to accept the Soviet resolution, is not
permanent. It is designed to help the Council to
reach a just decision. I should not wish to have
any of my remarks interpreted as prejudging this
case.
'The arguments used at the last meeting by the
representative of Yugoslavia were, I thought, out
of order only on account of the occasion on which
thi;y were being stated. The Security Council
eventually wishes to find the truth of this matter,
to give a fair hearing to all parties concerned,
and, if it can, t~ eliminate the causes which have
led to these unfortunate frictions, on both sides
. of the Greek frontier. I do not see why we should
try to dimi.'lish the effectiveness of the machinery
we have set up.
Paragraph 3 of the Soviet resolution states:
"The Subsidiary Group will cease its activity
with the liquidation of the Commission itself." I
should like to state in that connexion that the
United States delegation never had aay idea
other than that th'e Subsidiary Group would
cease its activity with the liquidation of the Commission itself. It never occurred to us that· the
Subsidiary Group could outlive the Commission.
Nowhere is it precisely stated when the Commission will cease to exist, but common sense would
seem to suggest that the COl,IDdl may declare
that the. Commission is no longer in existence,
once it has received its report and taken a final
decision. At that time, unless the Council haS in
the meanwhile taken other action of an affirmative nature, the Subsidiary Group. will automatically cease to ·exist.
.

'to

la Commission principale d'en fixer le mandat,
dans le cadre de la resolution du 19 decembre
1946.
Selon moi, et que1les que soient les fins que se
propose la resolution de l'Union sovictique, une
te1le mesure aurait pour effet de paralyser l'action
du Groupe subsidiaire. Comment la Commission
principale, qui acte chargee de venit a New-York
pour aider le Conseil a examiner et etudier le
rapport principal, pourrait-elle donner d'utiles
directivesau Groupe subsidiaire en Grece sur
chaque incident particulier pouvant surgir?
A mon avis, l'interet de la paix et de la securite veut que le Groupe subsidiaire soit en mesure
d'agir vite et de faire rapport au Conseil de securite, qui sera alors en train d'examiner le rapport
de la Commission principale, sur ses conclusions
au sujet de tout incident qui lui aura ete signale.
Le Groupe subsidiaire n'a pas re~u de fonctions
executives; il est simplement charge de faire rapport a la Commission principale sur tous les cas
particuliers, au fur et a mesure qu'ils se presentent.
J e regretterais vivement de voir le Conseil
limiter l'utilite eventuelle du Groupe subsidiaire,
dont il a autorise la creation, en restreignant ses
activites de te1le fa~on qu'il ne puisse s'occuper
de chaque cas particulier que lorsqu'il sera peutetre trop tard pour agir efficacement ou poUr
obtenir les renseignements necessaires.
Les dispositions actue1les, si le Conseil decide
de ne pas accepter la resolution de rUnion sovietique, ne sont pas permanentes. Elles sont destinees a aider le Conseil a arriver a une decision
juste. Je ne voudrais pas que l'on interpretat
aucune de mes observations comme prejugeant
le cas present.
. Les arguments exposes a la derniere seance par.
le representant de la Yougoslavie n'etaient, selon
moi, hors de propas qu'en raison du moment ou
ils ont ete presentes. Le ·Conseil de securite desire,
en fin de compte, decouvrir la verite en cette
affaire, permettre equitablement a toutes les
parties de se faire entendre, et, si possible,
eliminer les causes qui ont engendre ces frictions
regrettables de part et d'autre de la front@"e
grecque. Jene vois pas pourquoi nous devrions
tenter de reduire l'efficacite du mecanisme que
nous avons cree.
Nous lisons au paragraphe 3 de la resolution de
l'Union sovietique: "Que le Groupe subsidiaire
cessera son activite au moment ou la Commission
elle-meme sera dissoute." Jetdesire·declarer act.>
propos que 1.a delegation des Etats-Unis n'a
jamais pense que l'activit~ duGroupe..suh!'lidiaire
devrait continuer apl'es la dissolution de la. Commission elle-meme.. n n~ nous est jamais venu a
l'idee que le Groupe subsidiaire put survivte a
la Commission. Le moment a-aquella Commission doit cesser d'exister n'est precise nulle part,
mais le bon sens semble indiquer que le Conseil
pourra declarer que la Commission a cesse d'exister des qu'il aura re~u son rapport. et pm une
decision definitive. A ce moment-la, a moins que.
le Conseil n'ait pm entre temps quelque autre
mesure positive, le Groupe subsidiaire cessera
automatiquement d'exister.

-

pp

•

«

"874

Cette question presente un autre aspect, sur
There is another aspect to this question, which
my delegation had. hoped would not be exten- lequel ma dei~gation eSFerait que ·le Conseil ne
sively debated in the Council; however, it is of s'etendrait pas; eet aspect revet cependant a nos
such substantial importance, in our view, that yeme une si grande importance, que nous ne pouwe cailnot avoid commenting on it. I refer to the vons nous abstenir de presenter des observations
attitude taken by the Governments of Yugoslavia, a ce sujet. Je fais allusion a l'attitude prise par
Bulgaria, and Albania towards a decision of the les Gouvernements de la Yougoslavie, de la BulCouncil. It is entirely within the right of those garie et de l'Albanie a l'egard d'une decision du
Governments not to agree with a decision of the Conseil. Ces Gouvernements ont parfaitement
Council and to say so, but it seems to me that the le droit de ne pas etre d'accord avec une decisituation is different when they express their dis- sion du Conseil et de le dire, mais autre chose
agreement. and then set themselves up as judges est, me semble-t-il, d'exprimer sa desapprobation,
in their own case as to whether they will fulfil a pUis de s'arroger le droit de decider si l'on
decision adopted under the authority of the obeira a une decision prise sous la haute autorite
Council. It would set a very dangerous prece- du Conseil. Si cet organe, un an et demi apres
dent, it seems to me, if such a novel idea, in this sa creation, acceptait un pareil point de vue, il
first year and one half' of the existence of the etablirait, selon nous, un tres dangereux preSecurity Council, were to be accepted by this cedent.
body.
Les representants de ces trois pays ont ete
Quite properly the representatives of those
three countries were invited to the table of the invites, tres Iegitimement, a s'asseoir a la table
Security Council during the long ,discussions du Conseil de securite au cours des longues diswhich preceded the establishmen~,of the rp,ain cussions qui ont precede la creation de la ComCOD1.!'"lission and ended in the reSolution of 19 mission principale et ont abouti a la resolution du
D<::cember 1946. They expressed their opinions at 19 decembre 1946. Ds ont, a l'epoque, tres longreat length at that time. They were also invited guement exprOOe leurs points de vue. Ils ont
to ~ table on 18 April 1947. They had perfect' egalement ete invites a s'asseoir a cette table le
freedom to express their views regarding the crea- 18 avril1947. Ils onteu toute liberte pour exprition of the Subsidiary Group. However, under mer leurs points de vue au sujet de la creation
the terms of the Charter, they had no right to du Groupe subsidiaire. Toutefois, en vertu de
vote on the establishment of the Group. The la Charte, ils n'avaient pas le droit de voter sur
Group was set up and Yugoslavia was bound, la creation de ce Groupe. Le Groupe a ete constias a Member of the United Nations, to accept tue, .et la Y ougoslavie~ en tant qu'Etat Membre
the decisions taken. Albania and Bulgaria ac- de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, etait tenue
cepted the obligations of membership and the d'accepter les decisions prises. L'Albanie et la
stipulations of the Charter for the purposes of Bulgarie ont accepte, dans la presente affaire, de
this. case. At our last meeting, the representative se soumettre aux obligations qui incombent aux
of Belgium made a very able exposition of the Membres de l'Organisation et de respect~r les
legal aspects of this matter, with which I am in dispositions de la Charte. A notre derniere seance,
entire agreement.1 It would seem useless to take le representant de la BeIgique a magistraJement
up the time of the Council with a reiteration of expose les aspects juridiqJ,les de cette question et
the arguments which he· stated so clearly and je suis entierement d'accord avec luit. nest inuwhich, in my judgment, state the facts of the tile d'abuser du temps du Con.~eil en reprenant
situation.
les arguments qu'il a presentes si clairement et
qui, seIon moi; expriment les donnees de la
situation.
I think it very odd that the representatives of
Je trouve extremement sirigulier que les reprethose three countries should object to the estab- ' sentants de ces trois pays s'elev.ent si tardivement
lishment of· the Subsidiary Group at such a late contre la creation du Groupe subsidiaire. Il est
date. It is true \hat they cannot be compelled to vrai qu'on ne peut les obliger a se faire represensend representatives to act as liaison officers with ter aupres du Groupe par des agents de liaison.
the Group. In that respect, the use of the '00- A ce point de vue, il est peut-etre facheux que
perative form of the verb by the Commission in la Commission se soit exprimee, dans le mandat,
tlle terms of reference was perhaps unfortunate. a l'imperatif. Le subjonctif eo.~ mieux valu, mais,
The subjunctive should have .been used but, as comme M.' van Langenhove l'a indique, il ne
Mr. van Langenhove suggested, that is perhaps s'agit peut-etre la que d'une question deredaconly a matter of drafting. If, however, the repre- tion. Si, toute~ois, les representants de l'Albanie,
sentatives of Albania, Bulgaria", and Yugoslavia de la Bulgarie et de la Yougoslavie sont sinceres
are expressing truly - and I am convinced that - et je suis,so.r qu'ils le sont - en aff~ant que
they are - their countries' interest in arriving at leurs pays desirent aboutir a une solution juste
a just soluy.Q!!Jmd their devotion to the principles et veulent vraiment faire triompher les principes
,of the. Charter,· it would seem to me that Yugo- de la Charte, il me semble que la Yougoslavie, en
slavia,as a good Member of the United Nations, tant que Membre fidele de rOrganii3ationdes
and Albania and Bulgaria, as good prospective Nations Unies, et l'Albanie et la Bulgarie, en tant
Membe% even .though a decision has been taken que futurs Membres fideles, ne manqueront pas,
1 See iOt/ic;al Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 40.
"

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de stlcuritt!,
Deuxieme Annee, No 40.

:q

p

875
which they do not like, will nevertheless give their bien qu'elles n'approuvent pas la decision prise,
loyal co-operation, and will find it useful and de cooperer loyalement et de reconnaitre rutilite
conciliatory to have representatives present with de f~e un geste conciliant en se faisant representhe Subsidiary Group.
ter aupres du Groupe subsidiaire.
In the view of our delegation it is entirely inadSelon notre deiegation, il est absolument inadmissible that this Council should accept their re- missible que le Conseil accepte leur refus de
fusal to co-operate, whether or not they send cooperer, que ces Etats se Jassent ou non reprerepresentatives to act as liaison officers. It seems senter par des agents de liaison. S'ils refusent de
to me that, if they refUse to co-operate when re- cooperer lorsque le Groupe subsidiaire le leur
quested to do so by the Subsidiary Group, they demandera, ils prendront, me semble-t-il, une atwill put themselves in the grave position of a titude grave de defi deIib&e al'egard de l'Orgadeliberate defiance of the United Nations, which, nisation des Nations Unies, ce qui, dans le cas
in the case of Yugoslavia, would be a refusal by de la Yougoslavie, constituerait un refus de la part
a Member to carry out obligations; in the case d'un Etat Membre de remplir ses obligations et,
of the other countries, it would be a refusal to dans le cas des autres pays, un refus de respecter
abide by the obligations wplch they voluntarily des obligations qu'ils ant volontairement acassumed for the purposes of the present situation. ceptees pour les besoins de l'affaire presente.
I hope very much that the Governments of those ,J'espere tres vivement que les Gouvernements
three countries will perhaps, on reflection, with- de ces trois pays voudront bien, a ,la reflexion,
draw their objections.
renoncer a leurs objections.
'
. They will have ample opportunity, at tile
lIs auront toute latitude, an moment voulu
proper time, in the proper place, to discuss the et al'endroit voulu, pour discuter le fond durapsubstance of the report which will shortly be sub- port qui sera d'ici peu soumis au Conseil. C'est,
mitted to the Council. It seems' to me singularly me semble-t-il, pour un Etat Membre de l'Orgainept and short-sighted for &"1Y Member of the nisation des Nations Unies, comme pour tout
United Nations, or for any country which wishes Etat desireux d'acquerir cette qualite, adopter
to be a Member of the United Nations, to try to une attitude singulierement deplacee et peu persobstruct a piece of administrative machinery picace que d'essayer d'entraver un rouage du
which has been designed by the Security Council mecanisme administratif ctee par le Conseil de
only in order to help in reaching, eventually, a securite a seule fin d'aider a atteindre une solufair and just solution of this question.
tion juste et equitable de cette question.
J'espere que le Conseil ne se laissera pas accuI hope that the Council will not allow itself to
be pushed into a position which is contrary to our ler a une position contraire a nos intentions preoriginal and clear intention in this matter. I feel mieres et manifestes en cette matiere. Je suis sUr
confident that the Council will reach the right que le Conseil prendra, dans cette affaire, la
decision on this question and I express again the decision qui convient, et j'exprime a nouveau les
good-will of the United States for all the ';OUll- bonnes dispositions qu'entretiennent les Etatstries concerned, as well as our sincere desire to see Unis a l'egard de tous les pays interesses, ainsi
conditions of peace and tranquillity established que leur desir sincere de voir s'instaurer, dans
in this troubled region of the Balkans, because, cette region troubIee des Balkans, des conditions
although the question before us now seems trivial, de paix et de tranquillite, car,. bien que la quesour delegation believes that. the principles in- tion qui est devant nous paraisse de peu d'importance, notre delegation estime que les principes
volved in it are of genuine importance.
mis en c:..use sont d'une reelle importance.

I

Colonel HODGSON (Australia): Under item 2
of the agenda - the Greek question - we have a
letter from the representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics. and a cablegram from
the Chairman of the Commission of Investigation. I propose to deal with those two questions
together, because they are so closely related that
they come d0vin to one simple issue: did the
terms of reference of the Subsidiary Group, as
set forth in the Commission's directive of 29
April correctly interpret the wishes and intentions of this Council?
You will recall that when the Council's resolution was adoptcd.0l1.18 April, it'was framed very
c~refully. The representatives of the States
directly concerned were all present. We .intended
to give to the, Commission the fullest possible
powers. We did not wish to burden it with all
kinds of extraneous questions, ,such ,as defining
again the whole of the area, so we referred to
"the area concerned". We did not want to

Ib_~.

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): Au point 2 de l'ordre du jour, sous
le titre "La question grecque", figurent une lettre du representant de l'Union des Republiques
sociaiistes sovietiques et un clblogramme dqPresident de la Commission d'enquete. Je me propose d'examin~r ces deux questions en meme
temps, car elles sont si etroitement liees qu'elles
peuvent se ramener a une seule, asavoir: le mandat du Groupe subsidiaire, tel qu'il a ete defini
par la Comlnission d'enquete le 29 avril, repondil exacte~ent aux desirs et aux intentions du
Conseil de securite?
Vous voUs rappelez que nous avons apporte
un soin tout particulier a la redaction de la resolutionque le Conseil a adoptee le 18 avril. Tous
les representants des Etats directement interesses
etaient· presents. Nous avons voulu donner a la '
Commission des pouvoirs' aussi etendus que possible. Nous n'avons pas voulu compliquersa
tache par toutes sortes de questions secondaiies,
par exemple en delimitant de nouveau la zone

876

made by this Council was .that in ~ts resolution
of 19 December 1946 it said nothing whatever
about. rules of procedure. Therefore, the Commission was perfectly free to adopt any rules of
.
procedure it desired.
The original resolution states: "That a representative of each of the Governments of
Greece, Albania, Bulgaria, 'and Yugoslavia be
invited to assist in the work of the Commission
ih a liaison capacity." A liaison capacity, to
my r$ld, has a very strict and narrow interpretation. A liaison officer is a go-between, a channel
of communication. But the Commission interpreted' that particular part of its' term of
reference very' liberally indeed. Those liaison

d'action, et c'est 'pourquoi nous avons employe
l'expression "dans la region interessee". Nous
n'avons pas voulu non plus etablir un nouveau
mandat et nous nollS sommes reportes au mandat defini precedemment. Nul n'a alors souleve
la moindre objection, et voila que, maintenant,
on revient Ia-dessllS pour s'opposer a la resolution. Cette opposition constitue, dans une certaine mesure, un de£i, puisque l'on conteste l'autorite meme du Conseil de securite en mettant en
d'oute le bien-fonde et l'opportunite de cette
decision particuli~re.
Examinons done comment la Commission
d'enquete a applique cette decision. Le mandat
de la Commission etait, a l'origine, tres etendu.
Or, lorsqu'elle a etabli le mandat du Groupe
subsidiaire en lui deIeguant certains de ses pouvoirs, la Commission aurait pu simplement transmettre a ce dernier le mandat meme dont le
Conseill'avait investie. Elle avait le droit absolu
d'agir de la sorte si elle l'avait voulu. Mais elle
n'est meme pas allee jusque-Ia: en fait, elle a
apporte trois reserves a ce mandat. n n'est done
pas exact, ainsi qu'on l'a declare - je cite les
paroles du representant de I'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques, d'apres le compte
rendu stenographique - q,ue la Commission ait
delegue ses pouvoirs "sans aucune modification1 ". n y a eu des modifications; elles figurent
dans le mandat du Groupe subsidiaire.
Le deuxieme argument que I'on a fait valoir
est que la Commission avait adopte une procedure irreguliere, nullement conforme a la procedure reguliere suivie parle Cpnseil de securite,
et qu'en outre, eUe avait viole les dispositions
memes de I'Artic1e 32 de la Charte relatif au
droit des parties a un differend de participer aux
discussions relatives a ce differend. On a declare
qu'en n'invitant pas les Puissances interessees a
pren~e part a l' etablissement du mandat du
Groupe subsidiaire, la Commission avait' vioIe
la Charte. Je cite de nouveau les observations de
M. Gromyko: "La Commission d'enquete ... a
adopte une pro~edure particuliere, qui n'est pas
conforme aux dispositions de la Charte des Na"
tions Unies."
A notre avis, une des fautes que le Conseil a
conimises au debut a ete de ne faire aucune allusion, dans la resolution ,du 19 decembre 1946,
au reglement interieur que devait appliquer la
Commission. La Commission etait done Hbre
d'adopter le reglement interieur qu'elle voulait.
La resolution primitive declare: "Qu'un representant de ch~cun des Gouvemements de la
Grece, de l'Albanie, de la Bulgarie et de la You- .
goslavie soit invite a'assister la Commission dans
ses travaux a titred'agent de liaison." Les termes
"a titre d'agent de liaison" ont pour moi un
sens tres restreint et tres precis. Un agent de liaison sert d'intermediaire, d'agent de transmission.
Mais la Commission a donne Une interpretation
tres large a cette· partie de son mandat. Les

1 This statement and· the other statements by the USSR
representative are quoted from the provi~ional interpretationgiven during the 133rdmeeting 'of the Security Council and not from the official translation contained in the
Official Records Of the Security Council, Second Year,
No. 39.

. 1 Cette citation et les autres paroles du repr~entant de
I'URSS qui sont rapportees plus loin sont tirees de l'interpretation provisoire donnee au cours de la 133eme seance
du Cnnseil de securite et non de la traduction officielle
figurantaux Proces~verbaux'offjciels du Comeil de sdcurite,
Deuxieme Annee, No 39.

define completely new terms of reference, so we
referred to the previous ones. No objection
whatever was raised, but it is on those grounds
that the resolution is being challenged. And it
isto a certain degree a challenge, since the whole
authority of the Security Council has been questioned as regards the rightness and· propriety of
that particulax decision.

We must see how the Commission dealt with
it. Originally, its terms of reference were wide.
When it delegated some of therp., it could merely
have passed on those terms of reference which it
had originally received from this Council; had
that been its desire, it had full authority to do so.
But it did not even do that; indeed, it laid down
three qualifications. Therefore, it is Dot correct,
as has been' stated - and I am reading the
words of the representative of the Union. of
Soviet Socialist Republics from the verbatim
record - that the Commission delegated"powers
which it had· received . . . without any change
, or modification"l. There were modifications, and
they ate set out in the terms of reference of the
Subsidiary Group.
The second atgument advanced was that the
Commission was quite incorrect in its procedure,
that it did not -follow the procedUl'e correctly
obseFVed by. this . Council, and further, that it
violated tlie actual terms ef Article 32 of the
Charter, which refers to the parties to a dispute
participating in the discussion. The argument
was advanced that, because the Commission did
not invite the Powers concemed when it was
laying doWn the terms of reference of the Subsidiary Group, it was violating the Charter. I
shall quote Mr. Gromyko's remarks again: "The
Commission of Investigation ... adopted a procedure of its own, which is. not in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations."
,

In our opinion, one of the mistakes originally

>

877
officers were entitled, and were given the privilege at all times, to express their views fully.
They actually cross-examined - some of them
took up the whole time of the cross-examination
on several occasions. They attended every public
meeting, with full consultation and full say on
every occasion. But at the end, the Commission
reserved its right - as we always do - to' hold
private meetings. The Commission received the
resolution of 18 April as a mandate. From a
common sense point of view, there was no question of inviting· these liaison officers to discuss
the terms of a mandate, and as I said previously,
the Commission had full authority to pass on
the full instructions to the Subsidiary Group.
Ther,:: was no need to consult the liaison officers
about that; this action was taken at a private
meeting~ Therefore, it is quite incorrect to say
that the Commission did not observe correct
rules of procedure and that it had no authority;
it had full and complete authority. In our opinion, the Commission correctly interpreted the
intentions and the spirit of the Council.

A second argument raised was that the terms
of reference of the Subsidiary Group refer to
future and not to past incidents. The representative of Yugoslavia based his main argument
on the supposition that this Council violated
Article. 34 of the Charter which deals with the
investigation of a dispute.
other words, if I
understood his argument correctly, the Charter
speaks of a dispute, of incidents which have
already taken place; therefore, an investigation
should be confined to that alone and, if it goes
beyond that, the Charter is violated. However,
the whole tenour of the debates and the language
used indicated that the Commission was to deal
with all incidents right up to the time when its
report came before this Council. That was clearly
the intention.
'

In

In the speech which I have quoted above,
Mr. Gromyko used exactly the same argument.
He said that the terms of reference of the Commission "could not refer to future incidents ~f
which no one had any knowledge". But we have
to apply common sense to see how inconsisteJ;lt
the Soviet representative is, because he went on
to say in the same speech: "The Subsidiary
Group is there to carry out inquiries into incidents that may occur, under orders of the Commission, as and when these incidents occur."
Surely, that is wholly a question of the future.
The resolution proposed by the representative
of the Union of ,Soviet Socialist Republics reads:
"1. The Subsidiary' Group will carry out the
investigation of facts only on the instructions of
the Commission in each separate case ..." In
other words, if a' ca::;e arises in the future, the
Subsidiary Group will 'be instructed by the Commission· and will then report to the Commission.

agents de liaison ont re~u le droIt et le privilege
d'exprimer librement leurs vues a tout moment.
De fait, i1s ont participe aux interrogatoires' contradictoires des temoins; certains d'entre eux
ont meme, a plusieurs reprises, employe tout le
temps reserve aux interrogatoires contradictoires.
lIs ant assiste a~toutes les seances publiques, avec
le droit de prendre part au debat et d'exprimer
leur opinion en toute occasion.' Mais vers la fin,
la Commission s'est reserve le droit, comme il
est d'usage, de tenir des seances privees. La resolution du 18 avril a ete envoyee a la Commission'
a titre de mandat. Le ban sens indique qu'il n'y
avait pas du tout lieu d'inviter ces agents de
liaison a participera la discussion des termes d'un
mandat et je repete que la Commission avait
taus pouvoirs pour transmettre ces instructions
integralement au Groupe- subsidiaire•. 11 n'etait
nullement necessaire de consulter a ce propos les
agents de liaison, la decision ayant ete prise
en seance privee. On a donc declare a tort que
la Commission n'avait pas suivi la bonne procedure et qu'elle n'avait pas l'autorite voulue
pour prendre cette mesure; elle disposait au contraire d'une autorite complete et absolue. A notre
avis, la Commission a interprete comme il convenait les intentions et la pensee meme du
Conseil.
On a fait valoir, en outre, que le tnandat du
Gtoupe subsidiaire visait les incidents futurs et
non les incidents passes. Le representant de la
Yougoslavie s'est fonde, essentiellement'sur le postulat oue le Conseilavait vioIe l'Article 34 de
la Chan:e qw traite de l'enquete sur un differend. En d'autres termes, si j'ai bien compris son
raisonnement, la Charte, d'apres lui, pade d'un
differend, d'incidents qui se sont dejaproduits;
toute I'enquete doit donc se borner a ces seuls
incidents, sous peine de vio1er la Charte. Or, il
ressort de l'ensemble des debats qui ant eu lieu
-et des declarations qui ont ete faites, que la Commission devait s'occuper de taus les incidents qui
pourraient se produire pendant la periode s'etendant jusqu'au moment OU son rapport parviendrait au Conseil de. sectirite. Telle etait bien
l'intention du Conseil.
Dans le discours que j'ai cite plus haut, M.
Gromyko a fait valoir le meme argument. n a
declare que le .mandat _de la Commission "ne
visait pas le~ incidents futursdont personne ne
pouvait avoir une idee". Mais il· suffit de faire
preuve de ban sens pour constater a quel point
le representant de l'Union sovietique mar.r;ue de
logique. En effet, il a dit dans le meme discours:
"D'apres les instructions, de la Commission, le
Groupe subsidiaire est la pour. enqueter sur .les
incidents qui pourraient. se produire, au fur et
a mesure qu'ils surgissent." Cette phrase, dans son
essence, s'applique incontestablement' au futuro
La resolution proposee 'par le representant de
l'Union .des Republiques socialistes sovietiques
est ainsi ton~ue: "1. Que le Groupe subsidiaire
ne procedera a une enquete sur des faits que seIon
les instructions Qu'il rec.evra de la Cozmnission
pour chaque caS partictilier . . ." End'autres
termes, si a l'avenir UllCas se presente, le Groupe
subsidiaire recevra des instructions de la Commis-

878
Otherwise, there would be no point to that at all.
So, it is perfectly 'Correct that the duty of the
Subsidiary Group is to report on future incidents
as th~y arise.
There is another point raised in the resolution
submitted by the Soviet representative:. "3. The
Subsidiary Group will cease its activity with the
liquidation of the Commission itseH." The Soviet
resolution asks the CoU'mission to change the
terms of reference of tht. .Subsidiary Group to
include that directive.
I may say that all those proposals were submitted to the Commission by the Soviet representative and every one of them was rejected.
The Commission of Investigation rightly said
that it was for the Security Council to decide
that question, and that it had no right to include that directive in the terms of reference to
be given to the Subsidiary Group. Therefore, the
Commission correctly rejected it. Similarly, my
delegation hopes that it will be rejected here.
That is a future decision of this Council, not
an immediate one.
I quote again from Mr. Gromyko's remarks:
"Nevertheless, the majority of the Commission
of Investigation did not see fit to support this
Soviet Union proposal. When the proposal was
put to the vote, not OI'Jy the Soviet representative,but others voted in favour of the proposal.
Four votes were cast in its favour..." There was
never any formal vote taken at any time in that
Commission, and certainly, there was no vote
taken on that. The Chairman obtained the
opinion of the members. He informs me that one
or two of the representatives present had 3: doubt
regarding the intention of this Council, because
there was no indication froIn the terms of reference as to what the intention was; but the
dir~ctive proposed by the Soviet representative
was not included because we had no idea of
the time of dissolution of the Subsidiary Group
or of the Commission itseH. That is why it was
not included in the resolution. The whole point
was that certain representatives expressed a
doubt, but no vote was taken.
Those are the main points raised in the debate
about the actual terms of reference, their interpretation, and the duties of the Commission of
Investigation.
There are certain other points which arise
from the resolution of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. First, the resolution reads:
"1. The Subsidiary Group will carry out the
investigation of facts only on the instructions of
the Commission in each separate case. " ." That
has been adequately dealt With. It would nullify
the whole work of the Subsidiary Group if that
particular article were to be inserted in the terms
of reference. Can you imagine, witli the Cornmission .on its way back from Geneva and some
of its members dispersed all over the world, that
we would have to follow that procedure if an
incident arose? The representative of the Union

sion et lui fera ensuite rapport. S':il en etait autrement, tout cela n'aurait aucun sens. n est donc
parfaitement exact que la tache du Groupe subsidiaire consiste a faire rapport sur les incidents
futurs, au fur et a mesure qu'ils se produiront.
La resolution du representant de l'Union sovietique souleve un autre point: "3. Que le Groupe
subsidiaire cessera son activite au moment ou
la Commission elle-meme sera dissoute." La
resolution de l'Union sovietique demande que la
Commissom modifie le mandat du Groupe subsidiaire de fa~on a y inclure cette clause.
Permettez-moi de dire que toutes ces propositions ont ete presentees a la Commission par le
representant de PUnion sovietique et que toutes
ont ete repoussees.
La Commission d'enquete a declare, a juste
titre, que c'etait le Conseil de securite qui devait
trancheI' cette question et qu'elle n'avait pas le
droit d'inchrre cette clause dans le mandat du
Groupe subsid~aire. La Commission a donc rejete
cette proposition avec raison. Ma delegation
espere que le Conseil de securite la rejettera egalement. Cette question devra etre tranchee plus
tard par le Conseil, mais pas tout de suite.
Je cite de nouveau les observations de M. Gromyko: "Cependant, la majorite de la Commission d'enquete n'a pas juge bon d'appuyer la
proposition de l'Union sovietique. Le representant·de l'Union sovietique n'a pas ete sem a voter
en sa faveur; plusieurs representants ont fait de
meme. La proposition a recueilli quatre voix ..."
Or, on n'a jamais procede a un vote officiel dans
la Commission et certainement pas sur cette question. Le President a demande l'opinion des membres. 11 me dit qu'un ou deux des repr6f'entants
presents n'etaient pas certains de l'interpretation
qu'il fallait danner aux futentions du Conseil,
parce que le mandat ne donnait aucune indication a ce sujet; mais la· clause proposee par le
representant sovietique n'a pas ete inseree dans
la resolution, parce que personne n'avait la moin~
<ire idee de la .date a laquelle le Groupe subsidiaire ou la Commission seraient dissous. Voila
pourquoi cette clause ne figure pas dans la resolution. Certains representants ont exprime des
doutes, mais aucun vote n'a eu heu.
Tels sont les· principailx points qui ont ete
souleves au cours des debats relatifs au mandat
proprement dit, a son interpretation et aux fonc~
tions de la Commission d'enquete.
La resolution du representant de l'Union des
Republiques socialistes sovietiques a encore souleve un certain nombre de points. Tout d'abord,
cette resolution est ainsi com;ue: "1. Que le
Groupe subsidiaire ne procCdera a une enquete
sur des faits que selon les instructions qu'il recevra· de la Commission pOUf chaque cas particulier ..." Cette question a· deja ete suffisamment examinee. Si cette clause etait inc1use dans
le mandat du Groupe subsidiaire, tout le travail
du Groupe deviendrait inutile. Pouvez-vous imaginer que nous devions adopter cette procedure,
au cas ou un incident se produirait alors que la
Commission aurait deja quitte Geneve et que

_,<_.O. ...f_'s...o~Vl_·...et~s...o...ial_is~~t~, .*..·~~=~~~_U~b~~=·.~~~~. ~~t~.~G~en~e~v~a~w~e~n~t_~ce~rt_a_ins_ de ses membres seraient disperses danS A
C...

p

879
even fUJ.-ther when he said that the incident
would have to be reported first by the four liaison
officers, a preliminary investigation made and a
report submitted to the Commission. The Commission would then decide that a full investigation should be made. That proposal, in our opinion, is completely unreal. It would lead to
excessive delay, whereas the whole essence and
purpose of the Subsidiary Group is to make a
rapid and speedy investigation.

le monde entier? Le representant de l'Union des
Republiques socialistes sovietiques a G~eve a
meme ete plus loin. Les quatre agents de liaison,
a-t-il declare, signaleront d'abord l'incident, puis
une enquete preIiminaire aura lieu. et un rapport
sera ;:;,.dresse a la Commission. Ce1le-ci decidera
ensuite s'il faut proceder a une enquete appro-'
fondie. A notre avis, cette proposition est chimerique. EIle entrainerait des delais tres longs,
alors que le Groupe subsidiaire a ete cree dans le
but meme de hater les enquetes.
Moreover, we are asked to give ~ directive as
En outre, on nous demande de decider si le
to whether the Subsidia.ry Group shculd be sta- Groupe subsidiaire aura son siege a Athen~s ou
tioned at Athens o~ Salonika. Salonika was a Salonique. On a propose Salorrique pour des
proposed for purely. practical reasons. Salonika raisons purement pratiques. Cette ville est situee
is only forty miles from the frontiers where these a soixante-cinq kilometres. seulement des fronincidents are occurring, an easy drive. Road tieres ou se produisent les incidents, distance facommunications between Athens and Salonika cile a p;;trcourir en auto. En revanche, les comare very bad; there is no railway connexion at munications par route entre Atherres et Salonique
all; air communications are not regular; it is sont tres precaires; il n'existe aucune ligne de
several days by sea. It is purely a proposal of chemin de fer; les communications par air sont
common sense, made in the light of the Com- irregulieres et le voyage par mer dure plusieurs
mission's own experience, that Salonika was the . jours. Cette proposition a done ete dictee uPiquemost satisfactory place from which to operate. ment par le bon sens, la Commission ayant eu
That is why it was included in the terms of l'occasion'de s'apercevoir que Salorrique etait le
reference to the Subsidiary Group; the Commis- centre d'operations le plus commode. C'est pour
sion had every right to include that particular cette raison qu'on l'a fait figurer dans le mandat
proposal.
du Groupe subsidiaire: la Commission avait
. pleinement le droit de l'inclure.
For those reasons, my delegation will vote
Pour ces raisons, ma delegation votera contre
against the proposal submitted by the represerr- la proposition du representant de l'Urrion des
tativeof the UIion of Soviet Socialist Repub- Repu~liques sociaIistes sovietiques.
lics.
To make our position quite clear, we must
Pourbien comprendre notre position, il faut
remember that the Subsidiary Group derives its ne pas oublier que le Groupe subsidiaire tient
authority from the Security Council, through son autorite du Conseil de securite par l'intermethe Commission. It is the servant and the instru- diaire .de la Commission. Le Groupe subsidiaire
ment of the Council. We feel that this view est l'instrument du Conseil et execute ses ordres.
should go on record to clear up any misund~r­ A notre avis, c'est la un point qui doit figurer
standing.
au proces-verbal afin de dissiper tout malentendu.
My delegation was pleased to hear· assurances
Ma delegation a ete heureuse d'entendre les
that the States directly concerned would loyally declarations dans lesqueIles les Etats directement
uphold any decision of this Council. However, interesses se sont engages a re.'>pecter les deciwe feel that this view should go on record, in sions du Conseil. Maisnous estimonsquele pclnt
order that there might be no misunderstanding enonce ci-dessus doit etre porte auproces-verbal,
about the matter, and that the States directly afin qu'il n'y ait aucun malentendu a ce sujet
concerned should take note of the opinion of the et que .les. Etats directement interesses prennent
Council. We would therefore move that it should note de l'opinion du Conseil. Nons proposons
be . recorded that, by its decision of 29 April done que l'on porte au praces-verbal que, de
establishing terms of reference for its Subsidiary l'avis du Conseil ele secuI'ite, la decision prise le
Group in the a..: ea concerned, in the opinion of 29 avril par la Commission d'enquete sur les
the Security Council, the Commission of In- incidents survenus a la -frontietc grecque, et etavestigation concernhg Greek Frontier Incidents blissant le m,andat. que ,le" Groupe subsidiaire
has correctly intetpreted the intention of the exercera daPs la region interessee, est bien conCouncil's resolution of 18 April; and that the forme a l'esprit de la resolution du Conseilen
representatiyes of Albania, Bulgaria, Greece, and date du 18 avrp; et que les representantsde l'AlYugosla'Via at the Council -should take note· of barrie, de la Bulgarie, de la Grece et de la Yougothis view. At the appropriate time, I shall for- slavieaupres de ce Conseil sont pries-d'en prendre
mally move that proposal.
note. .le presente::ai cette proposition officie1lement au moment voulu.
(

Mr. MUNIZ (Brazil): The cablegram from
the Chairman of the Commission of Investigation, addressed to the Security Council on 5 May,
raises two important questions which theSecurity
Council must consider and solve, in order to
ensure its' authority and the efficacy of its func~:~

.

M. MUNIZ (Bresil) (traduit de l'anglais):
Le cablogramme adresse le' 5 mai au Conseil de
securite par le President de la Commission d'enquete llQuleve deux questions importantes. que le
Conseil de securite doit absolument examiner et
regler s;il veut etablir son autorite et prouver

880
tions as an instrumel1t for the peaceful solution
of disputes, in accordance with Chapter VI of
. the Charter.
At our last meeting, the representative of
Belgium dealt very ably with those two pl>ints.
The :first refers to the obligation of Members and
non-members of the United Nations to carry out
the decision of the Security Council in matters
relating to the peaceful settlement of conflicts.
As far as Member States are concerned, Article
25 of the Charter is explicit: "The Members of
the United Nations agree to accept and carry
out the decisions of the Security Council in
accordance with the present Charter."

son efficacite en tant qu'organisme charge, en
vertu du Chapitre VI de la Charte, du reglement
pacifique des diffex-en!h.
Au cours de notre derniere seance, le representant de la Belgique a traite ces deux questions
avec beaucoup de competence. La premiere COIlceme l'obligation pour les Etats Membres et non
membres de l'Organisation des Nations Unies
de mettre a execution les decisions prises par le
Conseil ell vue du reglement pacifique des differends. En ce qui concerne les Etats Membres,
l'Article 25 de la Charte ~t clair: "Les Membres
de l'Organisation wnviennent d'accepter et d'appliquer les decisions du Conseil de securite conformement a la presente Charte."
Dans le cas qui nous occupe, deux des parties,
l'Albanie et la Bulgarie, ne sont pas membres
de l'Organisation, mais ont ete conviees, conformement 1'Article 32 de la Charte, a participer,
sans droit de vote. a la discussion du diffex-end.
Nous nous occupons d'une enquete a laquelle l~
Conseil a fait proceder en vertu de 1'Article 34,
qui 1'autorise a enqueter lui-meme sur tout dUfex-end ou toute situation qui pourrait entrainer
Un' desaccord entre nations ou engendrer un
differend.
L'Alb~eet la Bulgarie ont accepte 1'invitation du Conseil de securite a participer a la discussion. De ce fait, elles ont formellement accepte la juridiction du Conseil de securite et
assuIi:u~ du meme coup l'obligation de se soumettrea ses decisIons. n serait illogique de raisonner
autrement. Le fait qu.e des Etats acceptent de
prendre part aux discussions signifie que la juridiction du Conseil s'etend a ces Etats. S'il en
etait autrement, tout le mecamsme prevu au
Chapitre VI de la Charte, pour la solution padfique des differends, cesserait de fonctionnet.
Les fonctions assumees par le Conseil de securite
en tant qu'organisme charge du reglement pacifigue des differends seraient reduites a neant.

In the present case, two of the parties, Albania and Bulgaria, are not Members of the
United Nations, but were invited to participat~
without vote in the discussion of the cEspute,
under the terms of Article 32 of the Charter.
We are dealing with an investigation carried
out in accordance with Article 34, which grailts
authority to the Security Council to investigate
for itself any dis,' .lte or situation which might
lead to internatio~al friction, or give rise to a
dispute.
Albania and Bulgaria accepted the invitation
of the Security Council to participate in the
discussion. By doing that, they expressly accepted
the jurisdiction of the SecUrity, Council, and
thereby assumed the. obligation to abide by its
decision. Any other interpretation would be
illogical. The acceptance of the invitation to
participate in the discussion has no other effect
thall that of extending the jurisdiction of the
Cou.u.cil to the participating States. ,H it were
not no, the whole mechanism of the peaceful
solut'on of disputes, establis}J.~din Chapter VI
of the Charter, would cease to 'Work, and the
functions of the Securi.ty COULiCll as &"1 instrument of peaceful solution would be· completely
nullified.,
..
In the matter submitted for our examination,
Dans le cas qui nous occupe, l'Albanie et la
Albania and Bulgaria, which are non-member Bulgarie, Etats non membres ayant accepte de
States which accepted p¥rlcipation in the dis- prendre part a la discussion sans droit de vote,
cussion without vote, find themselves in the si-lIne se trouventdans la meme obligation cl'appliquer
situation as Yugoslavia and Greece, which are les decisions du Conseil que la Yougoslavie et
Member St.ates,' as regards the obligation· to la Grece, Etats Membres de l'Organisation. Ces
carry out the decisions of the Council. Those Etats n'ont· donc aucune ramon valable pour
States, therefore, have no· valid grounds for s'opposer a la resolution prise par le Conseil le
attacking the resolution of .:he Council of 18 18 avril, sous pretexte qu'ils n'ont pas ete conApril on the allegation that they were not con- suItes lors de la creation du Groupe subsidiaire,
sulted in the creation of the Subsidiary Group, com.me l'a ,cIeclare ragent de liaison de la Yougoas was stated l:!y the liaison officer of Yugoslavia; slavie; ils ne peuvent pas non plusrefuser, comme
neither may they refuse to co-operate with the l'ont f~it les agents de liaison de l'Albanie et de
Subsidiary 9'roup, as declared by the liaison la Bulgarie, -de cooperer avec le Groupe sub.
officers of Albania and Bulgaria. .
sidi:ii:re.' .

. As parties to·?~· c:lliJpute . invited to participate I . ,r' c J;l,ua.J;te de parties a un Qifferend invitees
in the dic;cussion; they were notenlitled to be I s partl:-]'2cr a: la discussion, ils n'avaient pas le

I

he.ardwitlt regard to the _establishment of. the melt de prendr.e la parole au sujet de la, creation
Subsidiary Group,inasmuch as Article 320£ the du Groupe subsidiaire, d'autant que I'Article 32
Charter denies them the right to vote,
. I de laCharte leur refuse le droit devote.
.
, , With regard,.to the delegation of powers conQuant a la delegation de pouvoirs· contenue
ta.ined LTl the resolution of the Security Council dansJa resolution du Cons~il de securite en date
of 18 April, I.· do not find any juridical ground du 18 avril, je ne vois aucune raison juridique
~: o~~~~g. i:'.':rhe~esolution of~~~~~~__ ~p~ur l'annuIer. La resolution du 18 avril equivaut.

»

881
has the same value as a substitution of powers; ~ une subrogation; en deleguant ses pouvoirs, le
the mandator, when conferring power on the mandant habilite expressement le mandataire a
mandatory, expressly authorizes it to extend those conferer ses pouvoirs a un autre agent. Telle est
powers .to another agent. That was the nature of la nature de la resolution du Consei1 de securite
the resolution of the Security Council authorizing autor.sant la Commission d'enquete a etablir un
the Commission of fuvegtigation to establish a Groupe subsidiaire charge de s'acquitter des
Subsidiary Group to fulfil such functions as the fonctions que la Commission pOll.TTait lui asCommission might prescribe in accordance with signer dans le cadre de son mandat. La seule
its terms of reference. The only limit imposed restriction imposee a la Commission cl.ans I'exerupon the Commission in the e."Cercise of that cice de ce droit reside dans le fait que dans aucun
riaht lay ID that its own powers may not, in any cas, elle ne peut sortir de sa competence, car il
ckcUIIU.tances, be exceeded, u!lder the self-evi· t est clair que le mandant ne peut conferer des
dent theory that. the mandatory cannot use pouvoirs qu~il ne detient pas lui-meme. Ce n'est
powers which it does not possess. Such" however, cependant pas le cas du Groupe subsidiail'e, dont
is not the case of the Subsidiary Group whose les pouvoirs, te1s qu'ils ont ete dermis par la
powers, as deillled by the Commission, du not Commission, ne depassent pas ceux de la Comexceed the powers of the Commission itself.
mission elle-meme.
For those reasons, the Brazilian delegation is
Pour ces raisons, la delegation. du Bresil estime
of the opinion that the Subsidiary Group should que le Groupe subsidiaire doit con.tinuer a surproceed with its surveilla."1ce of the border area, veiUer la region frontiere, conformement aux
in accordance with its mandate, until the Com- termes de son mandat, jusqu'a ceque la Commission is able to present its report to the Se- mission soit en mesure de presenter sOIltapport
curity Council, and the Security Council has au Conseil de securite et que le Conseil de sereached a decision t.."ereon.
curite. ait pris une decision a ce sujet.
The Brazilian delegation thinks it of the ut'De ravis de la delegation du BresH, il est extremost importance to strengthen the role of the mement important de renforcer le rOle du. Conseil
Security Council as an instrument of peaceful de secunte en tant ,qu'instrument charge du reglesettlement. If we do not assure to the Security m~nt pacifique des diff6-ends. Si nous nepla~ons
Council proper conditions for the exercise of that pas le Conseil dans les conditions requises pour
function, we shall be stifling one of the greatest remplir cette tache, nonS detruirons l'un des plus
hopes placed in the United Nations as a means grands espoirs qu'ait fait naitre I'Organisation
of averting conflicts. The case before us is the des Nations Unieos en taut que moyen d'eviter les
first attempt of the Security Council to use its conflits. Nous assistons a la premiere tentative du
mandate in bringing about a peaceful settlement. Conseil de securite d'user de ses pouvoirsen vue
By throwing doubts upon its powers: which are d'arrivera un reglcr_ .;nt pacifique. En mettant
clearly defined in the Charter, we should be in- en doute ses pouvoirs, q!li sontc1airement definis
viting future conflict and frustrating one of the dans la Charte, nous encouragerions de nouveaux
main purposes of ,the United Nations.
conflits et nous emptkherions I'OrganisatioI+ des
Nations Unies de remplir l'un de ses principaux
devoirs.'
Mr. Quo Tai-chi (China): The question
M. Quo Tai-chi (Chine) (traduit de fanbefore us, namely the creation and the terms of glais): Le probleme qui nous occupe, a savoir
reference of the SU,bSidiary Group of the com-Ila creation et le .m,and,at du Grou.pe subsidiaire - mission of Investigation, is really a simple one,. de la Commission d'enquete, est en realite t:l'es
as it is only a part of the normal mechanism of simple, puisqu'il s'a:git simplement d'un element
the Security Council and of the Commission of du travail normal du ConseiJ de securite et de la
Investiga,tion.
_
Commission cl'enquete.
Unfortunately, the question has caused some, Malheureusement, ila provoque des debats
lengthy d,ebate, :first in the Council, then in the assez prolonges, d'abordau Conseil,'plrisau sein
Commission, and again ill the Council. The de la Commission, et enfin .de nouveau au'
problems that have arisen in this connexion may Conseil. Les questions qui se posent ace sujet
be briefly stated as follows:
,peuvent etre:tes'~mees comme suit:
1. Did the Security Council,. in creating the
1. En crean'c le Groupe subsidiaire, le Conseil ,
Subsidiary Group, act within its competence and d~ securite a+il agi dans le cadre deses attribuin accordance with itS rules of procedure?,
tions et conformementason reglement interieur?
2. Did the Commission of Investigation, in
2. En fixant le mandat du Groupe subsidlaire,
defining the tenns of reference of the Subsidiary la Commission d'enquete a-t-elle agidans le cadre
Group~act within its· co~petence?
de ses at+'...ributiolls?
.
3. Are Albania, Bulgaria, and Yugoslavia
3. L'Alb~e, la Bulgarie et la YougoslaVie
. ~~gally. and morally justified in refusing to assist s('~lt~elles juridiquement et moralement justifiees
m ,the 'Work of the Subsidiary Group?
a refuser d'aider le Groupe subsidiaire clans ses
.~
travaux?,
...

The 'able statement made before the Council
by theJ3elgian :repres~ntative at our last meeting,
ban:"'~e dear observations made this morning

Le sollde '~xpose" fait par le· r~resei1tant 'de
la' Belgique lors denotrederniere seanceetles
observations lucides que les' representants deg

882
by the representatives of the United State"1, Etats-Unis, de l'Australie et du BrCsil ant preAusti"alia, and Brazil have really disposed of sentees ce matin, ont vraiment resolu ces questhose questions. They have clearly supplied the tions. TIs ont nettement fourni la reponse.
answer.
Toutefois, au nom de la delegation de la Chine,
However, on behalf of the Chinese delegation,
I shall say just a few words. With regard to the je voudrais dire quelques mats. Premiere quesfirst problem - namely, whether the Security tion: en creant le Groupe subsidiaire, le Conseil
Council, in creating the Subsidiary Group, has de securite a-t-il agi dans le cadre de ses attribuacted within its competence - it is my delega- 'clons? Ma delegation estime que le Conseil avait
tion's opinion that the power of this Council to le droit indiscute et indiscutable de creer un
create this Subsidiary Group, in carrying out its Groupe subsidiaire, pour s'acquitter de sa tache
duties in conneXi.on with the Greek question, is au sujet de la question grecque. Tant que le
unchallenged and unchallengeable. As long as Conseil sera saisi de cette question,. il aura non
the Council is seized of the Greek question, it seulement le droit, mais egalement le devoir,
has the duty as well as the right to investigate the d'enqueter sur la situation et de s'y interesseI'.
situation and interest itself in it.
.
Le differend en question n'a pas ete regIe; tant
The dispute in question has not been settled,
and, as long as it is not settled, the Council must qu'it ne l'est pas, le Conseil doit continueI' a s'y
maintain a continuing interest and watch over interesser et surveiller la situation. Si le Conseil
the situation. If the Council were to. confine its devait se borner enqueter sur un certain nombre
investigations to border incidents as isolated inci- d'incidents de frontiere consideres isoIement, il
dents, it would be, defeating its own purpose, irait l'encontre de son propre but. car un difbecause a dispute consists of all such incidents of ferend est compose de taus les incidents passes et
the past and of the future put together. There- futurs, consideres dans leur ensemble. C'est pourfore we cannot deal with the situation adequately quoi nous ne pouvons regler cette affaire comme'
by confining our considerations to isolated inci- il convient si nous n'etudions que des incidents
isoles.
dents.
nest indeniable qu'en creant le Groupe subsiIn creating the Subsidiary Group, the Council
undeniably acted within its compete~ce and in diaire, le Conseil a pris une mesure relevant de
accordance with its rules of procedure. Yugo- sa competence et conforme son reglement inteslavia is a Member of the United Nations, and rieur. La Yougoslavie est un Etat Membre de
Albania and Bulgaria, though non-members, I'Organisation des Nations Unies et, dans l'affaire
have both accepted the obligations of member- presente, l'Albanie et la Bulgarie, bien qu'elles
ship for the purpose of this dispute. There is ne soient pas membres, ont toutes deux accepte
.nothing wrong with the procedure. Though with- les obligatiom. qui in<:ombent 3.UX Etats Membres.
out a vote,representatives of those three coun- Cette procedure est parfaitement reguliere. Bien
tries were present when the Council discussed the que n'ayant pas le droit de voter, les representants
question of the creation of the Subsidiary Group; de ces trois pays etaient presents lorsque le
the Council could not confer upon them the Conseil a discute de la creation du Groupe subsiright to vote. It may be recalled that before the diake. Le Conseil ne pouvait leur conferer le
Commission of Investigation concerning Greek droit de voter. On se rappellera qu'avant la
Frontier Incidents was established lastDecember, creatiun, en decembre dernier, de la Commission
the representatives of the three countries were d'enquete sur les inc;idents survenus a la fronalso present at this table, and they, from thp. very tiere g:'ecque~ les representants de ces trois pays
beginning, consistently opposed any appointment siegeaient egalement cette table et que, des le
of such a Commission. However, the Council, debut, ils n'ont cesse de s'opposer a la creation
after long deliberation, decided to appoint such de cette Commission. Toutefois, apres d~ 'longs
a Commission in order to carry out its duty in debats, le Conseil a decide de creer la Commisconnexion with the consideration and determina- sion, afin de remplir la tache qui lui incombe
tionot
pacific settlement of the dispute of d'etudier et de realiser un reglement pacifique
du differend dont il est saisi.
which it was seized.
Of coume, as has been pointed out, those three
Comme on l'a signale, ces trois pays, en tant
countries, as ~overeign' States, ha.d therig-ht to qu'Etats souverains, avaient naturellement le
express their opposition. Nevem'leless, the Coun- droit. d'exprimer une opinion opposee. Nean·
cil decided to create both the Commission and moins, malgre leur opposition, le Comeil a dethe Subsidiary Group despite. their opposition. cide de creer III Commission et le Groupe subsiIn my view, the opposition of those three coun- diaire. A mon avis, l'opposition de ces trois pays
tries 'and their refUSal to assist in the work of au Groupe .subsidiaire et leur reius de l'aider dans
the Subsidiary Group are no more valid, than ses travaux n~ sont pas plus valables' que l'op·
their original opposition to the estabfuhment of position qu'ils ont mise, au debut, la creation
de la Commission principale elle-meme.
the main, C()mmissiC'"! itself.
As regards the second qaest1o!i,the Chi'lese
Quant a la seconde question, la delegation de
, delegation is of the opinion d)atthe Conun.!ssion la Chine estime qu'en definissant le mandat du
9fInveStigation,in defil-ur-g thi'. terms of reference Groupe subsidiaire, la Commission d'enquete a
of the Subsidiary Group, a£~:ed eni:ir~ly within its agi entierement dans le cadre de ses attributions.
competence. It was the Security Council, that C'est le Conseh de securite qui a decide la creatook the decision to~re~t,,-; the Subcidiary Group ,,tion d~~r0u-pe subsidiaire et charge 1~ Co~~

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

pt

883
and directed the Commission, in implementing
the resolution of the Security Council, to prescribe such terJj1S of reference as the Commission
of Investigation saw fit. In other words, the
Commission was authorized by the Council to
define the terms of reference of its Subsidiary
Group.
It has been said that the Commission of Investigation acted without consulting the representatives of Albania, Bulgaria, and Yugoslavia. As
I understand it, and as has been pointed out by
previous speakers, the liaison officers of those
countries who were attached to the Commission
acted in the capacity of liaison officers only.
They had no power to paTticipate in the deliberations of the Commission, still less to vote.
0

As regards the third question, my delegation
thinks that Albania, Bulgaria, and Yugoslavia
are, both legally and morally, under obligation to
assist the Subsidiary Group in its work. Yugoslavia is a Member of the United Nations. Under
Article 25 of the Charter, Yugoslavia agreed to
accept and carry out the decisions of the Security
Council. Albania and Bulgaria, though nonmembers, have already accepted the obligations
imposed upon them by the Charter.

Furthermore, those three countries, the
Chinese delegation feels, are under a moral obligation to assist the Subsidiary Group in its work.
The Subsidiary Group is a creation of the
Security Council. It is an impartial and objective
fact-finding body. I am sure that those three
countries would wish the Group to investigate
all facts concerning the dispute, in order to
enable it to carry on its work, and to receive every
possible assistance.
Finally, I should like to comment on just two
more points:
First, the Subsidiary Group should have authority, by a formal decision, to inve~tigate any
incident that may occur, without having to await
an order in each case from the Commission of
. Investigation or from the Security Council. That
Group is to be stationed in Greece. It should
have the power to make on~the-spot investil!ations as It sees fit.
Secondly, whether the Subsidiary Group
should stay at Salonika or in AthenS is, to my
mind, a comparatively minor point. Perhaps
Salonika is a more convenient place and is
nearer to the northem border of Greece.
•

•

l.")

, The essential point, I submit, is that the Subsidiary Group should have authority to investigate any incident along the entire frontier
between Greece on the one hand, and Albania,
Bulgaria, and Yugoslavia, on the other. Where
th~ Subsidiary Group is to stay seems to me not
~o unportant as where it may go. In my opinion,
It has the right to go wherever necessary in the
"area concerned," which has already been
agr~ed Upon by this Council, in discharging its
duties.

sion, lorsqu'elle donnerait suite a la resolution
du Conseil, de de£inir elle-meme le mandat du
Groupe subllidi~' .; comme bon lui semblerait.
En d'autres tem...;;s, le Conseil autorisait la Commission a fixer le mandat de son Groupe subsidiaire.
On a dit que la Commission d'enquete avait
agi sans consulter les representants de l'Albanie,
de la Bulgarie et de la Yougoslavie. A mon sens,
et ainsi que l'ont signale les representants qui ont
deja pris la parole, les agents de liaison detaches
par ces pays aupres de la Commission agissaient
uniquement en qualite d'agents de liaison. lls
n'avaient pas le droit de prendre part aux discussions de la Commission et moins encore celui
de voter.
Quant a la troisieme question, ma delegation
estime que l'Albanie, la Bulgarie et la Yougoslavie
,sont juridiquement et moralement dans l'obligation d'assister le Groupe subsidiaire dans ses travaux. La YougosIavie est Membre de I'Organisation des Nations Unies. Aux termes de l'Article
25 de la Charte, ce pays a convenu d'accepter et
d'appliquer les decisions du Conseil de securite.
L'Albanie et la Bulgarie, bienqu'elles ne soient
pas membres de I'Organisation des Nations
Unies, ont accepte d'assumer les obligations que
la Charte impose aux Etats Membres.
En outre, selon la delegation de la Chine, ces
trois pays ont l'obligation morale d'assister le
Groupe subsidiaire dans ses travaux. Ce Groupe
est une creation du Ccnseil de secwite. C'est un
organisme charge de conduire ~e enquete avec
impartialite et objectivite. Ces trois pays desirent, j'en suis convaincu, que le Groupe enquete
sur t0US leg incidents relatifs au differend et
re~oive toute l'aide possible, afin d'etre en mesure
de poursuivre sa tache.
Enfin, je voudrais dire quelques mots sur deux
autres points:
En premier lieu, le Groupe subsidiaire devrait
etre autorise, par un acte formel, a enqueter sur
tout incident qui pourrait se produire, sans devoir, dans chaque cas, attendre un ordre de la '
Commission d'enquete ou du Conseil de securite.
Ce Groupe sera fixe en Grece. n devrait avoil"
autorite pour mener une enquete sur les lieux,
chaque fois qu'ille jugera necessaire.
En second lieu, la question de .savoir si· le
Groupe subsidiaire s'installera. a Salonique ou a
l..thenes est, a mon avis, re1ativement peu im- .
portante. Peut-etie serait-il plus commode de
choisir Salonique, qui est plus proche de la frontiere nord de la Grece.
L'essentiel, a mon avis, est d'autoriser le
Groupe subsidiaire a enqueter sur tout incident
quipourrait survenir en n'importe quel point de
la frontiere entre la Grece d'une part, l'Albanie,
la Bulgarie F-t la Yougoslavie d'autre part. La
question de,
Ir OU le Groupe subsidiaire se
fixera me par31t moins importante que celle de
savoir ou il pourra se rendre. Selon moi, le Groupe
subsidiaire, dans l'accomplissement de la tache,
a le droit de se rendre n'importe ou dans la
"region mteressee" sur laquelle le Conseil s'est
mis d'accord.

884
Therefore, in the light of those two observations, I think that the Soviet draft resolution
seems to imply a repudiation of the Commission
of I!1vestigation, which certainly would be derogatory both to the authority of the Commission
and of the Security Council itself.
The PRESIDENT: I have only one more speaker
on my list. Therefore, before we adjourn, I
should like to ask the Council whether it wishes
to meet again this afternoon at 3 p.m. or to
adjourn until Friday morning.

. 00IlIIlIII

A la lumiere dC"..s observations qui precedent,
j~estime done que dans son projet de r.esOlutiOD,

l'Union soYietique semble desavouer la Commission d'enqucte, cequi .porterait certainement
atteinte, nOIl seulement a l'autorite de la Commission, mais encore a celle du Conseil de securite
lui-meme.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de ~'anglais): Je n'ai
plus qu'un seul orateur inscrit SlJr ma liste. Avant
d'ajourner la seance, je voudrais done demander
au Conseil s'il prefere se reunir de nouveau cet
apres-midi. a 15 heures, ou remettre la discussion
a vendredi matin.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sociaMr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Relistes
sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Certes, il
publiCs) (translated from Russian): I had~ of
course, intended to speak·also, but I should like est egaIement dans mes intentions d'intervenir,
to do so after all the members of the Security -mais je voudrais parler lorsque tous les membres
Council have expressed their views on this du Conseil se seront prononces sur la question.
question.
As regards the time of the next meeting, I feel
Quant a la date de notre prochaine reunion,
it would be inconvenient now to call a meeting il serait difficile, me semble-t-il, de la prevoir
for 3 p.m. today. Generally speaking, it would pour cet apres-midi a 15 heures. Je crois que, '
be more advisable to agree on the times of our d'une fa~on generale, il serait utile de nous enmeetings well in advance. In any case, it would tendre assez a l'avance sur l'heure et la date de
not suit me to have a meeting today, as no I nos reunions. En tout cas, il me serait difficile
afternoon session had been planned.
de sieger aujourd'hui, car la seance de l'api'esmidi n'a pas ete prevue.
Colonel HOnGSON (Australia): When :t saw
that we were to meet at 10.30 a.m., I concluded
that it was a day's sitting; I thought everybody
else had reached the same conclusion and made
arrangements accordingly. ·My delegation would
like to diSpose of this question, and for that
reason we should prefer to meet again this afternoon.

Le colonel HOnGSON (Australie) (tradui: de
l'anglais): I:.orsque j'ai appris que nous' reunirior!! aID h. 30, j'ai pense que le Conseil siegerait
toute la journee; j'ai cru que tous les autres
membres penseraient de mcme et preildraient des
dispositions en consequence. Ma delegation aimerait que 1'0n en f!nit avec cette affaire et, pour
cette raison, nous prefererions sieger eet apresmidi.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): Puisque
The PRESIDENT: Since we have two opposing
views, we should perhaps vote first on the pro- nollS sommes en presence de deux avis differents,
posal of the Australian representative that we il convieudrait peut-ctre de voter· d'abord sur la
should meet this afternoon. Is that satisfactory? . proposition du representant de l'AustraIie tendant
a ce que nollS nous reunissions cet apres-midi.
Acceptez-vous cette procedure?

Mr. Quo Tai-chi. (China): I propose that
this meeting be adjourned until Friday morning.
I think a meeting this afternoon would be inconvenient for more than one member of the
. CoUIlcil. I have not made any plans to stay on
this afternoon either. It seems sensible to adjourn
until Friday.
Mr. E~-KHoURI (Syria): I do not see why
we should adjourn until Friday. We can meet
either tomorrow or' Thursday. Why s.'tould we
defer.our next meeting \mtil·Friday?

Mr. QUO Tai-chi (China): I mentioned Friday because. that day was suggested ·by the
i>resident. I have no preference for Friday or any
Qt!ter day. We can meet earlier, if you wish.

}\1. £~r.:-KHOURI <S~e) (traduit de. I'anglais) :
}:(f"'; Vf1·1'! t')~ pOurquOl nom renvemons la prof:hcinf. s,(;ance a vendredi. Nous pouvons noUS
r~,,;'ci;' gh; demain,. soit jeudi. Pourquoi remettre la pl'oe.i::l.aine seance a vendredir
M. Quo Tai-chi (Chille) (traduit· de· fanglais): J'ai parM de vendredi parce que le President a propose ce jour-la. Je n'ai de preference
ni pour vendredi, ni pour un autre Jour. Nous
pouvons nous reunir plus t~t, si.vous le desirez.

rt""I

D -. .- - - - - ~ ~ - · 885
Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria): We could at least
meet on Thursday.

M. EL-KHoURI (Syrie) (traduit de I'anglais) :
Nous pourrions au mo~ nous reunir jeudi.

M, LAWFORD (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de
Mr. LAWFORD (United Kingdom): Unless I
am mistaken, the name of the next speaker on I'anglais): Si je me trompe, Sir Alexander Cadothe list is Sir Alexander Cadogall. I know that gan est le pro~ain orateur a. prendre la parole.
he is quite ready to speak this afternoon, and Je sais qu'il est tout dispose a faire sa declaration
indeed, would be glad to do so. It would be cet apres-midi; en fait, il serait heureux qu'il en
easier for him to come to a meeting this after- soit ainsi. n lui serait plus facile d'assister a une
noon than tomorrow or the day after. I shall seance cet apres-midi que demain ou le jour
therefoi'(~ vote for the Australian proposal if it suivant. Je voterai done en faveur de la proposition de l'Australie si e11e est mise aux voix.
is put to the vote.
Mr. Quo Tai-chi (China): I made a motion
for adjournment; I think that comes before any
other motion. I ask tue President to put my
motion to the vote. I move that the meeting
should adjourn, but I think we can leave it to
the President to decide when we shall meet
a~1n.

M. Quo Tai-chi (Chine) (traduit de l' anglais): J'ai presente une motion d'ajournement.
Je pense qu'une proposition de cet ordrepasse
avant toute autre. Je demande donc au President
de la mettre aux voix. Je propose que 1'0n ajourne
la seance, mais j'estime que nous pouvons laisser
au President le soin de decider de la date de la
prochaine seance.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics)' (translated from Russian): Up till
now our procedure has been as follows: Whenever it did not suit a member of the Security
Council to meet at a particular time, we took
that circumstance into consideration, and did
not appoint a Council meeting for such a time,
simply because it was inconvenient for someor even for only one - of our members.
We have, of course, no strict rules of procedure on the subject, but there is what I would
call a definite tradition in this matter. I see no
reason, therefore, for putting this question to the
vote, especially as 'the time in question is inconvenient not only to one, but to several members
of the Security Council. I think it would be
better to meet not today, but at some other time.
We might ask our Chairman to fix a suitable
time, either on Thursday or Friday - I do not
mind which - so that we can meet and continue our discussion of this question. In so far as
tomorrow is concerned, I believe that several
other meetings are scheduled, and many of us
would probably find it difficult to \attend a Security Council meeting.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du. russe): Jusqu'a
present, nous procedions de la fa~on suivante:
lorsqu'une date ne r.onvenait pas a l'un quelccnque des representants du. Conseil de securite, nous
en tenions compte. Nous evitions de fixer la seancea cette date, preciseL.mt parce qu'il etait
difficile al'un de nos membres, ne ffit-ce qu'a un
s~ul, de sieger.
I
Certes,nous n'avons aucun reglement strict a
ce tlujet.Mais nous avons une tradition hien
etablit.,. si je puis dire. Je ne vois donc pas pourquoi il hudrait mettre cette question aux voix,
surtout etant donne que non pas un mais plusieurs membres du Consell ont declare que la
date et l'heure qu'on nous propose ne leur conviennent pas. Je {':wis qu'il vaudrait mieux nous
reunir non pill; aujourd'hui, mais un autre jour.
Nous pourrions demander au 'President de fixer
une date - jeudi ou vendredi, par exemple, cela
m'est egal- pour notre prochaine seance~ ou
nous pou.rsuivrions nos debats sur bL question.
Quant a demain, il me semble que_ plusieu.rs
autres reunions sont pre~es et qu'il sera donc
difficile a certains d'entre nous de sieger a~
Conseil de sc§Curite.
.

'The PRESIDENT: If we do not meet this
afternoon, we cannot meet tomorrow b~cause we
shall not have the facilities. Therefore, we could
meet on Thursday at 10.30 a.m. I propose that
we should adjouq:t today and hold our next
meeting at to.30 a.m. on Thursday.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Si nous
ne nous reunissons pas cet apres-midi, nous ne
pourrons le faire demain, pour des raisons d'ordre
materiel. Nous pourrions done nous reunir jeudi,
aID h. 30. Je propose que nous levions la seance
et que notre prochaine reunion ait lieu jeudi, a
10 h. 30.
.
,I

Mr. de la TOURNELLE (France) (translated
from French): May we assume that if,we are
unable to complete our discussion on Thursday
morning, we shall meet again in the afternoon?
The PRESIDES!T:1iope that this is satisfactory
to the C'luncil. . e there are no objections, that
.schedule is adop ed.

1Ib!ll'tlb.'I!I!IT!llih_:~m:~et~in~g _rose at 1.50. p.m,

M. de la TOURNEI.LE (France) : Si le debat de
jeudi n'etait pas termine a la seance du matin,
serait-il entendu que nous siegerions l'apres-midi?
Le PRESIDENT. (traduit de l',mglais): J'espere
que. tous les membres trouvent c::ette solution
satisfaisante. Puisqu'il n'y a pas cl'objections, j'en
conclus queu;c: hoaire est adopte.
.

La seance est levee a13 h. 50.
