IX.

Noting also the report of the Special Committee on
the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization,'" especially the
work done on the draft Manila declaration on the
peaceful settlement of international disputes, 11
Taking into account the suggestions and opinions expressed during the examination at its current session of
the question of the peaceful settlement of disputes between States,
Bearing in mind the wide consultations that have
taken place in connexion with the content of the declaration on the peaceful settlement of international disputes and the fruitful activity in the Working Group,
established at the current session of the General
Assembly, which continued the elaboration of the declaration,
l. Calls again upon all States to adhere strictly in
their international relations to the principle that States
shall settle their international disputes by peaceful
means in such a manner that international peace and
security and justice are not endangered:
2. Considers that the question of the peaceful settlement of disputes should represent one of the central concerns for States and that, to this end, the efforts for
examining and further developing the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes between States and the
means of consolidating its full observance by all States
in their international relations should be continued:
3. Considers also that the elaboration, as soon as
possible, of a declaration of the General Assembly on
the peaceful settlement of international disputes is likely
to contribute to the strengthening of the role and the efficiency of the United Nations in pn:venting conflicts
and settling them peacefully:
4. Requests the Special Committee on the Charter of
the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the
Role of the Organization to continue the elaboration of
the draft Manila declaration on the peaceful settlement
of international disputes with a view to submitting it for
further consideration to the General Assembly at its
thirty-sixth session;
5. Refers to the Special Committee the report of its
Working Group on the Peaceful Settlement of
Disputes, 1x as well as the views expressed at the current
session of the General Assembly on the contents of the
declaration;
6. Expresses the hope that the States which have not
yet transmitted to the Secretary-General their opinions
on that matter will do so as soon as possible in order to
contribute, in this way also, to the elaboration of the
declaration;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Peaceful settlement of disputes between States".
95th plenary meeting
I 5 December I 980
35/161.

261

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Consideration of the draft articles on mostfavoured-nation clauses

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33 / 139 of 19 December 1978
relating to the report of the International Law Commis" Official Records of the General A.uemhly. Thirty-Jijih Session.
Supplement No. 33 (A/35/33 and Corr. I)_
11
Ibid., para. 159.
1
' A/C.6/35/L.21.

sion on the work of its thirtieth session, in particular section II of the resolution,
Having considered the item entitled "Consideration of
the draft articles on most-favoured-nation clauses", including the report of the Secretary-General submitted
pursuant to resolution 33/139, 1"
Bearing in mind the importance of facilitating international trade and development of economic cooperation among all States on the basis of equality,
mutual advantage and non-discrimination in the establishment of the new international economic order,
A ware of the fact that more replies from States and interested intergovernmental agencies are needed,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General:
2. Requests the Secretary-General to reiterate his
invitation to Member States, organs of the United
Nations which have competence in the subject-matter
and interested intergovernmental organizations to submit or bring up to date. not later than 30 June 198 I,
their written comments and observations on chapter II
of the report of the International Law Commission on
the work of its thirtieth session 211 and, in particular, on:
(a) The draft articles on most-favoured-nation
clauses adopted by the Commission:
(b) Those provisions relating to such clauses on
which the Commission was unable to take decisions:
and also requests States to comment on the recommendation of the Commission that those draft articles
should be recommended to Member States with a view
to the conclusion of a convention on the subject:

3. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate, before the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly,
the comments and observations submitted in accordance with paragraph 2 above:
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to bring
up to date, in view of the comments and observations
mentioned in paragraph 2 above, the analytical compilation of comments and observations from Governments, organs of the United Nations which have
competence in the subject-matter and interested intergovernmental organizations:
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Consideration of
the draft articles on most-favoured-nation clauses" and
to consider it at an early stage.

95th plenary meeting
15 December 1980
35 / 162.

Review
process

of the

multilateral

treaty-making

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that multilateral treaties are an important primary source of international law,
Conscious, therefore, that the process of elaboration
of multilateral treaties, directed towards the progressive
development of international law and its codification,
forms an important part of the work of the United
Nations and of the international community in general,
Recalling its resolution 32/48 of 8 December 1977, by
which it requested the Secretary-General to prepare a
'A/3\'20J and:\dd. i-J.
'" Official Records of !he General Assembly. Thirty-third Session.
S111,pleme111 .\'o 10 1 \ _11 10).
