A /76/PV.51

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

51

st plenary meeting
Friday, 10 December 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Blanco Conde
(Dominican Republic), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 75 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
Report of the Secretary-General (A/76/334)
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/76/74,
A/76/320 and A/76/376)
Draft resolutions (A/76/L.23, A/76/L.24,
A/76/L.26 and A/76/L.27)
(b) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Report of the Secretary-General (A/76/78)
Draft resolution (A/76/L.25)
(c) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
Mr. Zinken (Netherlands): I am well aware of the
fact that I am the first to speak after the break, which
reminds me of a time when I was still a handball player.
The coach would always bring on the best players after
the break, so I am honoured to be here addressing the
Assembly this afternoon.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands fully aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union (EU) (see A/76/PV.50).
This morning, EU Ambassador Gonzato described
the haunting challenges of today. It is key to support the
humanitarian community and maintain international
consensus on the key normative frameworks of the
United Nations for humanitarian action. Let us make
sure that we do everything in our power to get back on
track with conscious and collective efforts.
The Netherlands is committed to not losing focus
in those collective efforts to get back on track. In that
vein, I would like to highlight two topics, namely, the
importance of a victim-centred approach to sexual
exploitation, abuse and harassment and the role of
mental health and psychosocial support to help people
and communities get back on track.
First, the Netherlands appreciates the SecretaryGeneral’s leadership in addressing sexual exploitation,
abuse and harassment. Progress is noted in the
adoption of standards and collaborative action in
fielding specialized staff and outreach to communities.
However, inter-agency collaboration in securing safe
and accessible complaint mechanisms, timely and
transparent investigations and, in particular, redress for
victims and survivors of sexual exploitation, abuse and
harassment is not on par with United Nations principles
and values. The widely reported sex-for-jobs scandal
during the Ebola response is sad proof.
Addressing the needs of people, particularly
those in vulnerable and dependent situations, is at the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-39770 (E)

*2139770*

A/76/PV.51

10/12/2021

heart of humanitarian action. Implementing a victimcentred approach means that we value and respect the
communities we work in. It also means that we manage
the biggest risks in humanitarian work, namely,
long-lasting damage to the people we are meant to
protect. Protection from sexual exploitation, abuse and
harassment requires stepping up leadership, action and
accountability to beneficiaries.

That is why we should pay attention in particular
to systematic work to build a common sustainability
system in the field of health, at both the national and
global levels, and to make humanitarian responses
more complex. One of the lessons we have learned from
the COVID-19 crisis is that in times of crisis, human
rights challenges become even more acute and come to
the fore.

Secondly, I wish to welcome the recognition, in the
humanitarian omnibus draft resolution (A/76/L.23) to
be adopted today, of the importance of mental health
and psychosocial support as a cross-sectoral theme of
humanitarian efforts. Mental health is just as important
as physical health for people affected by crises in order
to be able to withstand the adversities they meet.

Therefore, in our view, the following actions should
be prioritized: the prevention of gender-based violence;
post-COVID-19 economic development that is mindful
of vulnerable groups, such as people living in poverty,
women, older people, people with disabilities, internally
displaced persons and children; zero tolerance for
conflict-related sexual violence; the protection of
civilians in armed conflict; and compensation policies
for civilians affected by conflict.

Physical needs have to be addressed. Mental health
and psychosocial support can never solve a lack of food,
shelter, water or medicine, but the non-tangible mental
effects of living in a crisis need to be recognized and
addressed as well if we want individuals, families and
communities to be able to cope, recover and get back
on track. That should not be an afterthought. Rather, it
should be included in all phases of emergency response,
including preparedness, staff training, duty of care and
monitoring and learning what works and what does not.
The adoption of a mental health and psychosocial
support-inclusive draft resolution today is an important
step, but we have many more steps to take. Let us take
those steps and be sure to stay on track in ensuring access
to mental health and psychosocial support across the
globe, in particular to people affected by emergencies.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): The delegation of
Ukraine aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the observer of the European Union (EU) and by
the representative of Slovenia on behalf of the EU
(see A/76/PV.50). I would like to make the following
remarks in my national capacity.
In recent years, we have witnessed a rapid increase
in humanitarian needs globally, caused mainly by
armed conflicts, climate change and, most recently, the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. According
to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, next year nearly 274 million
people around the world will need humanitarian
assistance and rely on life-saving aid from the United
Nations to survive. Compared with this year, that figure
will increase by another 17 per cent.
2/19

As we have done over the past seven years, we
are compelled to draw attention to the humanitarian
crisis in the temporarily occupied territories of
Ukraine caused by the ongoing armed aggression
by the Russian Federation. Since the aggression
began in 2014, the civilian population living in the
temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine has borne
a heavy burden and is experiencing the most harmful
consequences of the actions of the Russian Federation’s
occupying administrations.
Due to the blocking of checkpoints by those
administrations, which are criminally justified by
measures to prevent the spread of COVID-19, the
citizens of Ukraine living in the temporarily occupied
territories of Donbas are unable to gain access to basic
requirements and services. Those include, in particular,
social welfare and pension benefits; educational,
medical, administrative and banking services; and
vaccination against COVID-19 with vaccines approved
by the World Health Organization.
At the same time, the epidemic situation in those
territories remains extremely challenging, as do foodsecurity conditions. That is why the Government of
Ukraine calls on the United Nations and international
humanitarian organizations to strengthen the
monitoring of the medical services, if any, provided to
people living in the occupied territories and to report all
violations of the human rights to life and health by the
occupying authorities. In the meantime, we are grateful
that this year, just as in the previous seven years, the
humanitarian community has assisted a large number
21-39770

10/12/2021

of people in need in the territories currently beyond the
control of the Government of Ukraine.
The Ukrainian Government is taking the necessary
measures to minimize the humanitarian consequences
of the external aggression and to simplify the relevant
administrative procedures. In particular, it approved a
strategy for the economic development of the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions and a strategy for the integration
of internally displaced persons (IDPs). The Ukrainian
authorities are also providing compensation for
housing destroyed as a result of the Russian armed
aggression, modernizing checkpoints with unified
standards, providing temporary housing for IDPs, and
implementing a preferential mortgage loans programme
for housing.
Last year we introduced a special programme for
the reintegration of youth from the temporarily occupied
territories, focusing on delivering on their right to
high-quality higher education. This year we have also
created relevant preparatory courses with scholarships.
There has been further progress in digitalization and
online access to services for IDPs and residents of the
temporarily occupied territories.
A national strategy for the protection of civilians
in armed conflict was recently drafted, reflecting
Ukraine’s commitment to adopting the international
standards set by the United Nations and the European
Union. At the same time, in order to solve the full
range of humanitarian challenges due to the foreign
aggression, the Government of Ukraine needs to further
expand cooperation with United Nations agencies and
other international humanitarian organizations.
That relates to two main areas, namely, a holistic
humanitarian response in the temporarily occupied
territories and the implementation of development
projects in the territories controlled by the Government
of Ukraine. Those projects aim to successfully integrate
IDPs into host communities and meet their economic,
cultural and social needs. In that regard, there is a clear
need for further broad support by international partners
for the United Nations humanitarian response plan for
Ukraine for 2022.
In conclusion, let me underscore that only a united
global response to the significant deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in the world will allow us to
overcome the current unprecedented challenges we
all face. It is in that context that we look forward to
the Assembly’s adoption by consensus of the relevant

A/76/PV.51

draft resolutions (A/76/L.23, A/76/L.24, A/76/L.26
and A/76/L.27), which Ukraine had the honour to
co-sponsor.
Mr. Kelsey (United Kingdom): Every year, Member
States gather here in the General Assembly Hall to
review the global humanitarian picture, reflect on the
year that has been and look ahead to future challenges.
However, having sat here a year ago and having listened
to Member States today, there are a number of recurring
themes that are, sadly, all too familiar.
Those include escalating and unprecedented levels
of need, more crises in more places and lasting longer
than before and demand for humanitarian assistance
increasingly outstripping resources. As conflict,
climate change and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
continue to drive and dominate humanitarian crises,
it is patently clear that we are heading in the wrong
direction. We need to see a shift in the way we work,
building new partnerships and developing tools to
better address and anticipate humanitarian crises.
The United Kingdom’s approach going into 2022 will
focus on three pillars, namely, prioritization, protection
and prevention.
First, we need to prioritize the delivery of effective
humanitarian assistance to people in greatest need. That
means ensuring that responses better reflect the needs
and voices of affected populations, as well as promoting
humanitarian responses that are accountable, datadriven and cost-effective.
Secondly, we need to protect the safety, dignity and
rights of individuals in situations of conflict and crisis,
especially women and girls, who are disproportionately
impacted by gender-based violence and abuse. We will
protect and champion humanitarian principles, norms
and standards while calling out those belligerents
disregarding international humanitarian law and
preventing populations from accessing the critical
assistance they need.
Finally, we need to prevent today’s problems from
turning into tomorrow’s crises. The United Kingdom
will push for a shift among multilateral, development,
peacebuilding and humanitarian partners, including
international financial institutions, to better prevent,
anticipate and prepare for new crises and rebuild
resilience in protracted and recurrent ones. That will
include increasing investments in monitoring and earlywarning systems and prearranged finance to anticipate

21-397703/19

A/76/PV.51

and act ahead of shocks and, in so doing, reduce the
scale and impact of humanitarian crises.
Innovation, data and technology are at the heart
of tackling those issues and acting early. The United
Kingdom will continue to lead in that area, using our
world-class capabilities to ensure that aid agencies are
able to plan and prepare for disasters, improving the
chances of saving lives and reducing suffering.
As we continue to face the combined effects of
conflict, climate change and COVID-19, we need to see
a holistic multilateral response. That means harnessing
big data and artificial intelligence, as well as the
expertise of the private sector. It means aiming the
power of climate finance at the most fragile contexts. It
means that the United Nations must make full use of all
the levers at its disposal, with development, peace and
political actors all playing their role in preventing crises.
Since 2015, the United Kingdom has provided more
than $14.5 billion in humanitarian funding to support
the world’s most vulnerable people. We are protecting
our life-saving humanitarian spend at more than
$1 billion per year. But with needs rapidly outstripping
available resources, it is vital that we find new means
to meet challenges and use funding in smarter, more
efficient ways. By focusing on prioritization, protection
and prevention, we will be able to fund more nimble and
flexible responses to humanitarian crises. The United
Kingdom is investing in earlier interventions to prevent
further suffering, reduce growing humanitarian needs
and ensure that funding goes further. We call on all
Member States gathered here today to do the same.
Ms. Brosnan (United States of America):
The United States is pleased to co-sponsor the
humanitarian draft resolutions on the strengthening
of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief
assistance of the United Nations (A/76/L.23), the White
Helmets Commission (A/76/L.24), the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel and protection of
United Nations personnel (A/76/L.26) and international
cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field
of natural disasters (A/76/L.27). We reaffirm the
vital function of the United Nations in responding to
humanitarian needs around the globe.
We remain deeply concerned by the unprecedented
rise in humanitarian needs. Last week, the United
Nations released the Global Humanitarian Overview
2022. The figures are stark and, sadly, engender a sense
of déjà vu. More than a quarter of a billion people
4/19

10/12/2021

are expected to need humanitarian assistance and
protection — a significant increase from a year ago,
which was already the highest on record.
This year, to date, donors have given almost
$18 billion to humanitarian plans. That is very generous,
but it amounts to less than half of plans’ financial
requirements. We can and we must do more. The
United States remains the single largest humanitarian
donor, giving nearly $13 billion in humanitarian
assistance in the fiscal year 2021. Earlier this week, we
also announced our intent to contribute to the Central
Emergency Response Fund in 2022.
We continue to play our part in countering the
pandemic and prioritizing global health security. Since
the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19),
the United States Government has appropriated
more than $16.2 billion in emergency health,
humanitarian, economic and development assistance
to help Governments, international organizations and
non-governmental organizations fight the pandemic.
That funding is helping to save lives in more than 120
countries. We call on all our fellow Member States to
join us in that solemn commitment by doing their share
in supporting the humanitarian response.
As the Administrator of the United States Agency
for International Development, Ms. Samantha Power,
has emphasized, while more funding from donors is
urgently needed, a new approach is essential if we are
going to go beyond the all-too familiar calls for more
resources, adapt to today’s changing humanitarian
landscape, more effectively and efficiently alleviate
suffering and address root causes. Our approach must
enhance humanitarian diplomacy.
Conflicts account for more than 80 per cent of
global humanitarian needs. The often-protracted battles
in areas such as Ethiopia, Yemen, Syria, Somalia,
South Sudan and Afghanistan overwhelmingly drive
humanitarian needs. The parties in fragile or conflictaffected areas too often fail to meet the needs of people
and choose violence over peace or respect for human
rights and pluralism. The answer to those conflicts
is political.
As President Biden has said, we must engage
in relentless diplomacy. We need to engage more
effectively in diplomatic negotiations regionally, at the
United Nations and bilaterally to bring parties together
to end conflicts. We must continue encouraging all
parties to conflicts and our partners to support inclusive
21-39770

10/12/2021

United Nations-led peace processes. The appointment
of United States Special Envoys West, Lenderking and
Feltman and acting Special Envoy Godfrey demonstrate
our commitment to peace and stability in Afghanistan,
Yemen, Ethiopia and the Horn of Africa and Syria.
The United States remains concerned over the
continued obstruction of humanitarian access by
parties to conflict and attacks on humanitarian workers
and other forms of interference that hinder them from
reaching those in need, including in Ethiopia, Yemen
and Syria. We must support all tools available to
promote accountability, consistent with international
law, for those responsible for unlawful attacks on
medical and humanitarian personnel. Maintaining
the safety of humanitarian personnel and unhindered
humanitarian access is critical to keeping people alive.
The United States is proud to co-sponsor the draft
resolution on the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel and the protection of United Nations
personnel. That resolution sends an important message
of solidarity to the many courageous people who risk
their lives to deliver humanitarian assistance to millions
of people across the world. We also recognize and
support the vital role of local humanitarian actors who
risk their lives on the front lines of humanitarian crises
to deliver life-saving aid, often in the most dangerous
and hard-to-reach environments.
The United States is also proud to co-sponsor the
draft resolutions under consideration today that focus
on the coordination of humanitarian assistance, the
Argentine White Helmets Commission and natural
disasters. Those draft resolutions rightly emphasize the
importance of partnerships in enhancing our collective
response to humanitarian crises.
We must more effectively address obstacles
that hinder us from scaling up partnerships vital to
expanding humanitarian access and ending conflicts.
That includes strengthening partnerships with
multilateral and regional financial institutions.
We cannot continue to allow the burdens and
risks of dealing with the fallout of conflicts to fall
almost entirely to humanitarian organizations. In
many crises, humanitarian organizations are not
only providing life-saving humanitarian assistance;
they are also having to compensate for broken health
systems and social safety nets. As Secretary-General
Guterres has underscored, we must continue to better
align humanitarian, development and peace efforts to

A/76/PV.51

achieve shared goals and make our foreign-aid dollars
stretch further and reach more people in need.
A key component of humanitarian work is to protect
and assist people in crisis. However, both humanitarian
institutions and States have fallen short in preventing
and addressing sexual exploitation and abuse. We
must prioritize and strengthen our collective efforts to
implement prevention and risk-mitigation strategies,
support survivors, enhance reporting mechanisms
and ensure that perpetrators face the full measure of
accountability for sexual exploitation, harassment
and abuse of their positions in power. The United
States takes that responsibility and those objectives
very seriously.
The United States takes this opportunity to reaffirm
that resolutions are non-binding documents that do not
create or affect rights or obligations under international
law. Regarding our position on the Sendai Framework
for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 and technology
transfer, we refer to our general statements delivered
on 5 and 18 November to the Second and Third
Committees, respectively, of the General Assembly at
its seventy-sixth session.
Finally, the United States will continue to work
towards significant progress on advancing management
reforms across United Nations agencies that enhance
efficiency, performance and accountability in order
to improve humanitarian outcomes for affected
populations. With the number and severity of complex
humanitarian crises outpacing global capacity to
respond, the United States seeks significantly improved
coordination within the humanitarian system and joint
needs assessment and joint analyses that inform and
improve prioritized humanitarian response plans and
appeals. The United States expects all United Nations
agencies engaged in humanitarian assistance to make
significant advances in those areas.
The United States is unequivocally committed
to humanitarianism, multilateralism, international
cooperation and ensuring that assistance reaches those
most in need, including vulnerable populations affected
by conflict, the climate crisis and COVID-19.
I thank the President of the General Assembly for
the opportunity to share our priorities.
Ms. Guzik (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
welcomes the presentation of the draft resolutions on
humanitarian and disaster relief assistance provided by

21-397705/19

A/76/PV.51

the United Nations (A/76/L.23, A/76/L.24, A/76/L.26
and A/76/L.27). We also acknowledge the efforts of the
facilitators throughout the negotiation process.
Mexico takes this opportunity to speak on the draft
resolution entitled “Strengthening of the coordination
of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United
Nations” (A/76/L.23). Thanks to the efforts of Sweden in
its capacity as facilitator, the General Assembly is able,
in this text, to declare its stance on the humanitarian
effects of the coronavirus pandemic, including in
relation to mental health, psychosocial well-being and
access to vaccines against the novel coronavirus.
We also commend the strengthening of the gender
perspective in humanitarian assistance and in all disaster
risk reduction activities. That is no casual inclusion, but
rather a demonstration of the Assembly’s focus on those
who are particularly affected in humanitarian contexts.
However, we deeply regret the fact that the General
Assembly failed to reach consensus on the inclusion
of a paragraph on the humanitarian impact of armed
conflict on children. We note that such obstructionism
occurred repeatedly and despite multiple arguments
supported by data-based evidence.
Not all humanitarian situations are linked to
situations of armed conflict, but all armed conflicts have
a major humanitarian impact on civilians. Worryingly,
the language in question focused on the humanitarian
context of grave violations perpetrated against children
in armed conflict.
In other words, interests outside the best interests of
the child, a principle enshrined in international human
rights law, were imposed. The responsibility of Member
States is to safeguard children’s rights, not to seek
arguments that refute the principles of international
law. The welfare of the more than 19 million children
living in armed conflict depends upon it.
We urge Member States to engage constructively
to find collective solutions on the basis of expert
recommendations developed by actors on the ground.
We hope that in future negotiations on such a landmark
draft resolution, we will be able to meet our obligations
to children and young people, including those who,
unfortunately, continue to suffer from the humanitarian
impacts of armed conflict.
Mr. Fepuleai (New Zealand): At the outset, New
Zealand would like to thank the facilitators of the draft
resolutions (A/76/L.23, A/76/L.24, A/76/L.26 and
6/19

10/12/2021

A/76/L.27) for their diligent work to find consensus
under trying circumstances. New Zealand is pleased
to co-sponsor the humanitarian draft resolutions up
for adoption.
In previous humanitarian debates of the General
Assembly, New Zealand has lamented the rise in global
humanitarian needs, the toll that conflict was having
on civilians, and flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law. Regrettably, little has changed.
Humanitarian needs are greater than ever. They continue
to be driven by a lack of political will to prevent and
end armed conflicts and a lack of respect for the rules
of war expressly designed to limit human suffering.
The coronavirus disease continues to exacerbate
the global humanitarian situation. It has forced
humanitarian actors to find innovative approaches to
responses and to further localization. We must not lose
sight of those advances and continue to innovate and to
strengthen anticipatory action to save lives.
The increase in food insecurity this year is deeply
worrying. That 142 million people are facing food crises
should motivate us all to uphold human dignity, find
political solutions to conflict and commit to lasting,
inclusive peace.
In ongoing armed conflicts, we see devastating
impacts from the use of explosive weapons in populated
areas. At all times, measures must be taken to avoid
incidental harm to civilians. If the risk to civilians
cannot be sufficiently mitigated, then the use of such
weapons in towns and cities must be avoided.
New Zealand remains deeply concerned by the
continuous disregard for the legal protections afforded
to humanitarian personnel, including medical workers.
We strongly condemn all acts of violence, attacks and
threats against humanitarian personnel and attacks on
hospitals and health facilities.
Climate change also continues to be a humanitarian
issue, driving the increase in global need. As an island
nation in the Pacific, New Zealand is acutely aware of
the threat of climate change. For the Pacific, the impacts
are being felt right now — from rising seas to greater
intensity and frequency of extreme weather events such
as cyclones, flooding and drought.
We should not be measured only by how we respond
to the impacts of climate change, but by how sincerely
we tackle its root causes. That is why New Zealand
champions the objective of the Paris Agreement on
21-39770

10/12/2021

A/76/PV.51

Climate Change for the world to become carbon-neutral
in the second half of this century.

no one behind and protect hard-won gains, particularly
for women and girls and people with disabilities.

New Zealand continues to stress that the sexual and
reproductive rights of women and girls in humanitarian
settings must be upheld in humanitarian crises. All
people, including those in humanitarian settings, have
the right to sexual and reproductive health. Sexual and
reproductive health care must be available from the
onset of a crisis. New Zealand strongly advocates for
sexual and reproductive health and rights for women
and girls in all their diversity because gender equality
and women’s empowerment simply cannot be achieved
without it.

Australia believes that collaboration and cooperation
are critical to achieving those objectives. With so much
instability and change, it is now more essential than ever
that we work together and remain accountable to the
standards that underpin our work, including by upholding
international law, providing humanitarian assistance
impartially and neutrally, preserving humanitarian
space from conflict and politics, and combating sexual
and gender-based violence.

We also stress the need for the involvement of people
with disabilities in humanitarian decision-making
processes. In particular, we point to the role of women
and youth with disabilities and the need to strengthen
opportunities for them to exercise leadership and
decision-making capabilities.
The global humanitarian outlook for 2022 is bleak,
with more people than ever in need of life-saving
assistance. The humanitarian system must continue
to evolve and innovate to remain relevant, strengthen
effectiveness and deliver for people in vulnerable
situations. We owe it to those affected by conflict
and disaster to collectively deliver on our shared
commitment to sustainable peace for humankind.
Ms. Webster (Australia): Two years on, the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) continues to cast a
long shadow. Too many people are still without access to
vaccines, and the threat of new variants is ever present.
The continuing impact on incomes and livelihoods is
pushing many people in crisis to the brink.
Furthermore, many protracted crises show no
signs of abating. In some places, conflict is growing,
complicated and exacerbated by climate-induced
hazards and the pandemic’s impacts. Australia’s
neighbours are particularly vulnerable to disasters,
with more than four in five people affected by natural
hazards living in the Indo-Pacific. With repeated
shocks, many people are unable to build up the reserves
that would have previously enabled them to survive
a crisis.
Against that challenging backdrop, our key
objectives become ever more important. We must
continue to stand by those who need our support, leave

However, Australia acknowledges that humanitarian
assistance alone is not the solution. We must find
political solutions, hold warring parties accountable for
violations of international humanitarian law and ensure
humanitarian access. Australia is increasingly focused
on how best to support a shift in the humanitarian system
towards earlier humanitarian action in order to save
lives, protect assets and safeguard development gains.
We must also progress our work across the
humanitarian, development and peace nexus,
empower local actors — including women-led
organizations — and ensure that women’s sexual and
reproductive health rights are respected and that those
services made available, accessible and affordable
to all.
With the COVID-19 pandemic entering its third
year, Australia will continue to be part of the global
drive for equitable access to life-saving vaccines. We
have committed to sharing 60 million vaccine doses
with countries in the Pacific and South-East Asia by
2022. We have already delivered 10 million of those
doses. We are also providing end-to-end support,
helping countries with health-worker training, coldchain equipment, public information campaigns and
technical advice to policymakers and regulators.
On top of that, Australia is contributing
AU$ 130 million to the COVID-19 Vaccine Global
Access Facility Advance Market Commitment, which
is helping to procure and distribute vaccine doses to
92 eligible low- and middle-income countries.
As we face the grim prospect of humanitarian
needs that are larger than ever in 2022, we can take
heart from some of the positive changes of the past year.
With overseas travel restrictions continuing to hamper
mobility, Australia has increasingly relied on local
actors to deliver assistance. That has promoted new

21-397707/19

A/76/PV.51

spaces for local leadership and a growing influence of
local actors in setting priorities and making decisions.
Australia is pleased to be hosting the Asia-Pacific
Ministerial Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction
in September 2022, in partnership with the United
Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction. The
conference provides an important opportunity to
review risk-reduction efforts, to share and learn about
innovative and practical solutions and for countries and
organizations to make new commitments. Diversity
and inclusion, along with science and technology, will
be priorities, with a particular spotlight on local action
and the island and coastal communities of our region.
Finally, I would like to convey Australia’s sincere
appreciation for the humanitarian work of the United
Nations and for all the staff who stay and deliver in
such incredibly difficult environments.
Mr. Tun (Myanmar): First of all, I wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his reports (A/76/334, A/76/74,
A/76/320 and A/76/376), in particular for providing the
General Assembly with an overview of key trends in the
areas of humanitarian assistance and recommendations
to Member States and humanitarian organizations.
In recent years and as we speak, global
humanitarian needs are significantly increasing due
to the continued spread of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19), conflicts, climate change and frequent
natural disasters. We support the important role of
the United Nations in coordinating and responding to
growing global humanitarian needs.
The humanitarian assistance provided by the
United Nations is one of the most tangible impacts of
the Organization’s existence, felt by millions of people
on the ground around the world. However, we are
particularly worried by disturbing trends, which range
from rising displacement to a higher humanitarian
funding gap, despite the unprecedented generosity of
donors contributing $19.11 billion in 2020.

10/12/2021

the start of the current human-made economic and
humanitarian catastrophe in Myanmar. Soon after the
coup, the junta forces unleashed their campaign of
terror upon the civilian population, which is resisting
their illegal military rule.
The systematic and widespread atrocities being
committed by the military junta have left more than
1,300 civilians dead. According to the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, as of 6 December,
more than 280,000 people have been internally
displaced since the coup, in addition to more than
330,000 existing internally displaced persons.
The number of people in need of humanitarian
assistance has increased from 1 million in 2020 to
3 million today. The United Nations Development
Programme estimates that nearly half of Myanmar’s
population will be living under the poverty line by next
year due to the combined impacts of the military coup
and COVID-19. The World Food Programme (WFP)
estimates that 2.6 million people will require food
assistance in the next six months. It is worrying to note
that only 57 per cent of the total requirements under
the 2021 humanitarian response plan for Myanmar has
been received so far.
Myanmar is facing a serious humanitarian crisis.
The tragedy is happening before our very eyes.
Access to vulnerable people who are in need of urgent
humanitarian assistance and protection remains
extremely limited by the military. There could be no
safe or unimpeded humanitarian access in the country
whatsoever if the military continues to hold power. It
is imperative that we all work to find ways, including
through cross-border assistance, to ensure that
humanitarian assistance reaches the people in need.

It is clear that the several ongoing humanitarian
emergencies in various parts of the world reflect the
need for closer coordination and cooperation between
Member States on humanitarian assistance. It has
become more crucial to intensify our efforts to alleviate
the suffering of millions around the world.

Despite the enormous humanitarian crisis, the
military junta continues to commit grave violations
of international human rights and humanitarian law.
This week alone, the military has burned 11 people to
death, including five minors, in Sangiang and rammed
vehicles into peaceful protesters in Yangon while they
were exercising their fundamental right to peaceful
assembly. The junta forces have been attacking
education and health-care facilities and personnel
and aid workers who do not bow to their illegal rule.
Arbitrary detentions also continue.

In February, the Myanmar military perpetrated an
illegal coup against the democratically elected civilian
Government. That illegal act by the military triggered

In the face of rising resistance from civil-defence
forces, the military turns to their usual tactic: punishing
civilian populations, including the mass burning of

8/19

21-39770

10/12/2021

civilian houses and properties, leaving an increasing
number of civilians displaced, as demonstrated by the
recent events in Chin state.
One of the most serious violations of humanitarian
law by the military is the blocking of humanitarian
access to people in need of assistance in defiance of
numerous calls by the United Nations, including the
Security Council. The military has been imposing a
policy of severe scrutiny on humanitarian personnel
and supplies. Bureaucratic procedures have been
weaponized to control humanitarian spaces and the
movement of humanitarian actors.
At present, Myanmar is facing a unique situation
in terms of the provision of humanitarian assistance.
Therefore, I wish to express our sincere thanks to United
Nations agencies, including the WFP and the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, for their best efforts in coordinating and
providing humanitarian assistance, as well as rapidly
responding to the COVID-19 pandemic. We will
continue to support the efforts of the United Nations
and the international community in responding to
global humanitarian needs.
In conclusion, we, the people of Myanmar, are
still counting on the United Nations at this profoundly
difficult time. To bring peace and stability and to
provide humanitarian assistance to those in need
must start with the end of military rule. I appeal once
again for an urgent unified international and regional
response to help put Myanmar back on the path to
democracy. I wish to stress that a lack of decisive and
timely action from the international community will
further exacerbate the high risks to the safety of the
people of Myanmar and lead to a full-blown conflict
in Myanmar.
Ms. Kocyigit Grba (Turkey): At the outset, we would
like to thank the delegations of Argentina, Bangladesh,
the European Union and Sweden for facilitating the
humanitarian draft resolutions under consideration by
the General Assembly today (A/76/L.23, A/76/L.24,
A/76/L.26 and A/76/L.27).
The continued failure to address the major root
causes of humanitarian situations by preventing
violence, persecution and human rights violations
continues to drive thousands of people away from
their homes, incurring heavy humanitarian and
financial costs.

A/76/PV.51

The rising trend in forced displacement, which
now exceeds 84 million people around the world,
is alarming. The danger of hunger, famine, food
insecurity and disease are no less likely compared with
the previous year. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic has made the global humanitarian situation
worse. More people have been driven into poverty,
deprivation, isolation and dependency, especially those
in conflict situations, such as refugees, migrants and
internally displaced persons. We are deeply concerned
about the fate of millions of innocent people in Syria,
Afghanistan, Myanmar and many other places.
Vulnerable groups, including women and girls,
people with disabilities, older people and those with
mental-health needs, are heavily affected by worsening
conditions. At the same time, respect for international
law and international humanitarian law is decline. The
humanitarian system is overwhelmed and overstretched.
In view of that grim outlook, the international
community has clear responsibilities based on the
humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence. Most urgently, the
international community must take bold steps to ensure
fair and equitable access to and distribution of vaccines
against COVID-19. That is significant, especially for
populations in conflict settings and those subject to
other forms of displacement.
Our actions in addressing humanitarian needs
should go beyond emergency humanitarian assistance
and also focus on a multi-year agenda for change and
transformation. In doing so, emerging trends and risks
must be duly taken into account.
The World Humanitarian Summit was a significant
opportunity to discuss a new way of thinking in
the humanitarian system. We should continue our
deliberations on innovative solutions and increase the
effectiveness and efficiency of our actions. In that
regard, we support United Nations efforts to explore
opportunities in terms of using new technologies and
data in the humanitarian system. We also need to make
use of the existing tools, in particular accountability
mechanisms, to better collect data and report
on violations.
Turkey has a human-centred focus in the conduct
of its international diplomacy. We have traditionally
maintained a strong humanitarian approach and
continue to provide shelter for the victims of

21-397709/19

A/76/PV.51

10/12/2021

persecution, oppression, violence and terrorism who
take refuge within our borders.

reached Syrians who desperately need them, including
Syrian children.

According to the Global Humanitarian Assistance
Report 2021, Turkey remained the most generous country
in the world in 2020 in terms of the proportion of gross
national income spent on international humanitarian
assistance. Turkey also ranked the second-largest donor
country in the world in 2020, providing more than
$8 billion in official international humanitarian aid.

While
implementing
our
comprehensive
humanitarian programmes, we are working closely
with United Nations humanitarian personnel and other
partners in the field in order to reach millions of people.
We very much value our partnership and we commend
their bravery and commitment.

We deliver humanitarian assistance in various parts
of the world, with the participation of a wide network of
humanitarian and development partners. Our agencies,
including the Disaster and Emergency Management
Authority, the Turkish Cooperation and Coordination
Agency and the Turkish Red Crescent, as well as
humanitarian non-governmental organizations, reach
millions of people impacted by human-made crises and
natural disasters all around the world.
As a proud member of its Advisory Commission
since its inception, Turkey is also a consistent supporter
and contributor to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. In
addition, Turkey currently hosts and addresses the
needs of 20 per cent of the total refugee population
worldwide. That makes Turkey the largest refugee
host country in the world. We have also mobilized our
resources to protect the 4 million refugees and migrants
in Turkey against COVID-19.
Of those refugees, 3.6 million are Syrians under
temporary protection in Turkey. They have access
to the same health services as Turkish citizens all
across the country for free. While daily economic
life is disrupted, we continue to provide monthly
allowances to those vulnerable people through cash
assistance programmes. Through those policies, we
strive to increase the resilience of refugees and reduce
their vulnerability while providing dignified living
conditions, with a special focus on women and children.
In Syria, we provide care and protection to people
who are right across our border, including victims
of brutal violence and indiscriminate attacks. In
the north-west of the country, the 4 million civilians
squeezed into a narrow area along our borders depend
on the cross-border humanitarian operations delivered
from Turkey. Through those aid mechanisms, in
addition to life-saving humanitarian assistance, more
than 1.1 million doses of COVID-19 vaccines and
more than 165,000 doses of childhood vaccines have
10/19

Mr. Omar (Somalia): We thank the SecretaryGeneral for supplying the Assembly with the informative
reports on the strengthening of the coordination of
humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the
United Nations, including special economic assistance
(A/76/334, A/76/74, A/76/320 and A/76/376).
On 23 November, the cabinet of the Federal
Government of Somalia declared a state of emergency
in the country due to devastating drought, as echoed
by President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo
during his televised debate. The drought emergency
affects more than 4,279,000 people in Somalia,
accounting for nearly 36 per cent of the population.
In 66 of the 74 districts, approximately 208,664
people have been displaced as a result of the drought
emergency, with figures rapidly increasing across the
nation amid another forecast for below-average rainfall
in early 2022.
The drought emergency continues to expose
vulnerabilities to hazardous risks that have led to the loss
of human life and livestock; further insecurity; severe
health impacts; and the compounding of existing risk
factors such as the coronavirus disease. Furthermore,
by the end of the year, 1.2 million children under the
age of 5 are expected to be acutely malnourished, with
more than 200,000 of them severely malnourished.
The National Drought Response Committee has
been heavily engaged in strengthening the coordination
and collaboration of a joint response to the drought
emergency between the Somali Government and key
stakeholders, including humanitarian partners and the
Somali private sector, to increase the harmonization
of effective response efforts. Despite financial
constraints, the Somali Government has managed to
pledge $1 million. Government ministers have also
agreed to a 20 per cent cut in their monthly salaries
until further notice.
We commend the Assembly for its efforts on current
and previous resolutions relating to the strengthening
21-39770

10/12/2021

of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief
aid of the United Nations, including special economic
assistance and development. Somalia’s private sector
has pledged $2 million to aid those efforts. The Somali
diaspora continues to be actively engaged in fundraising
efforts, and there is also ongoing communication with
traditional and non-traditional donors.
In that regard, we are happy to announce that with
the support of the Government of Sweden, the Swedish
International Development Cooperation Agency
and the World Bank, Somalia’s national emergency
operations centre is in the process of being officially
operationalized and will be the national coordinating
hub of all emergency and disaster response and
preparedness activities. Those activities are critical to
the realization of the principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations. In order to properly manage
recurring humanitarian emergencies, the General
Assembly must continue to support the development
of sustainable institutions that create and implement
effective policies according to internationally
established standards.
When discussing humanitarian crises, young
people are most at risk due to an amalgamation of
issues — ranging from a lack of nutrition leading
to premature death to prolonged absence from
education — stemming from the ramification of those
crises. Additionally, as stated in the report of the
Secretary-General, flooding in Somalia affected nearly
1.6 million, killing 35 people and displacing 900,000
last year (see A/76/376).
Cyclone Gati is estimated to be the strongest storm
on record in Somalia, affecting more than 120,000
people, displacing 42,000 and creating conditions
conducive to the further breeding of desert locusts.
That triple threat of cocktail calamities serves
as a stark reminder that climate change adversely
affects countries in different ways and has
complex and interlinked implications, exacerbating
existing vulnerabilities.
Somalia acknowledges the United Nations system
and humanitarian organizations for their efforts in
coordinating and providing humanitarian assistance, as
well as rapidly responding to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19). Somalia pays tribute to humanitarian
and medical personnel for their dedication on the front
lines. Somalia firmly supports the United Nations in

A/76/PV.51

coordinating international humanitarian assistance and
global cooperation to combat COVID-19.
In conclusion, while no country is immune to
national disasters, no country is destined to suffer
them alone.
Mr. Ben Naftaly (Israel): Israel is proud to
co-sponsor several of the draft resolutions under this
agenda item (A/76/L.24 and A/76/L.27). We commend
the efforts and actions of the personnel of the United
Nations humanitarian response system, who work
under difficult and often unpredictable and even
impossible circumstances.
Over the decades, Israel has delivered assistance to
more than 140 countries, saving thousands of lives. We
do so even for citizens of countries that sadly do not
yet recognize Israel. Often, Israel, with its Home Front
Command unit, is among the first on the scene in the
wake of earthquakes, floods, famine and other natural
disasters. MASHAV, Israel’s Agency for International
Development Cooperation, leads our efforts in
assistance and development aid worldwide.
Just several months ago, when a powerful
earthquake struck Haiti, Israeli teams were dispatched
to help supply clean water, energy and medical supplies
to help save thousands of lives. Israeli teams were no
strangers to Haiti, being among the first on the ground
after that country’s devastating earthquake in 2010.
MASHAV also organizes courses each year for
participants from developing countries. While many of
the courses focus on agriculture and education, others
bolster disaster preparedness and teach participants
how to foster resilience. They include courses in public
health and on how to build medical systems for mass
casualty events. Furthermore, MASHAV mainstreams
gender equality and women’s empowerment throughout
all of those activities.
Israel takes to heart its responsibility as a member
of the global community. In the spirit of the draft
resolutions under consideration today, we pledge to
continue our mission to bring relief to people in need
around the world.
As for the remarks made by the Iranian delegation
(see A/76/PV.50), it is ironic that Iran — which
violates humanitarian and human rights law left and
right — would choose to attack Israel, a world leader in
humanitarian assistance. The international community
must act now with resolve to stop the Iranian threat and

21-3977011/19

A/76/PV.51

the humanitarian carnage that the Iranian regime always
leaves in its wake wherever it tries to spread its malign
influence, from the Red Sea to the Mediterranean.
Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): One
million Afghan children are at risk of starvation in
the coming months, with similar situations in Yemen,
Ethiopia, Madagascar, Haiti and numerous other
places. There are 45 million people in grave danger of
starvation, yet hunger can be stopped, and humankind
can dedicate itself to making that happen.
The draft resolutions under consideration today by
the Assembly show us that we have the assessments, the
means and the road map. We must not be hindered by a
lack of commitment. Let us do it today; let us do it now.
There will be no peace nor sustainable development
as long as hunger continues to plague millions. Let us
decide that it is the primary role of the United Nations
to fight hunger now, wherever it exists. Let us do what is
necessary to preserve those millions of lives, wherever
it is required. Let us get them the food they need.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the observer of the Observer State of
Palestine.
Mr. Abu Shawesh (Palestine): I am honoured to
deliver this statement on behalf of the State of Palestine
on this very important agenda item on the strengthening
of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief
assistance of the United Nations, including special
economic assistance, in particular with regard to
sub-item (b) on assistance to the Palestinian people. In
that connection, I wish to renew our appreciation to the
Secretary-General and his team for the report entitled
“Assistance to the Palestinian people” (A/76/78).
Since the first day of the prolonged Israeli
occupation, an endless list of violations has included,
inter alia, the confiscation of land; the destruction of
infrastructure and property, as well as agricultural
land and water wells; the demolition of homes; severe
restrictions on the movement of persons and goods; the
exploitation of natural resources; and the obstruction
of Palestinian access to 63 per cent of West Bank,
which contains the majority of agricultural land
and water sources. Moreover, Israel’s use of 75 per
cent of the amount of sustainable groundwater from
the coastal aquifer each year leaves very little water
available to Gaza. All of those violations undermine the
12/19

10/12/2021

Palestinian economy and prospects for its rehabilitation
and development.
It is unquestionable that the long list of Israeli
violations is a result of the inaction and lack of
accountability for its gross violations of international
law, the Charter of the United Nations and countless
resolutions, with more than 800 General Assembly and
80 Security Council resolutions still unimplemented.
The latest report of the Economic and Social
Council indicates that the ongoing coronavirus disease
pandemic has stricken the already weakened Palestinian
economy and compounded the dire economic conditions
in the occupied Palestinian territory (A/76/94). The
latest report of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development also reveals that the Palestinian
economy contracted by 11.5 per cent in 2020, which is
the second-largest contraction since the establishment
of the Palestinian National Authority in 1994. Gross
domestic product (GDP) per capita in the West Bank
also fell by 13.4 per cent in 2020 and, in 2019, registered
the lowest growth rate since 2003.
Furthermore, the report of the Economic and
Social Council indicates that customs tax and value
added tax collected by Israel, the occupying Power, for
the Palestinian National Authority represented up to
75 per cent of Palestinian revenues, and that the fiscal
stalemate with Israel over clearance revenues weighed
heavily on the Palestinian economy. In that regard, we
call on the international community to compel Israel,
the occupying Power, to end its repeated practice of
withholding the taxes and customs revenues due to
the Palestinian people. Such a practice constitutes a
flagrant violation of international law and the Geneva
Convention’s prohibition of the pillaging of the
occupied people’s resources. It is clear that the impact
of that fiscal loss, the falling GDP per capita, declining
trends in foreign aid and persistent extreme levels of
unemployment, as well as the persistent fiscal deficit,
point to widening and deepening poverty.
We reaffirm our deep appreciation and gratitude
to all of the United Nations agencies and programmes
that continue to provide vital assistance to the
Palestinian people. We also recognize all donors and
express our deepest gratitude for their support
and assistance.
We fully acknowledge the importance of the
consensus position of the General Assembly on the
draft resolution entitled “Assistance to the Palestinian
21-39770

10/12/2021

people”, presented and co-sponsored annually by the
European Union, and we reaffirm our appreciation
in that regard. That support is helping to mitigate the
serious challenges being faced by our Government
and people in the context of over half a century under
Israeli occupation. The situation, long deemed as
unsustainable as it is unjust, requires not only urgent
humanitarian remedies but equally urgent diplomatic,
political and legal mechanisms available to States to
compel Israel, the occupying Power, to cease its war
crimes and human rights violations and end its regime
of prolonged colonial occupation and apartheid policies.
It is high time to take action in order to bring an
end to all of the violations perpetrated by Israel against
the Palestinian people and to pave a way forward to
achieve a just solution based on international law and
the relevant resolutions, including Security Council
resolution 2334 (2016). We strongly believe that,
with the support of the international community and
through the resilience of the Palestinian people, we can
strive to fulfil our national aspirations and rights in
an independent, sovereign State of Palestine with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I give
the floor to the observer of the International Committee
of the Red Cross.
Ms. Courtois (International Committee of the Red
Cross): When the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic hit two years ago, millions of people faced
sudden lockdowns, closed borders, restrictions of
movement, the inability to see and visit loved ones,
a scarcity of goods, the collapse or near-collapse of
health systems, job losses, economic hardship and
political and financial instability. Many of those are
still a reality for millions of people affected by armed
conflict and other situations of violence — a reality that
the once-in-a-century public health emergency has not
created, but merely magnified.
Paradoxically, wars have not abated, and we are
witnessing more conflicts playing out in densely
populated urban zones, causing widespread casualties
and destruction and disrupting livelihoods and essential
services for increasingly large numbers of people. In
that challenging context, the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) would like to provide three
key messages to States.
First, we cannot afford to allow systems to collapse.
Collective action to better protect and support essential

A/76/PV.51

services in conflict-affected areas is a humanitarian
imperative. The pandemic brought that into sharp
focus, but that imperative is not new. Over the years,
humanitarian actors — including the ICRC — have
stepped up to support health, water and sanitation
systems that are simply too important and too big to
fail. Humanitarian action is not only the delivery of
emergency assistance and protection in acute crises;
it is also activities that are necessary to ensure that
populations can meet their basic needs and have access
to essential services in protracted conflicts. We will
continue trying to prevent disastrous humanitarian
consequences for millions of people, but we need help.
We need redoubled efforts to ensure respect for
international humanitarian law and to implement
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
intended to protect and support essential services,
notably Security Council resolutions 2286 (2016), on the
protection of the medical mission, and 2573 (2021), on
the protection of objects indispensable to the survival
of the civilian population.
Moreover, we need others to step in earlier and
reliably in fragile and conflict-affected settings.
Development actors have a major role to play in enhancing
and upscaling the impact of humanitarian action
and preventing the collapse of essential services and
systems. The ICRC stands ready to continue engaging
with those actors, in the spirit of complementarity, as
they forge ways to stay and deliver in crisis settings.
We will also continue working closely with others
to strengthen climate adaptation in places enduring
conflict, notably through systemic investments.
Secondly, we cannot leave people behind.
Everywhere we work, we see entire areas that are hard
to get to and populations facing exclusion or neglect.
Whether it is people living in protracted displacement
situations, those in detention, those living in remote
areas or under the control of non-State armed groups
or people facing stigma, ensuring no one is left behind
is an ethical imperative and a hallmark of our common
humanity. Hard-to-reach areas are where we should be
and act. Striving to reach the populations living in those
areas and doing our utmost to ensure their protection is
an untouchable priority for the ICRC.
We need States to prevent patterns of exclusion
and neglect and to find long-term solutions to address
those situations as soon as they arise. In that spirit, the
ICRC calls for equitable access to vaccines during the

21-3977013/19

A/76/PV.51

10/12/2021

COVID-19 pandemic, within and between countries, and
encourages States to seize the opportunity to strengthen
health-care delivery in last-mile areas. We also urge all
States to continue to work collectively to facilitate and
support rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access to
populations in armed conflict.

Ms. Ghukasyan (International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies): I thank you, Sir,
for giving me the opportunity to address the General
Assembly on behalf of the International Federation
of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies and its 192
national societies.

Thirdly, we need space to be able to operate. While
there may be different views on what humanitarian
space is, there can be little doubt about what happens
when there is no humanitarian space. Too often,
humanitarian efforts are constrained by sanctions and
counter-terrorism legislation. The ICRC condemns
acts of terrorism. Such acts negate the basic principle
of humanity.

Throughout the year, we have seen world leaders
stand at this very rostrum to bring to our attention the
dire and compounding consequences of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the climate crisis and
other humanitarian emergencies. Those overlapping
and multiplying crises have innumerable wide-reaching
and long-term socioeconomic impacts and have
exacerbated pre-existing inequities.

However, we ask for well-crafted and standing
humanitarian carve-outs in sanctions and counterterrorism resolutions and national legislation in order
to be able to deliver on our humanitarian mandate and
support populations in need. Similarly, we engage with
State and non-State actors, recognized and de-facto
authorities, not in order to support them or give them
legitimacy, but because they are in control of the fate of
civilian populations. Those actors have responsibilities
and obligations towards civilians, and we have been
mandated by States to engage with all duty-holders.
We urge States to build well-framed humanitarian
exemptions into sanctions regimes and counterterrorism measures in compliance with international
humanitarian law, so that impartial and humanitarian
action is supported and facilitated — not obstructed
or criminalized — including in areas controlled by
non-State armed groups designated as terrorists or
listed under sanctions regimes. Let us not create an era
of conditional humanitarianism, for that would threaten
humanitarianism itself.
If we fail to safeguard essential services, to protect
impartial humanitarian spaces or to defend those
in conflict settings and those living through other
situations of violence — even now, during a global
pandemic and a climate crisis — how will history judge
us? All of us, including those living through conflict,
yearn for a safer and more secure future, but that future
is in jeopardy if we do not act now.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the observer of the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
14/19

It is already clear that COVID-19 has reversed the
development gains made in past decades. While some
countries might be able to reverse the trend with a
strong economic recovery, countries where economic
recovery is slow could see continued high levels of
poverty for years to come.
We have also heard so many times that we are all in
this crisis together and that we are united by our pledge
to leave no one behind. Unfortunately, there is far too
much rhetoric and far too little action on this. Our Red
Cross and Red Crescent staff and volunteers, many
of whom work on the front lines, are painfully aware
of how certain communities are disproportionately
affected by and made more vulnerable to climate
change, the pandemic and their secondary impacts.
From the outset, the humanitarian crisis caused by
COVID-19 has been defined by profound and persistent
inequities, both in terms of who is most at risk and of
how the world has responded. Migrants, refugees and
persons living in countries with underresourced health
systems or in fragile settings are among the least likely
to receive the medical, financial and social support that
they need.
According to our research, the livelihoods of
women were more significantly impacted by the
pandemic. Additionally, women were still expected
to provide care in their households, including care for
people with COVID-19, putting them at a higher risk of
infection. Lockdowns and the resulting social isolation
removed many of their protections, exposing women to
sexual and gender-based violence.
COVID-19 has not happened in isolation. The
destructive consequences of this pandemic have revealed
21-39770

10/12/2021

how existing and new crises collide, compounding
vulnerabilities. While dealing with COVID-19, many
communities around the world continue to suffer from
the impacts of climate change. The IFRC estimates
that of the 132 extreme weather events that occurred
in 2020, 92 overlapped with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Those overlapping crises disproportionately affect
people in the most vulnerable situations, who suffer the
brunt of the climate crisis while dealing with the direct
health impacts of COVID-19 or coping with measures
to curb its spread.
In addition, the dual crises of COVID-19 and
climate change continue to exacerbate mental-health
needs and strain health systems. From our operational
experience, we know that early and sustained access
to mental health and psychosocial support services
for people affected by overlapping crises is essential.
But to provide those services in a timely and effective
manner, we need flexible funding and sustainable
investments in public, local and community-based
mental health and psychosocial support that meet a
range of mental-health needs.
Such events are no longer the exception. Major
crises such as climate disasters and pandemics will
continue to increase in frequency. Allow me to share
three points in that regard.
First, ensuring equitable access to COVID-19
vaccines and essential health services is both a
humanitarian imperative and the only way to end the
pandemic. Equitable vaccination is a moral imperative,
and we must work together in our shared humanity
to ensure that everyone gets a vaccine and that highrisk and vulnerable people are prioritized. Ending the
pandemic is not just about delivering more vaccines; it
is about ensuring that countries have the infrastructure
and human resources necessary to get the vaccines into
people’s arms, with their full acceptance. We need health
infrastructure that enables equitable prevention and
treatment, including for those diseases that are already
vaccine-preventable and future health emergencies.
Secondly, disease outbreaks begin and end in
communities. From our responses to HIV, Ebola, H1N1
and COVID-19, we know that trust and community
mobilization are critical in times of global crisis and that
we must involve local communities as co-developers
from the very beginning and throughout the response.
Our 192 Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies are a
part of their communities before, during and after

A/76/PV.51

crises. They are uniquely placed to understand and
address context-specific barriers and opportunities for
meeting the needs of hard-to-reach communities.
Thirdly, COVID-19 has demonstrated the
adaptability
of
humanitarian
action
without
international deployments, owing to lockdowns and
mitigation measures. COVID-19 further reinforced the
distinct advantage of local organizations, including
national Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, that
can respond quickly to the unprecedented challenges
of a crisis that encompasses health, economic, human
rights and social crises. Our shared responsibility
should be to mobilize resources so that local actors can
reach last-mile communities and those most affected by
the pandemic.
The IFRC and our National Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies are steadfast in our dedication to
work alongside Governments and communities to
build resilient social-protection systems, enhance the
resilience of vulnerable communities to shocks and
support and empower local investment and participation.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/76/L.23, A/76/L.24, A/76/L.25, A/76/L.26 and
A/76/L.27. Delegations wishing to make a statement
in explanation of vote before the voting on any or all
of the draft resolutions are invited to do so now in
one intervention.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/76/L.23, entitled “Strengthening of the
coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of
the United Nations”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to the delegations listed in A/76/L.23, the
following countries have also become co-sponsors of
the draft resolution: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra,
Angola, Bangladesh, the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burkina Faso,
Chad, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, the Gambia,
Ghana, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Maldives, Monaco, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Palau,

21-3977015/19

A/76/PV.51

Panama, Philippines, Qatar, the Republic of Moldova,
San Marino, Serbia, Tuvalu, Ukraine and Uruguay.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May
I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/76/L.23?
Draft resolution A/76/L.23 was adopted (resolution
76/124).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/76/L.24, entitled “White Helmets Commission:
participation of volunteers in the activities of the United
Nations in the field of humanitarian relief, rehabilitation
and technical cooperation for development”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to the delegations listed in A/76/L.24, the
following countries have also become co-sponsors of the
draft resolution: Albania, Andorra, Bahrain, Belarus,
Burkina Faso, the Central African Republic, Cyprus,
Egypt, the Gambia, Ghana, Indonesia, Italy, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Mauritius, Mongolia,
Nigeria, North Macedonia, Palau, the Philippines, Saint
Lucia, San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles, South Sudan,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey and Ukraine.

10/12/2021

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft
resolution A/76/L.25?
Draft resolution A/76/L.25 was adopted (resolution
76/126).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/76/L.26, entitled “Safety and security of humanitarian
personnel and protection of United Nations personnel”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to the delegations listed in A/76/L.26, the
following countries have also become co-sponsors of
the draft resolution: the Gambia, Guatemala, Jordan,
Palau, Papua New Guinea, Rwanda, San Marino,
Serbia, South Sudan, Tunisia and Ukraine.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft
resolution A/76/L.26?
Draft resolution A/76/L.26 was adopted (resolution
76/127).

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft
resolution A/76/L.24?

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/76/L.27, entitled “International cooperation on
humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters,
from relief to development”.

Draft resolution A/76/L.24 was adopted (resolution
76/125).

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/76/L.25, entitled “Assistance to the
Palestinian people”.

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to the delegations listed in A/76/L.27, the
following countries have also become co-sponsors
of the draft resolution: Albania, Andorra, Armenia,
Australia, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Malta,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, the Republic
of Moldova, Romania, the Russian Federation, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey,
Ukraine, the United Kingdom and the United States.

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to the delegations listed in A/76/L.25, the
following countries have also become co-sponsors of
the draft resolution: Andorra, the Gambia, Monaco,
San Marino and Serbia.
16/19

21-39770

10/12/2021

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May
I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/76/L.27?
Draft resolution A/76/L.27 was adopted (resolution
76/128).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
giving the floor for explanations of position after the
voting, may I remind delegations that explanations are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Hatem (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): It is an
honour for me to deliver this statement on behalf of
the members of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC):
the United Arab Emirates, the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, the Sultanate of Oman, Kuwait, Qatar and my
country, Bahrain.
The States members of the GCC would like to
express their thanks and appreciation to the delegation
of Sweden for having submitted draft resolution
A/76/L.23. The delegations of the GCC States joined
the consensus on this draft resolution, entitled
“Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations” based
on the importance of the relevant issue.
Concerning sexual and reproductive health issues
as well as sexual rights, in particular given the content
of paragraphs 62 and 63 of the draft resolution, our
States consider these issues in line with our national
legislation and the religious and cultural values of
our society.
Ms. Karmazinskaya (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Our delegation joined the consensus on
the adoption of resolution 76/127, entitled “Safety and
security of humanitarian personnel and protection of
United Nations personnel”.
Our position on the International Criminal Court
(ICC) remains the same. We are firmly convinced that
the work of that body continues to be ineffective and
excessively one-sided. For that reason, Russia withdrew
its signature in 2016 from the Rome Statute after it
became clear that the ICC had not lived up to the hopes
placed in it and had not become an authoritative and
independent international legal body.
On that basis, our delegation disassociates itself
from the thirty-second preambular paragraph and

A/76/PV.51

operative paragraph 8 of the resolution and does not
consider itself bound by its provisions.
Mr. Mohamed (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
shares the growing concern of the international
community over the exacerbation of humanitarian
crises in some regions of the world owing to armed
conflict, instability, natural disasters and health crises.
My country’s delegation would like to thank
the delegation of the Kingdom of Sweden for having
submitted resolution 76/124, entitled “Strengthening of
the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance
of the United Nations”, under agenda item 75(a).
Egypt joined the consensus on the adoption of the
resolution. However, my country’s delegation reiterates
that operative paragraphs 62 and 63 of the resolution
on the sexual and reproductive health must be in
accordance with national laws and legislation as well as
the religious and cultural values of a society.
Ms. Navarrete (Philippines): The Philippines
dissociates itself from preambular paragraph 32 and
operative paragraph 8 of resolution 76/127, entitled
“Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and
protection of United Nations personnel”, and all other
paragraphs in other resolutions making reference to the
International Criminal Court (ICC).
The Philippines withdrew from the Rome Statute
effective 17 March 2019. It is our principled stand
against those who politicize human rights and disregard
our country’s independent and well-functioning organs
and agencies.
Notwithstanding our withdrawal from the Rome
Statute, the Philippines reaffirms its commitment to
protecting humanitarian and United Nations personnel
and to apply the full force of the law against persons
who attack them.
The Rome Statute is anchored in the principle
of complementarity, not substitution. It recognizes
that States have the first responsibility and right to
prosecute international crimes and that the ICC may
exercise jurisdiction only where national legal systems
fail or are unable to do so. Since we are able and willing
and our courts are fully functioning, we do not accept
the ICC as a substitute for our national courts.
Ms. Kókai (Hungary): Hungary wishes to deliver an
explanation of position with regard to resolution 76/128,
entitled “International cooperation on humanitarian

21-3977017/19

A/76/PV.51

assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief
to development”.
Hungary remains concerned about the increasing
impact of natural disasters, resulting in loss of life
worldwide, food insecurity, water- and sanitation-related
challenges, shelter and infrastructure losses as well as
displacement. For those reasons, Hungary joined the
consensus on the resolution.
At the same time, we would like to take this
opportunity to put on record our position concerning
the thirteenth preambular paragraph, which makes
reference to the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly
and Regular Migration. We would like to recall that
Hungary did not endorse the Compact and does not
participate in its implementation. Therefore, we cannot
accept any reference to the Compact in international
documents.
In that respect, Hungary would like to disassociate
itself from the thirteenth preambular paragraph of the
resolution.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of position.
Before giving the floor to speakers in the exercise
of the right of reply, may I remind members that
statements in the exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to
five minutes for the second intervention and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Karmazinskaya (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): False accusations were made by Ukraine
against my country that are devoid of any common
sense. Unfortunately, they form the whole basis of
Kyiv’s domestic and foreign policy. We do not want
to waste any time on further addressing those lies.
Instead, we would note the following.
The number of violations of the ceasefire regime
by Ukraine since the 2020 signing of the additional
measures to strengthen that cessation of hostilities has
approached 90,000. The Special Monitoring Mission
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe has noted that 75 per cent of the incidents
that claimed victims among the civilian population
and an absolute majority of violations against civilian
infrastructure objects since the beginning of this year
have taken place on the territory of the Luhansk and
Donetsk people’s republics.
18/19

10/12/2021

Of course, there is nothing here to comment on, and,
as we understand it, the importance of documenting
those violations was voiced by our Ukrainian
colleague himself — how self-critical of him.
Given the total blockade of the population of
Donbas in November, a decree was issued by the
President of the Russian Federation on the provision
of humanitarian assistance to the peoples of the
separate areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts of
Ukraine, dictated by concerns over human rights and
the principles and norms of international humanitarian
law, and was adopted as an exceptional measure until a
political settlement has been achieved to the situation.
Russia will continue to provide humanitarian assistance
to the residents of Ukraine, taking into account the
significant number of Russian citizens who live there.
We underscore that in accordance with paragraph
11 of the package of measures for the implementation
of the Minsk agreements, Donbas, within the context
of the legislation on special status, will have the right
to engage in transborder cooperation with regions of
the Russian Federation, and Kiev must do everything
to facilitate that.
Russia’s actions do not contravene the Minsk
agreements, unlike the steps taken by the Ukrainian
authorities and those countries that instead of
humanitarian assistance are considering sending forces
for direct military and technical support to Ukraine.
Mr. Ghorbanpour Najafabadi (Islamic Republic
of Iran): Today the representative of the Israeli regime
made baseless and unfounded allegations against my
country. The dissemination of false and fabricated
accusations against the countries of the region,
particularly the Islamic Republic of Iran, has long
been a standard practice of Israel’s, with the exclusive
purpose of cancelling its crimes and brutality against
innocent Palestinian people.
Nevertheless, it is quite evident that no amount of
disinformation and manufactured crises can cover up
the regime’s criminal nature as well as the expansionist
and warmongering policies that it has pursued over the
course of the past 70 years.
Israel, in flagrant violation of international law
and with total disregard for all relevant United Nations
resolutions, continues to violate the fundamental rights
and dignity of the Palestinian people and other Arabs
living under its occupation. As a result, Palestinians are
21-39770

10/12/2021

deprived of their land and property, possibly evicted
and subjected to violence, terror and intimidation.
Meanwhile, the right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination has been totally negated under the title
of “one Jewish State”.
Worse still, under the current challenging
circumstances and as the international community
focuses on mitigating the serious effects and
consequences of the coronavirus disease pandemic,
the Israeli regime continues to exploit this period to
accelerate its illegal settlement activities and annexation
scams and to further strengthen its military occupation.
Simultaneously, the inhuman and suffocating blockade
on the Gaza Strip continues to deepen the severity
of the humanitarian crisis and inflict misery on the
Palestinian civilian population there.
At the regional level, the continued occupation of
the territories of the occupied Syrian Golan as well
as part of Lebanon and frequent encroachments into
the countries of the region have seriously endangered
peace and security in the region and beyond.
The Israeli regime’s entire history is replete with
aggression against its neighbours and other countries
of the Middle East. Given such a dark track record,
the hysterical attempts by the Israeli regime to seek
international sympathy and favour by claiming that it
is, in fact, the one that is under threat are nothing but
manipulative propaganda.
Ms. Ali (Syrian Arab Republic): So as not to be
deluded by some of the humanitarian claims stated by

A/76/PV.51

the Turkish representative, it is important to note that a
humanitarian provider does not use water as a weapon
against more than a million civilians in Al-Hasakah
province in Syria. A humanitarian provider does not
provide terrorist groups with endless and resourceful
support. The largest humanitarian refugee hub does not
use those refugees as a threat whenever its Government
is at a political juncture.
I would say to my colleague that the most
humanitarian action that should be taken is to withdraw
the occupation forces from my country.
Mrs. Özgür (Turkey): In the statement that has
just been delivered by my delegation, we spoke of the
unparalleled — I repeat, unparalleled — humanitarian
assistance, protection and care that my country, Turkey,
continues to provide to 9 million Syrians, approximately
4 million of whom are under temporary protection in
Turkey and the rest are inside Syria.
The hallucinatory statements, on the other hand,
that we have just heard, especially in a humanitarian
debate, is an affront to the millions of Syrians who have
suffered countless crimes of each and every sort at the
hands of the regime. Therefore, I will not honour those
delusional accusations with a response.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 75 and its sub-items.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

21-3977019/19
