S/2003/130

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 January 2003
English
Original: French

Letter dated 31 January 2003 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
transmit to you herewith the report on the international security presence in Kosovo
covering the period from 1 to 31 December 2002 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would arrange to bring this report to the attention of
the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

03-23341 (E)

310103

*0323341*

310103

S/2003/130

Annex
[Original: English]

Monthly report to the United Nations on KFOR operations
1.
Over the reporting period (1 to 31 December 2002) there were almost 28,000
Kosovo Force (KFOR) troops in theatre.
2.
Despite some violent incidents and an increase in political tension, the overall
situation in Kosovo during the month of December remained substantially stable.
Security
3.
In two separate incidents of fatal injuries due to explosions, KFOR provided
assistance for explosive ordnance disposal and medical aid. On 5 December, two
ethnic Albanians were killed close to the border with Albania in Djakovica as a
result of an explosion in a marked minefield. On 6 December, two children died and
three were wounded by the explosion of a hand grenade they were playing with.
4.
During the evening of 13 December, a car-bomb exploded in Pristina injuring
32 people and causing structural damage to buildings. This incident took place one
day before the visit of the delegation of the Security Council.
5.
KFOR continued to carry out Kosovo-wide search operations in its campaign
against weapons-smuggling and activities of ethnic Albanian armed groups.
Weapons and ammunition were seized daily. Items confiscated during the month
included 67 assorted weapons, 108 grenades and mines, and 2,350 rounds of
ammunition.
6.
On 10 December, KFOR lifted the curfew over the “Confidence Zone”
covering the east bridge, the west bridge and the footbridge in Mitrovica.
Border/boundary security
7.
KFOR continued to monitor border and boundary security during the reporting
period, and prevented illegal crossings. The number of incidents involving attempts
to cross borders decreased sharply compared to the previous month, due in part to
the worsening weather conditions. KFOR intercepted a total of 29 attempts to cross
borders illegally and detained 28 people who were subsequently handed over to
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) police.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
8.
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia security forces continued to remain in
compliance with the terms and conditions of the Military Technical Agreement.
9.
Six cases of non-compliance within the Kosovo Protection Corps were
reported during the month of December. Forty-eight cases remain open.
10. KFOR railway engineers provided assistance to the railways of Kosovo to
enable the opening of train service on 12 December, creating a daily link from the
ethnic Serb enclaves in northern Kosovo to Serbia.

2

S/2003/130

Cooperation with international organizations
11. On 31 December, after seven people escaped from the UNMIK prison in
Dubrava, KFOR intercepted the escaped prisoners and handed them over to UNMIK
Police.
12. On 23 December, KFOR and UNMIK signed a Memorandum of Understanding
(MoU) covering the loaning of weapons to the Kosovo Police Service (KPS). This
MoU establishes the conditions under which KFOR may loan a specified number of
confiscated weapons to the KPS border security units for use at designated points of
crossing and under UNMIK Police supervision.
Outlook
13. The overall security situation in Kosovo remains stable, despite continued
localized acts of vandalism and intimidation. The increased presence of UNMIK
Police and KPS has allowed KFOR to reduce its engagement in static security
duties.

3
