S/PRST/2021/4

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 February 2021
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
On 9 February 2021, in connection with the Council’s consideration of the item
entitled “The situation in Libya”, in accordance with the procedure agreed in light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the COVID -19 pandemic and set out in
S/2020/372, the President of the Security Council issued the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the agreement reached by the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum on a new unified interim executive authority charged
with leading the country to elections.
“The Security Council welcomes this achievement as an important
milestone in the Libyan political process.
“The Security Council calls on the interim executive authority to agree
swiftly on the formation of a new, inclusive government, as set out in the
roadmap agreed by the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum in Tunis, and to make
the necessary preparations ahead of national Presidential and Parliamentary
elections planned for 24 December 2021. The Security Council further calls on
the interim executive authority to improve services and launch a comprehensive
national reconciliation process.
“The Security Council calls on all parties to implement the 23 October
2020 ceasefire agreement in full.
“The Security Council urges Member States to respect and support the full
implementation of the agreement, including through the withdrawal of all
foreign forces and mercenaries from Libya without further delay.
“The Security Council calls for full compliance with the arms embargo by
all member States, in line with the relevant Security Council resolutions.
“The Security Council underlines the importance of a credible and
effective Libyan-led Ceasefire Monitoring Mechanism under UN auspices and
welcomes the critical steps towards UN support for the mechanism through the
swift deployment of a UN advance team to Libya. The Security Council looks
forward to receiving proposals on the tasks and scale of the ceasefire monitoring
mechanism from the Secretary-General.
“The Security Council recognises the important role of neighbouring
countries and regional organisations in support of UN efforts.
“The Security Council underlines its support to the UN Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) and to Special Envoy Ján Kubiš and UNSMIL Coordinator,

21-01761 (E)

110221

*2101761*

S/PRST/2021/4

Raisedon Zenenga. The Security Council thanks former acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Stephanie Williams for all her work.
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong commitment to the
UN-facilitated Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process and to the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national unity of Libya.”

2/2

21-01761
