A /70/PV.116

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

116th plenary meeting

Friday, 9 September 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa
Draft resolution (A/70/L.62)
The President: Members will recall that the General
Assembly considered, in a joint debate, agenda item 66
and its sub-items (a) and (b) and agenda item 14 at its
34th and 35th plenary meeting, on 16 October 2015.
I now give the floor to the representative of Chad to
introduce draft resolution A/70/L.62.
Mr. Abdallah (Chad) (spoke in French): As
the representative of the country that holds the
chairmanship of the African Leaders Malaria Alliance
(ALMA), I am pleased to introduce, on behalf of the
Group of African States, draft resolution A/70/L.62,
entitled “Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to
control and eliminate malaria in developing countries,
particularly in Africa, by 2030”.
The draft resolution has been revised for technical
reasons, as compared to last year’s resolution 69/325,
because of the alignment in commitments agreed
upon in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1). During the negotiations on the
draft resolution, we considered the World Health
Organization 2015 World Malaria Report, which shows
a considerable decrease in malaria throughout the world
over the past 15 years. Target 6 (c) of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), on malaria, has been

16-28236 (E)

achieved, and we have seen a 75 per cent decline in 57
countries in the number of malaria cases at the national
level by 2013. The decrease in deaths from malaria has
made a major contribution to the progress on Target 4 of
the MDGs, namely, in the reduction by two thirds of the
mortality rate of children under 5 from 1990 to 2015.
Despite that remarkable progress, many challenges
remain. Many African countries continue to make
inadequate progress in achieving national and
international goals. In 2014, the estimate was that
269 million people had no mosquito nets or lived in an
unprotected place; 15 million pregnant women at risk
of malaria had not received any preventive treatment;
and between 68 and 80 million children had not been
properly treated.
The African Leaders Malaria Alliance and the
Asia-Pacific Leaders Malaria Alliance are fighting to
eradicate malaria by 2030. Under the presidency of
Mr. Idriss Deby Itno, President of the Republic of Chad,
Chairman-in-Office of the African Union and Chairman
of the African Leaders Malaria Alliance, the Heads of
State and Governments of Africa, at the margins of the
African Union Summit held in Kigali in July adopted
a new road map to completely eliminate malaria in
Africa by 2030. In the 2013 Abuja Declaration, Africa
had already planned to eradicate malaria by 2030,
and the Abudja Declaration is also a key pillar for the
implementation of the African Union 2063 Agenda.
The World Technical Strategy for Malaria 20162030, adopted by the World Health Assembly in
May 2015, establishes ambitious, but nevertheless

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1628236*

A/70/PV.116

achievable, objectives by 2030, namely, to reduce by
at least 90 per cent cases of malaria and associated
mortality cases. According to the WHO, when the
intermediate objectives of 2020 and 2025 are realized,
almost 3 billion people will be spared from malaria
and 10 million lives will be saved, and when the 2030
targets are achieved $4 billion in additional economic
benefits are expected.
The achievement of the intermediary goals is the
target of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
in terms of fighting malaria. It will involve new
intensified interventions, which have been tried and
tested — the strengthening of monitoring systems
and ensuring continued investment in research
and development — and will lead to the necessary
innovations in terms of tools and methods. That will
also contribute to fighting infectious diseases, such as
the Zika virus.
An impact study of expenditures shows that an
investment of $1 per capita to fight malaria in Africa
leads to a per capita increase of the national gross
domestic product of $6.75. The increase in national
expenditures will therefore have to be supported by
increased external funding, especially in countries
where the heavy burden of malaria is accompanied
from the outset by low levels of per capita incomes,
which means the population lives in a very fragile
situation or in a situation of crisis. Therefore, we have
especially to strengthen health systems and meet the
resistance to medication and insecticide by seeking in
particular to provide countries suffering from malaria
with infrastructure, health-care services, monitoring
and laboratory services. A working mechanism for data
collection so they can respond rapidly and effectively
is also needed during malaria outbreaks. We encourage
the sharing at the interregional level of knowledge,
experience and lessons learned in the framework
of fighting malaria and its eradication, particularly
involving Africa, the Asia-Pacific and the Latin
American regions.
In conclusion, I thank all Member States for their
constructive participation in the negotiation process
and for their active support, which signals their
commitment to eradicate malaria by 2030.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/70/L.62, entitled
“Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to
2/22

09/09/2016

control and eliminate malaria in developing countries,
particularly in Africa, by 2030”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Ms. Pollard (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/70/L.62, the following countries have
also become sponsors of the draft resolution: Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Greece, Indonesia, Kazakhstan,
Lithuania, Monaco, Myanmar, Serbia, Sweden,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and Turkey.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/70/L.62.
Draft resolution A/70/L.62 was adopted (resolution
70/300)
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 14?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 15 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/70/L.63)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly considered agenda item 15, jointly with
agenda items 116 and 123, at its 52nd plenary meeting, on
13 November 2015. Members will recall that the General
Assembly considered agenda item 15 at its 75th and
82nd plenary meetings, on 14 and 23 December 2015,
retroactively, and adopted resolution 70/110 under
this item. Members will also recall that the Assembly
considered the item at its 19th plenary meeting, on
1 April, and adopted resolution 70/259 under this
item. Members will further recall that the Assembly
considered the item at its 112th plenary meeting, on
25 July 2016, and adopted resolution 70/293.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Germany to introduce draft resolution A/70/L.63.
16-28236

09/09/2016

A/70/PV.116

Mr. Braun (Germany): First, let me first thank my
colleague from Gabon, Ambassador Baudelaire Ndong
Ella, the United Nations Group of Friends on Poaching
and Illicit Wildlife Trafficking and all other supporters
for their strong commitment to this significant issue
and for the constructive work atmosphere in preparing
this draft resolution.

region or agency working alone will be able to succeed
in suppressing it. The need for an enhanced collective
effort within and among States, regions and agencies is
obvious. That includes working across source, transit
and destination States and tackling both demand and
supply. The fight against wildlife crime is our common,
shared responsibility.

The General Assembly adopted the first-ever
resolution (resolution 69/314) on tackling illicit
trafficking in wildlife on 30 July 2015 — you
mentioned it, Mr. President. Since then, we have raised
global awareness remarkably and put this topic back on
the agenda. But despite that success, the statistics on
poaching and illicit wildlife trafficking are reaching alltime highs. That is an entirely unacceptable situation.

In September 2015 we agreed on the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1). Target
15.7 calls on Member States to take

The global illegal wildlife trade is valued at
approximately $19 billion annually. That makes it the
fourth-largest sector of the illegal trade, following
narco-trafficking, human trafficking and product
piracy. As we speak, four to five elephants are being
poached in African countries. According to the firstever report of the Secretary-General on tackling illicit
trafficking in wildlife, published in June, 100 elephants
are poached per day, adding up to a very sad 40,000
elephants annually out of a total remaining population
of only 500,000. That means 8 per cent of the world’s
elephant population is being killed by poaching every
year. In addition, in 2015, a deplorable record high of
1,500 rhinos were poached. Those iconic species draw
much attention, but many lesser-known species are
also brutally exploited. Wildlife is in more danger than
ever, despite all our efforts at the regional, national and
international levels. Clearly, that is not acceptable. If
poaching numbers continue to increase in that way,
elephants, rhinos and many other species may face
global extinction during our lifetime. The time for
action is now, not tomorrow.

In addition, target 15.c calls for enhanced

Equally disturbing are the negative political,
economic, social and environmental effects of illicit
traffic in wildlife. The scale and nature of wildlife crime
must be seen as a pressing global problem that requires
shared solutions at all levels. The World Wildlife
Crime Report: Trafficking in protected species, issued
by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in
May, identifies wildlife traffickers from more than 80
nations. That illustrates that wildlife crime is a truly
global challenge. All regions of the world are implicated,
either as a source, as a transit or as a destination of
the illegal wildlife trade. No Government, country,

“urgent action to end poaching and trafficking of
protected species of flora and fauna and address
both demand and supply of illegal wildlife
products”.
“global support for efforts to combat poaching and
trafficking of protected species”.
As a consequence of the resolution adopted in July
2015, many countries have undertaken further actions
to combat illicit trafficking in wildlife by strengthening
legislation. However, one third of Member States
still responded in a United Nations survey that illicit
trafficking in wildlife would not be treated as a serious
crime under their national legislation. We must ensure
the full implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals, the Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora and the
draft resolution before us. The report of the SecretaryGeneral offers a range of further measures we all can
apply to fight the illegal wildlife trade.
In conclusion, together we have been successful in
raising much-needed attention to this topic. Now it is
up to all of us to maintain the momentum to ensure
a significant and immediate reduction of the alarming
numbers I mentioned earlier. It is our responsibility to
ensure the survival of many endangered species. We
stand ready to continue the fight against illicit wildlife
trafficking and, with all our support, we will ensure
that this topic remains a priority on the international
agenda. In this case, too, the words of Secretary General
Ban Ki-moon must come true: 2015 was the year of
commitment, 2016 must be the year of implementation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. Pollard (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The present statement

16-282363/22

A/70/PV.116

is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
By paragraph 4 of draft resolution A/70/L.63,
the General Assembly would request the SecretaryGeneral, taking into account Economic and Social
Council resolution 2013/40, to present, based on inputs
from Member States and other relevant stakeholders,
updated information to the Assembly at its seventyfirst session on the global status of illicit trafficking in
wildlife, including poaching and the illegal trade, and
on the implementation of the present draft resolution
and to present proposals for possible future action.
The implementation of the request in paragraph 4
of the draft resolution would require extrabudgetary
resources in the amount of $71,000 for the preparation
and translation into all six languages of one report. The
activities related to the request in paragraph 4 of the
draft resolution would be carried out provided that the
extrabudgetary resources mentioned are made available.
Accordingly, the adoption of draft resolution A/70/L.63
would not give rise to any financial implications under
the programme budget.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution A/70/L.63, entitled
“Tackling illicit trafficking in wildlife”.
I give the floor again to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. Pollard (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution,
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/70/L.63, the following countries have also become
sponsors of A/70/L.63: Bosnia and Herzegovina, Chad,
Georgia, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malaysia, Malta,
Monaco, the Republic of Moldova, Serbia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt draft resolution A/70/L.63?
Draft resolution A/70/L.63 was adopted (resolution
70/301).
The President: Before giving the floor to the
speaker in explanation of position, I remind delegations
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Shearman (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom is proud to sponsor this important resolution
4/22

09/09/2016

on tackling illicit trafficking in wildlife. We would
like to thank and congratulate Gabon and Germany
once more for their continued dedication and hard
work in bringing people and countries together on this
pressing issue.
The first-ever General Assembly resolution on the
illegal wildlife trade (resolution resolution 69/314),
adopted last year, was a milestone. It demonstrated
a powerful and growing consensus that the illegal
wildlife trade was an issue worthy of global attention at
the highest levels of Government. It is an issue that calls
out for global cooperation across Governments, sectors,
regions and continents. We know why it is important.
Some of our most iconic species are being driven to the
point of extinction. Organized criminal networks are
making untold profits. Rangers are being killed. The
impacts are wide-reaching — corruption, criminality,
decreased chances for sustainable livelihoods — and
could be permanent. Once these animals are gone, they
are gone for good.
The United Kingdom therefore welcomes this
resolution on illicit trafficking of wildlife and remains
firmly committed to working with our international
partners to end this abhorrent trade. It is vital that we
build momentum. The Conference of the Parties to
the Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, to be held later
this month, will be a significant milestone and an
opportunity to take international efforts further.
Then, on 17 November, Viet Nam will host the third
global high-level conference on the illegal wildlife
trade in Hanoi, to follow the London and Kasane
Conferences on the Illegal Wildlife Trade. That will be
a crucial opportunity to uphold the high-level political
momentum that this issue so urgently requires. The
United Kingdom is pleased to support the conference.
Resolution 70/302, which we have just adopted,
shows clearly that we are making progress in our
recognition of the issue and in our resolve to act. It is an
important and reassuring signal of global commitment
that the battle has not been won, and it is vital that
we redouble our efforts and act now to reverse the
catastrophic loss of wildlife through the illegal trade.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
15.
16-28236

09/09/2016

Agenda items 15 and 116 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields.
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/70/L.61)
The President: Members will recall that, under
agenda items 15 and 116, the Assembly held the United
Nations Summit for the adoption of the post-2015
development agenda, at its 4th to 12th plenary meetings,
from 25 to 27 September 2015, and adopted resolution
70/1 at its 4th plenary meeting, on 25 September 2015.
Members will also recall that the Assembly considered
in joint debate agenda items 15, 116 and 123, at its 52nd
plenary meeting, on 13 November 2015.
Members will further recall that the Assembly
considered agenda items 15 and 116, at its 81st plenary
meeting, on 21 December 2015, and adopted decision
70/539; at its 93rd plenary meeting, on 27 April 2016,
and adopted resolution 70/262; at its 108th plenary
meeting, on 30 June 2016, and adopted resolution
70/290; and at its 114th plenary meeting, on 29 July
2016, and adopted resolution 70/299.
As members all know, the current crisis related
to migration and refugees has caused the worst
humanitarian crisis since the Second World War. The
numbers are staggering, and the genuine loss and pain
these people are suffering should be unbearable for all
of us. As we speak today, millions of Syrian civilians
continue to suffer, and basic humanitarian assistance
is denied to millions more right across the world. It is
frustrating to see that, despite the generosity of some,
in a global economy worth more than $77 trillion,
somehow we are not even able to fill a humanitarian
funding gap of $10 to $15 billion. It is equally frustrating
that we have not been able to end the conflicts and the
disgraceful attacks on civilians that are at the root of
much of today’s displacement.
In January, I joined the Secretary-General in
Dubai for the launch of the report of the High-level
Panel on Humanitarian Financing, and during the first
six months of this year I visited refugees in Jordan,
Ethiopia and Turkey. As members know, the Assembly,
in close cooperation with the Secretary-General, has
been working hard to address the crisis. In both plenary
and informal General Assembly meetings, including

A/70/PV.116

the humanitarian response in Africa and through the
World Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul, on which I
once again congratulate the Secretary-General and the
Turkish host, we have sought to bring forward a better,
more just, more equitable and more comprehensive
response. The high-level meeting of the General
Assembly to be held on 19 September will build on the
achievements of those endeavours.
I wish to sincerely congratulate Her Excellency
Mrs. Dina Kawar, former Permanent Representative of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, and His Excellency
Mr. David Donoghue, Permanent Representative of
Ireland, for ably and resolutely leading the negotiations
on the modalities and the draft outcome of the highlevel meeting. I also wish to thank civil society and
others within this cause to reach higher. Of course, I
wish to thank Member States for their commitment to
bringing the negotiations to a successful conclusion.
Members today have the opportunity to transmit
draft resolution A/70/L.61, which contains the draft
outcome document, entitled “New York Declaration for
Refugees and Migrants”, for adoption by Heads of State
and Government and other high-level representatives on
19 September. In doing so, let us recall that the United
Nations was created 70 years ago with the fundamental
purpose of promoting peace, protecting vulnerable
populations and ensuring human rights. The draft New
York Declaration reflects the collective commitment of
the international community to pursue that objective.
We must ensure that the issue of large movements
of refugees and migrants continues to be the subject of
our focus and engagement. We must continue the strong
cooperation by all concerned in finalizing the two
compacts and preparing the international conference on
migration, and we must not allow our commitment to
some of the world’s most vulnerable people to weaken.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/70/L.61.
I call on the representative of Ireland on a point
of order.
Mr. Mawe (Ireland): I have a small point of order.
But first, on behalf of the co-facilitators, may I also
take this opportunity to thank Member States for their
constructive engagement and excellent cooperation
over the past several months as we negotiated
the modalities and the draft declaration for the
19 September summit on large movements of refugees

16-282365/22

A/70/PV.116

and migrants. Ambassadors Donoghue and Kawar are
also very grateful for the support they received during
the negotiations from the broader United Nations
system, as well as for the important contribution by
civil society.

09/09/2016

Draft resolution A/70/L.61, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 70/302).
The President: I shall now give the floor to
speakers who wish to make statements following the
adoption of resolution 70/302.

On the point of order, with reference to draft
resolution A/70/L.61, when processing the document
editorially, it was initially agreed that the reference
to the name of the office-holder in paragraph 62 of
the draft declaration and in paragraph 13 of appendix
II would be omitted, in order to align with common
practice. It is now proposed to revert to the text as
agreed by consensus on 2 August by reinserting the
name of the office holder, Peter Sutherland, in both
cases. If agreed, I understand that the draft outcome
document contained in draft resolution A/70/L.61,
which will be transmitted to the high-level meeting on
19 September for adoption, as noted, will reflect those
revisions. A number of Member States have made very
clear their wish to see that change made.

I now give the floor to the observer of the
European Union.

The 19 September summit will be a critically
important and timely event. For the first time ever, the
193 States Members of the United Nations will come
together to comprehensively and collectively address
the global challenge of large movements of refugees
and migrants. The commitments that we have agreed
together, along with the draft global compacts on
refugees and migrants to be adopted within two years,
have the potential to improve the lives of millions
of people around the world who need protection and
support to live in safety and dignity.

We note with satisfaction that the negotiations
and the summit itself reflect growing awareness of
the truly global nature of refugee and migrant issues,
as well as an understanding of the need for global
consensus and cooperation. The high-level meeting
will mark a unique and important moment in which the
international community will come together to affirm
the shared responsibility in responding to large flows
of migrants and refugees. We are pleased to see the
notion of responsibility-sharing and the importance of
international cooperation in response to migration and
refugee flows reflected in the draft outcome document.
The establishment of a global compact for refugees and
a global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration
in the upcoming two years will be an important next
step in moving this important agenda forward. We
believe our strong participation will emphasize and
confirm our steadfast political commitment and major
contributions to the effective management of related
issues in all their facets, in the name of human dignity
and in line with our international humanitarian and
human rights obligations.

Finally, warm thanks are due to you, Mr. President,
and your Office for your steadfast support, trust and
advice during this process. Please accept our thanks
and every good wish as your term of office draws to
a close.
The President: I understand that there is a request
for an oral amendment to draft resolution A/70/L.61
to include the name of Peter Sutherland, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Migration,
in paragraph 62 of the draft declaration and in paragraph
13 of appendix II. That proposal — reinserting the name
of the office-holder in both places — would revert to
the draft text agreed upon by consensus on 2 August.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
resolution A/70/L.61, as orally revised?
6/22

Ms. Adamson (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union and its
member States.
Let me warmly congratulate you, Sir, on the
successful outcome of the negotiations on the draft
political declaration and its two appendices (resolution
70/302, annex) for the 19 September high-level meeting
of the General Assembly, including the oral revision,
which was just been agreed to, at the request of Ireland
and others. Let me in particular thank the co-facilitators
and their teams for their efforts to bring about a
successful conclusion in this important exercise.

While recognizing the efforts of the co-facilitators
in finding common ground, the European Union and its
member States regret that the consultations period did
not allow more time to consider issues that would have
benefited from further reflection. We would therefore
like to clarify our understanding of certain points.
16-28236

09/09/2016

We would like to take this opportunity to express a
clarification with respect to paragraph 33 as it currently
stands. Although in some exceptional cases the
detention of children might be required for the purpose
of determining migration status, we reiterate that the
detention of children should be used only as a measure
of last resort, in the least restricted setting, for the
shortest possible period of time, and with full respect
for the human rights of the child taken into account,
as a primary consideration, in the best interests of the
child.
We are fully committed to promoting, protecting and
respecting the human rights and fundamental freedoms
of all migrants, particularly children, regardless of their
status, and to upholding mainstream labour standards
for regular migrant workers as we do for any worker in
our own countries. It is our understanding that paying
attention to the application of minimum labour standards
for migrant workers regardless of status does not carry
any responsibilities to provide residence permits to
irregular migrants. With regard to the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, the
European Union and its member States believe that the
legal frameworks in place within the European Union
provide equivalent or greater protection for the human
rights and fundamental freedoms of migrant workers as
compared with the Convention.
In paragraphs 42 and 58 and the reference to all
States’ obligations to readmit their own nationals,
we believe that this obligation is essential for a wellfunctioning global migration management system.
Any interpretation of these two points must be in line
with the wording of paragraph 35 of resolution 68/141,
adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2013,
which emphasizes the obligation of all States to accept
the return of their nationals and calls upon all States
to facilitate the return of any person who has been
determined not to be in need of international protection.
We welcome the wording on enhanced cooperation with
respect to return and readmission and reiterate that a
well-functioning system of cooperation in this field is
indeed conducive for expanding and creating new legal
avenues for migration, which is mutually beneficial and
can in turn promote people-to-people contact.
We recognize the International Organization
for Migration (IOM) as the global lead organization
on migration. The integration of the IOM into the
United Nations system and the development of the

A/70/PV.116

global compact on migration are two processes that
will strengthen cooperation on migration issues at the
global level. We are committed to actively engaging in
those processes.
We welcome a change in title, which makes it more
intelligible, including to the wider public. While we
understand that introducing a title is a prerogative of the
President of the General Assembly, we would welcome
broader consultations on such issues in future.
Lastly, we would like to reaffirm our commitment
to ensuring the effective implementation of the draft
political declaration and to reaffirm our engagement in
the upcoming negotiations on a draft global compact for
migration to be concluded by 2018. We look forward to
the high-level meeting on addressing large movements
of refugees and migrants on 19 September.
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position, may I remind delegations
that explanations of position are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Today, the world of migration and
protection-of-refugees issues is changing rapidly, as
those issues are becoming increasingly acute. Despite
the efforts undertaken by the international community
and States themselves, the gravity of migration issues
is not diminishing, which burdens us with the task of
further strengthening international cooperation so
as to develop new joint comprehensive approaches
to finding the optimal economic, social and political
solutions to such issues. In that regard, we fully
support the initiative of holding, on 19 September, a
high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly
to address large movements of refugees and migrants.
We also support most of the provisions set out in the
draft outcome document (resolution 70/302, annex) that
we are transmitting to the seventy-first session of the
General Assembly today.
We are grateful to the co-facilitators of the
negotiation process for their efforts in achieving
compromise. In our understanding, agreement on the
draft outcome document without disseminating the
final version for approval through the so-called silence
procedure does not harm the established United Nations
practice of using that procedure in similar cases. We
will insist on adherence to it henceforth.

16-282367/22

A/70/PV.116

It is understood that any formulation of the draft
outcome document, as well as actions aimed at its
implementation, cannot run counter to the fundamental
humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality,
objectivity and independence, nor can it violate the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States or be
implemented without the agreement of the countries
involved. In our view, the current difficult migration
situation, first and foremost in European countries, is
the fallout of irresponsible interference into the internal
affairs of sovereign States in the Middle East and North
Africa, their destabilization and the forceful removal
of undesirable Governments. That has led to a collapse
in nationhood, humanitarian catastrophes, civil wars
and the rise of terrorism. All that has made life in
those regions untenable due both to the threat that
posed to human lives and to the disregard for human
rights and fundamental freedoms, which has led to
massive outflows of refugees and migrants from that
region. We believe that States actively participating in
such interference must be held primarily responsible
for providing aid to the victims, refugees and forced
migrants.
It is our understanding that none of the provisions
in the draft outcome document, including those relating
to so-called shared responsibility, create additional
international, legal and financial obligations. That
is equally true of the provisions dealing with issues
relating to relocating refugees.
Of course, what I have said here does not mean
that we are distancing ourselves from solving
issues of refugees and migrants. We continue to
contribute significantly to international cooperation
for development realized within United Nations
specialized bodies. We also support the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in the
fulfilment of the functions entrusted to him.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): I would like, first of all,
to express our appreciation to the co-facilitators,
Ambassadors Dina Kawar and David Donoghue, and
thank them for their efforts and leadership throughout
the drafting process. The draft outcome document
(resolution 70/302, annex), together with its appendices,
which will be adopted at the highest level next week by
the General Assembly, is indeed the result of a complex
process and many compromises along the way. While
we acknowledge the consensus reached on the draft
document, now entitled the “New York Declaration for
8/22

09/09/2016

Refugees and Migrants”, my delegation would like to
make the following remarks.
Lebanon believes equitable international burdenand responsibility-sharing to be indispensable when
responding to mass displacements of refugees,
particularly in the attempt to meet refugees’ needs
in terms of shelter, food and essential services, such
as access to water supplies, sanitation, electricity,
education and basic health care. That can best be
achieved through the provision of direct humanitarian
and development assistance to host countries, including
through United Nations entities operating at the country
level.
Lebanon reaffirms that the priority goal should
remain the return of refugees to their countries. In that
regard, Lebanon reaffirms its respect for the principles
of non-refoulement in accordance with international
refugee law, and will continue to provide international
protection to all those who qualify for refugee status on
its territory until the return to their countries becomes
possible. Furthermore, Lebanon believes that, in
exercise of their right to return, refugees decide to go
back to their homeland even before political solutions
are achieved, they should be allowed to do so without
any impediment. That is how Lebanon understands the
contents of paragraph 76 of the draft outcome document.
Lebanon is a small country with limited resources
and territorial space. It has one of the highest population
densities in the world and has been, for over 150 years,
a country of emigration, not immigration. Lebanon is
therefore not in a position to accept the integration,
naturalization or any other form of permanent
resettlement of refugees on its territory. With more
than 1.2 million registered Syrian refugees — and for
more than seven decades over 400,000 Palestinian
refugees — Lebanon is today the country with the
world’s highest ratio of refugees and displaced persons,
both per capita and per square kilometre. As a result,
Lebanon faces humanitarian challenges that go way
beyond its capacities and which could threaten its very
existence.
It is our hope that the high-level debate next week
will raise awareness of the challenges faced by countries
hosting large movements of refugees, like Lebanon,
and the necessity to recommit at a global level to the
principles of equitable burden- and responsibilitysharing, particularly with developing countries. We
look forward to a successful and fruitful meeting.
16-28236

09/09/2016

Mr. Gómez Camacho (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico welcomes the adoption of the draft outcome
document (resolution 70/302, annex), entitled New
York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants. The
draft document represents a watershed in the way in
which we respond to the multidimensional reality of
migration. We recognize and commend the difficult
work of the co-facilitators, Ambassadors Donoghue
and Kawar. Building consensus among Member States
regarding migrants’ human rights continues to be a
strategic priority of my Government. However, Mexico
regrets that some aspects of the draft declaration are not
sufficiently strong, which leads us to this explanation
of position.
The Mexican Government believes that the draft
New York declaration identifies important commitments
at each stage of migration. We must continue to work
towards its implementation in order to create a virtuous
cycle of migration.
While Mexico welcomes the commitments
regarding border controls based on full respect for
human rights and the rights of refugees, it is our view
that the most recent resolutions of the General Assembly
and of the Human Rights Council on this issue must
continue to inform future discussions in the light of the
draft declaration.
Mexico is a country of origin, transit and destination
and return of migrants, which include unaccompanied
boys, girls and adolescents. We reaffirm the findings of
the Committee on the Rights of the Child as set forth
in paragraph 86 and recommendation 79 of its General
Comment No. 6 (CRC/GC/2005/6), particularly the
need to identify a durable solution that addresses all
unaccompanied children’s protection needs and consider
their best interests in any determination of immigration
status. Following a rights-based approach, the search
for a durable solution commences with analysing
the possibility of family reunification. The punitive
detention of minors due to their parents’ immigration
status is a violation of children’s rights. Member States
will have to explore and promote alternatives to such
detention, working hand in hand with civil society to
ensure that minors have access to education, health
care and psychosocial support. We hope to see greater
commitment in that regard in the future.
We are convinced that the United Nations is the
ideal forum for managing migration with a human face.
The upcoming negotiations towards a global compact

A/70/PV.116

for safe, orderly and regular migration represents a
historic opportunity to show that the United Nations can
meet those expectations. Mexico warmly welcomes the
holding of an international conference for the adoption
of such a text in 2018. Although it is not reflected in the
draft outcome, we would like to repeat our offer to host
a preparatory conference on the topic. We call upon
all Member States, the Secretariat, the International
Organization for Migration and civil society to work
with resolve, transparency and ambition to reach a
global compact.
Mr. Tsutsumi (Japan): At the outset, we would
like to welcome the transmittal of the draft New York
Declaration for Refugees and Migrants (resolution
70/302, annex). Due to the complexity of the issue, there
have been many differences of opinion among Member
States. We particularly thank the co-facilitators,
Ambassadors Donoghue and Kawar, as well as the
Secretariat, for leading the difficult negotiations
towards consensus. We sincerely hope that the adoption
of the draft declaration at the highest level at the summit
will be an important step towards resolving this global
challenge. I would like to make a few points on the
draft declaration.
First, Japan regrets that the draft declaration
focuses only on the cross-border movements of people
and could not shed light on internally displaced persons
(IDPs). The international community, including the
United Nations, should further address the plight
of IDPs.
Secondly, we welcome the fact that the draft
declaration stresses the importance of improving
the self-reliance and resilience of host countries and
communities through strengthening the humanitarian
development nexus. Japan also shares the view that the
international community should support host countries
and communities through burden- and responsibilitysharing.
Lastly, I would like to add a few words on the
financial implications of the draft declaration. Although
we support the draft declaration, Japan would like to
express its serious concern that, even as we speak,
Member States are not yet informed about the details
of its extra-budgetary implications. We understand
that the additional resource requirements of the draft
declaration are partly subject to future negotiations
among Member States, such as the modality of the
negotiations on a draft gobal compact for safe, orderly

16-282369/22

A/70/PV.116

and regular migration. However, there could have
been an informal way to provide information related
to probable financial implications, to the extent that
the Secretariat was then aware. Since we adopted
resolution 70/302 without knowing its additional
budgetary requirements, we strongly expect that the
additional costs for the Secretariat in implementing
the draft outcome document will be reduced as much
as possible and absorbed into the budget for the 20162017 biennium. We expect that the issue will be further
discussed in the Fifth Committee.
Mr. Roet (Israel): First, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and acknowledge the effort invested by
the co-facilitators and Member States in producing the
draft outcome document of the New York Declaration
for Refugees and Migrants (resolution 70/302, annex).
Israel is deeply sensitive to the unprecedented numbers
of refugees and migrants that the world has witnessed
in recent years and is aware of the impetus behind
the important draft declaration we have agreed to
transmit today.
The State of Israel has absorbed hundreds of
thousands of refugees since its founding. The Jewish
people, in its long history, are all too familiar with
the trials and hardships of the refugee and migrant
experience. Therefore, we feel genuine solidarity
with the plight of today’s refugees and migrants, and
intimately understand the destabilizing effects of
and the personal toll taken by such massive levels of
human mobility.
At the same time, Israel is a society that is a living
testimony to the many blessings and the richness
of diversity that migrant communities bring to the
countries that absorb them. Israel recognizes the
need for a coordinated and thoughtful response to
that phenomenon at the international level. We also
recognize the central role that the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in particular
can play in helping to find durable solutions to
refugee situations, as recognized in the draft outcome
document and its appendices. As the draft document
acknowledges, the response needs to show sensitivity
and flexibility while taking account of
“different national realities, capacities and levels of
development and respecting national policies and
priorities.” (resolution 70/302, annex, para. 21)
Large movements of refugees and migrants demand
an international response that is humane, effective
10/22

09/09/2016

and respectful while, at the same time, respecting the
right of States to manage and control their borders and
ensure security, prosperity and stability within them.
It is important to note — as stipulated in the draft
document we have agreed to transmit today — that the
draft outcome document and its appendices constitute a
political declaration that does not establish or recognize
any new legal rights or obligations.
The draft outcome document and its appendices
also recognize that each refugee and migrant situation
is different in nature and should be addressed with
attention to its specific circumstances, with a view to
adopting mechanisms and solutions that respond to,
and take account of, the particular political context,
the practical reality on the ground and the legitimate
needs and interests of all those affected by the
specific situation. That is why international legal and
policy approaches to large-scale refugee and migrant
situations must in practice advance a flexible and
practical response that considers a variety of options,
including integration, resettlement in third countries,
repatriation to the country of nationality and a wide
range of factors and variables.
Israel views the draft outcome document and its
annex as a call to action to respond to the recent wave
of refugee and migrant populations, in a manner that is
sensitive, non-dogmatic and practical. We look forward
to contributing to the advancement of the document’s
goals in that spirit.
Mr. Rivero Rosario (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba joins the consensus on resolution 70/302 in
adopting the draft outcome document, whose annex
contains the New York Declaration for Refugees and
Migrants, although we believe that the Declaration
should address the causes of the high number of
refugees and migrants directly and more thoroughly.
We believe that those who provoke or help to foment
international armed conflicts should shoulder the
burdens and responsibilities of dealing with refugees.
Only genuine international cooperation will enable
us to help both the countries taking in refugees and
refugees’ countries of origin.
Where migrants are concerned, the Declaration
should address the negative brain-drain effect that
irregular and unregulated migration can have on
developing countries, and which does not help such
countries achieve their internationally agreed-on
development goals. The Declaration should condemn
16-28236

09/09/2016

Member States’ use of selective and discriminatory
policies that encourage unregulated migration and
cause irregular flows that create problems for countries
of transit and render migrants vulnerable to humantrafficking networks. In that regard, it should directly
address the effects of the Cuban Adjustment Act of the
United States, and in particular the implementation of
the so-called wet-foot, dry-foot policy, which treats
Cubans differently from anyone else in the world by
admitting them immediately and automatically to
the United States, regardless of the ways and means
whereby they enter its territory and even if they are
illegal. The policy encourages illegal emigration from
Cuba to the United States and constitutes a violation of
the letter and spirit of existing migration accords under
which both countries have an obligation to ensure legal,
safe and orderly migration.
Similarly, Cuba asserts that the Declaration should
have asked for an end to the Cuban Medical Professional
Parole Program in the United States, which encourages
Cuban doctors and other health workers to abandon
their missions in third countries and to emigrate to the
United States. It is a reprehensible practice designed
to damage Cuban cooperation programmes and
deprive Cuba and many other countries in need of vital
human resources.
Ms. Mainali (Nepal): I would first like to
congratulate the co-facilitators and all of us on a
successful conclusion to the negotiations on the draft
outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of
the General Assembly on addressing large movements
of refugees and migrants (resolution 70/302, annex).
Nepal fully understands how important and urgent it is
to deal effectively with the sensitive issues consequent
on the situations that are at the root of large movements
of refugees and migrants, and yet how difficult it is
to find ways to do so. My delegation has followed the
negotiations with great interest, since the issue is one
that is central to Nepal as a host to one of the world’s
most protracted refugee problems and a country about
one tenth of whose population is made up of migrant
workers from outside the country. In the light of this, we
really appreciate the efforts made by all delegations to
arrive at consensus on the draft document. Nonetheless,
my delegation wishes to register the following concerns.
Developing countries that host large numbers
of refugees should be considered in the light of their
capacity to do so and to make the commitments included
in the draft outcome document. The commitments that

A/70/PV.116

are expected of such countries may not be feasible
in practice. We also believe that nothing in the draft
document should be construed as a binding alternative
instrument for countries that are not party to the 1951
Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees and its
1967 Protocol. Nor should it eliminate the autonomy
and right to their own policies of individual States
for decisions on such issues as their national capacity,
economy, environmental consideration, geopolitical
sensitivities and domestic imperatives demand.
The scale of resources required to address the
problems that come with large movements of refugees
and migrants is very high. If such resources are
mobilized at the cost of providing development aid to
least-developed countries (LDCs) and others in special
situations, they may involuntarily risk increasing the
numbers of migrants and refugees due to the direct
effects on the economies and related political issues in
these countries.
Refugees and migrants are not synonymous. They
are distinct from one another and should be treated
as such. We should always take into account the fact
that not all migrants are refugees. Any provision that
downplays that reality may make its implementation
unrealistic, and no provisions should leave room for
justification of any forceful eviction of citizens.
We agree that every possible effort should be
made to ensure that all the basic rights of refugees and
migrants are protected, but seeking such assurances
from LDCs or vulnerable host countries whose own
citizens are themselves far from possessing such rights
is counter-productive and blames them for a lack of
resources and capacity. We therefore believe that the
specific national circumstances and conditions of
countries such as Nepal should be taken into account
and an enhanced level of international cooperation
provided in order to bridge the resource gap.
When we draft outcome documents such as these,
we should aim to reach a consensus that can stand the
test of time, changing landscapes, shifting problems
and likely scenarios that indicate that a country’s status
may change over time. Regarding issues relating to
status, residency and nationality, we should be aware
that the same country may simultaneously be a place
of origin, destination or transit for different groups of
migrants. There is no guarantee that a place of origin
will not be a destination too, or vice versa. Our texts
should reflect that perspective as well. Where refugee

16-2823611/22

A/70/PV.116

and migrant populations are manmade, they should
be the responsibility of the country that has been the
cause, not the country where they reside. We respect
the right of refugees to return to their own countries. In
case of political refugees, the problem cannot be fully
addressed if the countries of origin take a back seat.
Nepal is not yet a party to the 1951 Refugee
Convention and its optional Protocol. Despite that,
on humanitarian grounds, we have hosted refugees
and provided them with all the necessary support
and favourable environments within our capacity to
do so. Nepal has always respected the principle of
non-refoulement, while making every effort to protect
and promote refugees’ dignity and well-being. The
international community should make every effort to
avoid situations where those who reject refugees are
silently encouraged while those who extend support
to them on humanitarian grounds are burdened with
additional commitments. Nor should those who wish
to return to their countries in safety and dignity be
forced to accept citizenship of their host countries or to
resettle elsewhere.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote for this meeting.
We will now hear statements after the adoption of
the resolution.
Ms. Amadeo (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to join consensus on resolution
70/302 before us, which decides to transmit the draft
outcome document of the New York Declaration for
Refugees and Migrants to the General Assembly at
its seventy-first session for adoption at the high-level
plenary meeting on addressing large movements of
refugees and migrants, to be held on 19 September. In
doing so, we reiterate the comments that we made at
the adoption of the Declaration and its two annexes on
2 August. We will transmit a written explanation of
the United States position on the text to the SecretaryGeneral separately for inclusion in the official record
under the relevant agenda item.

09/09/2016

and thank you, Sir. I would also like to congratulate
the co-facilitators, Ambassadors Dina Kawar and
David Donoghue, for their leadership and also all
Member States for their substantive engagement
during the negotiations and the successful outcome.
We express our sincere thanks to the co-facilitators for
their attempts in upholding the consensus, which was
achieved during the negotiations. We would also like
to welcome the reinsertion of the name of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, a consensus
reached during the negotiations.
Now we should look forward and work together
for a successful high-level meeting on 19 September
and the adoption of the New York Declaration, which
will ultimately culminate in the adoption of the global
compact for migrants and refugees through an inclusive
intergovernmental process.
The President: We have now heard the last speaker
on this item.
I would like to express my sincere thanks
to Ambassadors David Donoghue of Ireland and
Dina Kawar of Jordan, the co-facillitators of the
intergovernmental negotiations, who demonstrated
great political acumen in their conduct of the complex
discussion in the negotiations. I also thank all Member
States for their valuable contributions to reaching an
agreement on resolution 70/302.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
15 and agenda item 116?
It was so decided.
Agenda items 20 and 79 (continued)
Sustainable development
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Draft resolution (A/70/L.64)

We also welcome the reinsertion of the name of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for International Migration and Development, Peter
Sutherland, and note also that we have concerns about
the number of substantive changes to the text.

The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/70/L.64, entitled
“Modalities for the United Nations Conference to
Support the Implementation of Sustainable Development
Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas
and marine resources for sustainable development”.

Ms. Faizunnesa (Bangladesh): On behalf of the
Bangladesh delegation, I would like to congratulate

I give the
the Secretariat.

12/22

floor

to

the

representative

of

16-28236

09/09/2016

Ms. Pollard (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The present statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
In paragraphs 1 and 2 of draft resolution
A/70/L.64, the General Assembly would decide that
the high-level United Nations Conference to Support
the Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal
14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and
marine resources for sustainable development, shall be
convened at United Nations Headquarters from 5 to
9 June 2017, in view of the exceptional circumstances;
and also decide that the Governments of Fiji and Sweden
shall retain co-hosting responsibilities by assuming the
costs of the conference and its preparatory process.
Pursuant to the request contained in paragraph
2, it is understood that the Governments of Fiji and
Sweden would be responsible for co-hosting the
high-level United Nations Conference to Support the
Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal
14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas
and marine resources for sustainable development,
and would assume all the costs associated with the
Conference and its preparatory Process.
Accordingly, the adoption of draft resolution
A/70/L.64 would not give rise to any financial
implications under the programme budget for the
biennium of 2016-2017.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/70/L.64, entitled
“Modalities for the United Nations Conference to
Support the Implementation of Sustainable Development
Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas
and marine resources for sustainable development”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/70/L.64 was adopted (resolution
70/303).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
delegations that wish to explain their position on the
resolution just adopted, I remind Assembly members
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Medina Mejías (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We take this

A/70/PV.116

opportunity to express our unconditional solidarity
with the people of our brother country Fiji, confronted
by the natural disaster that recently impacted its shores.
We trust that they will emerge stronger from their
unfortunate circumstances.
Our delegation wishes to refer to resolution
70/303, which has just been adopted under agenda
items 20 and 79 (a), entitled “Modalities for the United
Nations Conference to Support the Implementation
of Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and
sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources
for sustainable development”. We wish to express our
gratitude to the facilitators of the resolution — the
representatives of the delegations of Fiji, Sweden and
Mauritius. We also wish to express our thanks to the
Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea,
the Office of Legal Affairs and the Department of
Economic and Social Affairs.
For the sake of consensus, my country took part
in the negotiation process in a constructive and
dialogue-oriented spirit. It is nevertheless appropriate to
recall that Venezuela is not party to the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea. Venezuela is also
not a party to the Agreement on the Implementation
of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 related to
the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks. That is why
the regulations set out in the aforesaid instruments,
including those that could be characterized as customary
international law — other than those that our country
expressly recognizes through their incorporation into
our national legislation — cannot be imposed upon
us. For Venezuela, the Convention on the Law of the
Sea should not constitute the sole legal framework to
regulate activities related to the oceans and seas, or
characterized as a universal instrument.
While the text includes positive and proactive
aspects on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1), we
nevertheless note the presence of elements that, in
their times, led my country to express reservations
on the outcome document of the 2012 United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development (resolution
66/288, annex), as well as issues relating to marine
biodiversity outside national jurisdictions. For the same
reasons, my country has also expressed reservations on
Sustainable Development Goal 14 (c), included in the

16-2823613/22

A/70/PV.116

09/09/2016

document, “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development”.

of the Assembly join me in extending to them our
sincere appreciation.

We are of the view that we must consider the future
updating of the terms of the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea, since new situations that have been
addressed prematurely and in some cases could have
counterproductive results. We take this opportunity to
stress that the evolution of this regime must address the
most important seas and oceans issues of the day in a
balanced, equitable, participatory and inclusive manner.
In that context, we again offer our special thanks to the
delegations of Fiji and Sweden on the work they have
done in preparing for the Conference. They can count
on the active participation and the full support of my
country on this issue.

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
20 as a whole and agenda item 79 as a whole?

Mr. Daunivalu (Fiji): The Fiji delegation is delighted
to see resolution 70/303 adopted by consensus, and we
thank all Member States for demonstrating a positive
spirit of engagement throughout the consultations. We
especially thank the two co-facilitators, Ambassador
Jagdish Koonjul, Permanent Representative of
Mauritius, and Ambassador Magnus Lennartsson of
Sweden for their excellent stewardship in bringing us
all together through this resolution.

The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Finland to introduce draft resolution
A/70/L.65.

We also express our appreciation to President
Lykketoft and his Office for the leadership and oversight
theyprovided throughout this process. The adoption is a
joyous moment not only for Fiji but for all communities
around the world that care about the oceans’ health.
We are convinced that this will be the game-changing
conference for the ocean — one that will support the
implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14,
thereby helping to reverse the current cycle of decline
in which the oceans are caught. To ensure that the
Conference delivers on the mandate given by this
organ, the Fiji delegation, along with that of Sweden,
is committed to working closely with Member States,
relevant international organizations and partners in
preparing for it in June 2017.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
I would like to express my gratitude to Ambassador
Jagdish Koonjul of Mauritius and Ambassador Magnus
Lennartsson of Sweden, co-facilitators of resolution
70/303, for conducting the complex negotiations on the
resolution in the informal consultations to bring them
to a successful conclusion. I am sure that the members
14/22

It was so decided.
Agenda item 34
Preventing armed conflict
(b) Strengthening the role of mediation in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and resolution
Draft resolution (A/70/L.65)

Mr. Sauer (Finland): I have the honour to introduce
draft resolution A/70/L.65, entitled “Strengthening the
role of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflict prevention and resolution”. The draft was
initiated by the Group of Friends of Mediation. The
Group of Friends, co-chaired by Finland and Turkey,
consists of 43 States Members of the United Nations and
8 regional and subregional organizations, with a total of
51 members. Before the draft I am presenting today,
the Group initiated three resolutions on mediation.
The first, in 2011 (resolution 65/283), addressed the
normative framework of mediation. The second, in 2012
(resolution 66/291), was procedural. Resolution 68/303
of 2014 had a specific focus on the role of regional and
subregional organizations in mediation.
Mediation is one of the principal tools for the
peaceful settlement of disputes envisaged under the
Charter of the United Nations. It is among the main
raisons d’être of the Organization. Mediation, as we
know, is a voluntary endeavour whereby a third party
assists two or more parties, upon their consent, in
preventing, managing or resolving a conflict by helping
them to achieve mutually acceptable agreements. The
United Nations has been at the forefront of international
mediation efforts.
The new draft resolution seeks to strengthen the
role of mediation in line with the key findings and
recommendations of the recent review processes
in United Nations peace and security, which have
concluded that mediation should be further used as
16-28236

09/09/2016

a conflict-prevention tool and as a means to sustain
peace. Mediation needs to be used to its full potential
as a tool for seeking political solutions to conflict. At
the United Nations, mediation needs to have a central
place in the Organization’s toolbox.
In line with the reviews and the 2014 resolution,
today’s draft resolution recognizes the role that regional
and subregional organizations play in mediation. The
institutional and operational partnerships between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations should continue and be further enhanced.
In specific mediation contexts, the coherence and
complementarity of the efforts of the various actors
should be encouraged. Mediation efforts should also
engage all the relevant actors and support national and
local capacities, as appropriate. The draft resolution
recognizes the role of civil society in mediation and
calls for integrating gender perspectives into it.
In order to fully play its role, mediation needs
capacities, funding, support functions and strategic
thinking. Those aspects must be developed further
to ensure a professional approach in every effort
involving the United Nations, regional and subregional
organizations and Member States.
Strengthening the role of mediation as a tool for
conflict prevention should also be a priority for the
incoming Secretary-General. The draft resolution
includes a task directed specifically at the SecretaryGeneral and requesting that he or she produce a report
on mediation. It does not, however, focus on any
specific conflict or mediation process.
We wish to thank all delegations for their active
participation, constructive approach and flexibility
in the negotiations, and for their untiring quest to
find solutions. We would also like to thank the other
delegations sponsoring today’s draft resolution.
In conclusion, I would also like to acknowledge
the Secretariat and its Mediation Support Unit for their
support and insights during the process.
The Acting President: The Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/70/L.65,
entitled “Strengthening the role of mediation in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention
and resolution”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.

A/70/PV.116

Ms. Pollard (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution,
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/70/L.65, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Austria, Azerbaijan,
Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Chad, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Ecuador, Estonia, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Italy,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Mexico, Montenegro, the Netherlands,
Norway, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Samoa, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, South
Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Ukraine, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay and the
observer State of Palestine.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/70/L.65?
Draft resolution A/70/L.65 was adopted (resolution
70/304).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of position on the resolution
just adopted, I would like to remind delegations that
explanations of are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by representatives from their seats.
Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): The role of mediation
is essential to the prevention and peaceful resolution
of conflicts and is clearly recognized in the Charter of
the United Nations, Article 33 of which explicitly calls
on parties to a dispute to resort to mediation. Clearly,
mediation can and should play a critical role at every
stage of a conflict or dispute. That said, the resolution
the Assembly has just adopted (resolution 70/304)
should be based on a clearly articulated consensus
supported by all States. Such consensus is central to
ensuring the resolution’s credibility and integrity.
Armenia deplores the fact that the resolution has
retained an uncompromising position on certain areas
through the selective references to the principles of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations
that are reflected in two of its preambular paragraphs.
In considering delegations’ arguments concerning the

16-2823615/22

A/70/PV.116

application in the resolution of certain forms of agreedon language, Armenia would like to point out that the
Charter represents the ultimate agreed-on language.
The purposes and principles of the Charter cannot be
distorted, limited or made conditional. It is evident that
credible and effective mediation aims to achieve the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the prevention and
resolution of conflicts in ways that are based on the
Charter and on international law. Article 1 of the Charter
emphasizes that the purpose of the Organization is to
“develop friendly relations among nations
based on respect for the principle of equal
rights and self-determination of peoples, and to
take other appropriate measures to strengthen
universal peace”.
In the decades since the adoption of the Charter,
our understanding of the substantive legal principle
of self-determination has evolved into our recognition
of it as a fundamental right. Today’s resolution aims
to further strengthen the mediation dimension of the
United Nations and regional organizations. As such,
we believe that it should consolidate the purposes of
the Charter and the principles of international law and
ensure their balanced and inclusive reflection in the
text. We cannot agree to the limitations it imposes on the
self-determination of peoples, and we believe that the
narrow reference in the seventh preambular paragraph
should in no way prejudice the right of all peoples to
self-determination, freedom and independence, as
derived from the Charter of the United Nations, the
two international covenants on human rights and the
numerous relevant United Nations resolutions, among
other instruments, especially given the resolution’s
subject matter.

09/09/2016

of mediation activities at all stages of the conflict
cycle, from prevention to resolution. Ukraine is fully
committed to the idea that the United Nations has to
play a more active role in response to ongoing conflicts
all over the world. Ukrainian society looks upon the
United Nations as a universal international organization
tasked with preventing military conflicts between
States and ensuring compliance with the principles
of international law. The relevance of this statement
has increased significantly over the past two years
with regard to the ongoing Russian aggression against
Ukraine.
According to the Secretary-General’s report on the
United Nations and conflict prevention of 25 September
2015,
“while Member States bear the primary
responsibility for conflict prevention, the United
Nations, with its universal membership, impartiality
and the legitimacy derived from the principles of
the Charter, has an important and unique role to
play.” (S/2015/730, para. 2)

Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): I would like to
underscore the special importance of the topic of
resolution 70/304 for my country and to thank the
representatives of Finland and Turkey for the efforts to
facilitate its adoption.

Once again, we would like to express our gratitude
for the support expressed by Member States with respect
to the resolution on the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
At the same time, we are of the view that there is room
for actions by the Secretariat, within its competence
in the area of mediation and good offices, instead of
shying away from playing its part. Such an action does
not contribute to resolving the conflict. The Russian
Federation continues to concentrate its weaponry,
armaments and military forces on the temporary
occupied territories of Crimea and Dombass, as well
as along the Ukrainian-Russian border. Nevertheless,
Ukraine remains committed to a peaceful resolution
of this conflict. We proceed from the fact that Article
33 of the Charter of the United Nations envisages an
obligation to settle any international dispute peacefully.
However, striving to achieve that does not mean that a
breach of the principles of the United Nations should
be accepted. That would be a false lesson to be drawn
from history and be detrimental for both regional and
global security. In that context, Ukraine would like to
highlight the necessity of strengthening the cooperation
of the United Nations with regional and subregional
organizations devoted to the process of mediation and
conflict resolution.

As a country that continues to suffer from Russian
aggression, we clearly understand the importance

In conclusion, I wish to recall that resolution 70/304,
on the territorial integrity of Ukraine, was also adopted

We firmly believe that a delegation has a legitimate
right to request that a resolution duly reflect the
language of the Charter of the United Nations and
that such a request should be heard, respected and
addressed. I regret that resolution 70/304 lacks that
minimum degree of agreement, and Armenia therefore
dissociates itself from the consensus.

16/22

16-28236

09/09/2016

under this agenda item. That resolution underlines
the prescience of the Charter principles, including the
obligations of States to refrain in their international
relations from the threat of the use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State and to settle international disputes by peaceful
means, thereby emphasizing the acute relevance of
mediation activities given the current state of world
affairs.
Mr. Mazzeo (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
The Republic of Argentina joined the consensus on
resolution 70/304, entitled “Strengthening the role of
mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and resolution”. In doing so, Argentina
reaffirms its strong commitment to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations as well
as its belief that multilateralism is the key principle for
international peace and security. While all methods
for the peaceful settlement of disputes are equally
valid to settle international conflicts, we particularly
stress our conviction that only through such methods
can we ensure fair and lasting solutions. That of course
means mediation, which, as stipulated in the guidelines
of the United Nations for effective mediation, has
its own logic and may or may not coexist with other
methods for the peaceful settlement of disputes, such
as facilitation, good offices and dialogue efforts. In
that regard, we stress the special role that the Charter
bestows on the Secretary-General in terms of good
offices and mediation.
Argentina stresses that the guideliness for effective
mediation refer to the necessary consent of the parties
to be involved in a specific process for the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Nevertheless, it is clear that
what can never be subjected to the consent of the
parties is the greater obligation that weighs upon all
Member States to settle disputes by peaceful means.
For that reason, it would not be appropriate to condition
the consent of the parties to a dispute to the mandate
given by the international community to the SecretaryGeneral.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 34?
It was so decided.

A/70/PV.116

Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items: reports of the General Committee
The Acting President: Members will recall that, at
its 95th plenary meeting, on 13 May 2016, the General
Assembly concluded its consideration of sub-item (c) of
agenda item 113. In order for the Assembly to consider
sub-item (c) of agenda item 113, it will be necessary to
reopen its consideration.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen its consideration of sub-item (c)
of agenda item 113 and to proceed immediately to its
consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 113 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(c) Election of the Executive Director of the
United Nations Environment Programme
Note by the Secretary-General (A/70/859/Add.1)
The Acting President: Members will recall
that, at its 95th plenary meeting, on 13 May 2016,
the General Assembly elected Mr. Erik Solheim as
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme for a term of four years, beginning on
15 June 2016 and ending 14 June 2020. In his note,
the Secretary-General informs the General Assembly
that Mr. Solheim assumed his duties on 27 June 2016.
Accordingly, his term of office will be from 27 June
2016 to 26 June 2020.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes note
that Mr. Solheim’s term of office will be from 27 June
2016 to 26 June 2020?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item 113 and of
agenda item 113 as a whole?
It was so decided.

16-2823617/22

A/70/PV.116

Agenda item 34 (continued)
Prevention of armed conflict
(a) Prevention of armed conflict
The Acting President: Member States will recall
that, at its 2nd meeting, on 18 September 2015, the
Assembly decided to include this sub-item in the
agenda of the seventieth session. It is my understanding
that it would be desirable to include this sub-item in
the draft agenda of the seventy-first session of the
General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to include sub-item (a) of agenda item 34 in
the draft agenda of its seventy-first session?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
also the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 34 and of
agenda item 34 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 36
Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic
The Acting President: Member States will recall
that, in resolution 55/285, the General decided to
consider agenda item 36 biennially at its fifty-sixth
session. Members will also recall that the Assembly,
in its decision 60/509, decided to maintain biennial
consideration of the item at its seventy-first session.
Members will furthermore recall that the General
Assembly, in its resolution 69/322, requested the
Secretary-General to submit a report to the Assembly
at its seventieth session and decided to include the
item in the provisional agenda of the seventieth
session. It is my understanding that to maintain the
biennial consideration of the item, pursuant to decision
60/509, it would be desirable to include this item in
the draft agenda of the seventy-first session of the
General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to include agenda item 36 in the draft agenda of its
seventy-first session?
It was so decided.
18/22

09/09/2016

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 36?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 40
The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 18 September 2015, the
Assembly decided to include agenda item 40 in the
agenda of the seventieth session. In connection with this
item, I have received a letter dated 3 August 2016 from
the representative of Azerbaijan in which he requests
that the consideration of this agenda item be deferred to
the Assembly’s seventy-first session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer its consideration of this item and to
include it in the draft agenda of its seventy-first session?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I also take it that it
is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 40?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 41
Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 18 September 2015, the
Assembly decided to include this item in its agenda, on
the understanding that there would be no consideration
of the item by the Assembly until further notice. In
connection with this item, I have received a note verbale
dated 13 April 2016 from the Permanent Mission of the
Comoros to the United Nations requesting the inclusion
of this item in the provisional agenda of the seventyfirst session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to include the item entitled “Question of the Comorian
island of Mayotte” in the draft agenda of the seventyfirst session?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 41?
16-28236

09/09/2016

It was so decided.
Agenda item 43
The situation in Central America: progress in
fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy
and development
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 18 September 2015, the
Assembly decided to include item 43 in the agenda of
the seventieth session in accordance with the decision
60/508, of 31 October 2005. In that decision, the General
decided that this item shall remain on the agenda for
consideration upon notification by Member States.
Accordingly, this item has been included in the draft
agenda of the seventy-first session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 43?
It was so decided.
Agenda items 44 to 49
Question of Cyprus
Armed aggression against the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas)
The situation of democracy and human rights
in Haiti
Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi
nuclear installations and its grave consequences
for the established international system
concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and
international peace and security
Consequences of the Iraqi occupation of and
aggression against Kuwait
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 18 September 2015,
the Assembly decided to include items 44 to 49 in the
agenda of the seventieth session, in accordance with
paragraph 4 (b) of the annex to its resolution 58/316, of
1 July 2004. In resolution 58/316, the General Assembly
decided that these items shall remain on the agenda
for consideration upon notification by Member States.
Accordingly, these items have been included in the
draft agenda of the seventy-first session.

A/70/PV.116

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda items
44 to 49?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 119 (continued)
Implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 18 September 2015, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the seventieth session. Members will also recall that the
Assembly considered, in a joint debate, agenda items
119 and 120 at its 45th and 46th plenary meetings, on
3 and 4 November 2015. It is my understanding that it
would be desirable to defer consideration of this item to
the seventy-first session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this agenda item
119 and to include it in the draft agenda of its seventyfirst session?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I also take it that it
is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 119?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 130 (continued)
Global awareness of the tragedies of irregular
migrants in the Mediterranean Basin, with specific
emphasis on Syrian asylum seekers
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 18 September 2015, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda
of the seventieth session. Members will also recall that
the Assembly considered this item at its 59th, 60th and
61st plenary meetings, on 20 and 23 November 2015.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I should like to record my
country’s objection to re-including agenda item 130,
“Global awareness of the tragedies of irregular migrants
in the Mediterranean Basin, with specific emphasis on
Syrian asylum seekers”, for the following reasons.
First of all, the phenomenon of migration and
refugees is a global phenomenon that is affecting all

16-2823619/22

A/70/PV.116

peoples of the world, rather than a specific geographical
region or population. The agenda item in question seeks
to focus on the phenomenon in the Mediterranean Basin
alone and only on the Syrian population. Therefore, the
inclusion of these specific places and people betrays
political rather than humanitarian motives. I would
also highlight that Syrians make up only 20 per cent of
the migratory movements from the Mediterranean via
Turkey. The remainder comprises other nationalities in
Turkey with fake Syrian passports.
Secondly, the phenomenon will be eliminated only
if all Member States assert that countries that support
terrorism must stop doing so and must implement the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Thirdly, while we express our appreciation of the
frank and honest efforts of a number of countries to
host Syrians, we reject any attempt to abuse these
Syrians through political and electoral manipulations
or to contend that they cannot be hosted or that they are
linked to terrorism. The international community must
therefore shoulder its own responsibilities to confront
the phenomenon of tens of thousands of foreign
terrorists from 100 Member States migrating to join the
terrorist groups that are active in Syria.
We can solve the problem of Syrian refugees and
encourage them to return to their countries only if we
first end the terrorism that rules over the Syrian people
and affects all aspects of life in Syria. That can be
accomplished by pressuring the Governments of the
countries that fund terrorism to implement the relevant
Security Council resolutions relating to confronting
terrorism, especially resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178
(2014) and 2199 (2015).
Secondly, we must end the unilateral procedures
and measures imposed on the Syrian people that are
among the primary reasons behind the paralysis of
their way of life, the destruction of their infrastructure,
the closing of hundreds of factories and the increase
in the unemployment rate. These unilateral measures
are serving to limit the Syrians’ way of life, extending
the tragedies that have befallen them thus far and
causing them to flee their country and fall victim to
human traffickers.
Thirdly, we must support international efforts to
find a peaceful solution to the Syrian crisis based on
a comprehensive dialogue among the Syrian people,
without external interference.
20/22

09/09/2016

Fourthly, we must stop buying oil and antiquities
from Da’esh and other Turkish mediators.
Fifthly, stressing that the agenda item is to be
deferred to the following session makes it clear that
the political blackmail of the Syrian Government
will continue.
In conclusion, and because the issues of migrants
and refugees are being discussed at two levels of the
General Assembly, including the high-level meeting
that is charged with dealing with large movements of
migrants and refugees, my delegation would like to
stress that agenda item 130 should not be included in
the agenda of the seventy-first session.
Mr. Maleki (Islamic Republic of Iran): Since
the issue of migrants and refugees is being regularly
considered under various agenda items, bearing in
mind the hefty number of items already on the General
Assembly’s agenda, and in order to avoid duplication in
the Assembly’s work, my delegation is also unable to
support the inclusion of item 130 on the draft agenda of
the seventy-first session.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): In the light of the previous two
delegations’ statements, I feel obliged to take the floor.
While I regret having to take up more of our time, I
should point out that in the next few days our leaders will
come together to raise global awareness of the tragedies
facing millions of displaced people. The summit of
19 September will represent an important milestone
in our efforts to take stock of our work and advance
our areas of action in addressing large movements
of refugees and migrants. Turkey is determined to
continue its cooperation, advocacy and humanitarian
policies aimed at ensuring safe, orderly and regulated
migration, as well as spreading the burden and sharing
responsibility for refugees and their hosts.
As we said during the adoption of the agenda of
the seventy-first session, this subject has never been
Turkey’s agenda item per se. Since that adoption, it has
been the General Assembly’s item, and today it is still
in our collective interest to consider the issue at the
seventy-first session until we see meaningful change in
the lives of millions of the displaced. We are therefore
confident that Member States will stand firm in their
commitment to keeping item 130 on the agenda of the
seventy-first session of the Assembly.
Ms. Engelbrecht Schadtler (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
16-28236

09/09/2016

briefly add our voice to the discussion. In the interests
of saving time, we will not repeat the explanations
just made by our colleagues from Syria and Iran,
but while we are aware that the issue of refugees is a
global problem, we do not support including the topic
on the agenda of the General Assembly at its seventyfirst session.
Ms. Blake (United States of America): The United
States wishes to express its support for the transfer
of agenda item 130. Despite the fact that refugees
and migrants are included elsewhere in the General
Assembly’s scope of work, we believe there is still a
place and a need for a specific focus on the issue, and
wish to see it included on the agenda of the Assembly at
its seventy-first session.
Ms. Guillamo (France) (spoke in French): France
supports keeping item 130, “Global awareness of the
tragedies of irregular migrants in the Mediterranean
basin, with specific emphasis on Syrian asylum
seekers”, on the agenda of the General Assembly at its
seventy-first session.
Mr. Al-Hamadi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): The
introductory statement today by the President of the
General Assembly reflected only a small part of the
suffering and tragedy suffered by millions of refugees,
especially refugees from Syria. My Turkish colleague
has voiced the reasons that prompt us to support keeping
the item on the Assembly’s agenda as a forum and a
way of dealing with the suffering of those millions. Just
as we support the reasons cited by the representative
of Turkey, we also support keeping the item on the
Assembly’s agenda.
Mr. McDonald (United Kingdom): I would like
to reaffirm that the United Kingdom also supports
keeping this item and transferring it to the agenda of
the Assembly at its seventy-first session.
Ms. Radwan (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I
too would like to express my delegation’s support for
keeping item 130 on the agenda of the Assembly at its
next session.
Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): I would like to support
the proposal of the representative of Turkey to keep
this item on the agenda of the General Assembly at its
seventy-first session.
Mr. Nagan (Netherlands): I would like to add
my voice to those proposing to retain this item on the

A/70/PV.116

Assembly’s agenda, given the ongoing tragedy in the
region and in Syria itself.
The Acting President: Having heard the statements
just made, I understand that further consultation is
required. I therefore propose that we defer discussion
of this item to the morning of Tuesday, 13 September
2016. The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 130.
Agenda item 155
Financing of the United Nations Mission in
East Timor
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 18 September 2015, the
Assembly decided to include this item on the agenda
of the seventieth session. It is my understanding that
it would be desirable to defer consideration of the item
to the seventy-first session. May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to defer consideration of
agenda item 155 and to include it on the draft agenda of
the seventy-first session?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 155?
It was so decided.
Programme of work
The Acting President: I should like to remind
delegations that the following agenda items, which have
been considered at previous meetings, remain open
for consideration during the seventieth session of the
General Assembly: items 9, 16, 18, 18 (d), 21, 30 to 32,
37, 38, 56, 57, 67, 73, 73 (a), 73 (b), 73 (c), 74, 91, 107,
109, 110, 112, 112 (b), 114, 114 (a), 114 (b), 114 (e), 114
(f), 114 (g), 115, 122, 123, 126 to 129, 131 to 154 and
156 to 166.
As members are aware, these items have been
included in the provisional agenda of the seventy-first
session of the General Assembly, with the exception of
sub-item (d) of agenda item 18, entitled “Commodities”;
agenda item 32, entitled “Support by the United Nations
system of the efforts of Governments to promote and
consolidate new or restored democracies”; agenda
item 74, entitled “Assistance to survivors of the 1994
genocide in Rwanda, particularly orphans, widows and

16-2823621/22

A/70/PV.116

victims of sexual violence”; agenda item 91, entitled
“Review of the implementation of the Declaration on the
Strengthening of International Security”; agenda item
126, entitled “International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and
Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994”;
agenda item 133, entitled “Programme budget for
the biennium 2014-2015”; agenda item 150, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad”; agenda item 156, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste”; and agenda item 163, entitled “Financing
of the United Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to include agenda items 9, 16, 18, 21, 30, 31,
37, 38, 56, 57, 67, 73, 73 (a), 73 (b), 73 (c), 107, 109, 110,
112, 112 (b), 114, 114 (a), 114 (b), 114 (e), 114 (f), 114 (g),
115, 122, 123, 127 to 129, 131, 132, 134 to 149, 151 to
154, 157 to 162, 164, 165 and 166 in the draft agenda of
the seventy-first session?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda items 9, 16, 18, 18 (d), 21, 30
to 32, 37, 38, 56, 57, 67, 73, 73 (a), 73 (b), 73 (c), 74, 91,
107, 109, 110, 112, 112 (b), 114, 114 (a), 114 (b), 114 (e),
114 (f), 114 (g), 115, 122, 123, 126 to 129, 131 to 154 and
156 to 166 at the present session?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I should like to inform
members that the following representatives have been
elected Chairpersons of the First, Special Political and
Decolonization (Fourth Committee), Second, Third
and Sixth Committees of the General Assembly at its
seventy-first session and are accordingly members of
the General Committee for that session: for the First
Committee, His Excellency Mr. Sabri Boukadoum of
Algeria; for the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth), His Excellency Mr. Vladimir
Drobnjak of Croatia; for the Second Committee, His
Excellency Mr. Dian Triansyah Djani of Indonesia; for
the Third Committee, Her Excellency Ms. María Emma
22/22

09/09/2016

Mejía Vélez of Colombia; and for the Sixth Committee,
His Excellency Mr. Danny Danon of Israel.
I congratulate the Chairpersons of these Main
Committees for the seventy-first session of the General
Assembly on their election.
I should like to inform members that the
Chairperson of the Fifth Committee will be elected at
the first meeting of the Fifth Committee.
I shall now call on those representatives who wish
to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
May I remind members that statements in exercise
of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the
first intervention and to five minutes for the second
intervention and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Upon the adoption of resolution 70/304, the
Ukrainian delegation unfortunately took the floor for
his own destructive ends rather than to focus on the
Minsk agreements. We condemn such an approach.
The Acting President: I take this opportunity
to remind members that the next plenary meeting
of the seventieth session will be held on Thursday
13 September, in the morning, to take up agenda item
120, entitled “Revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly”, and agenda item 130, entitled “Global
awareness of the tragedies of irregular migrants in the
Mediterranean basin, with specific emphasis on Syrian
asylum seekers”.
I would also like to remind members that the closing
plenary meeting of the General Assembly at its seventieth
session will be held at 3 p.m. on Tuesday, 13 September, in
this Hall. Immediately thereafter, the General Assembly
will declare open the seventy-first session and convene
the 1st meeting of the seventy-first session.
In order to allow a smooth proceeding of two
meetings — namely, the closing of the seventieth session
and the opening of the seventy-first session — I would
like to remind members that, as announced at the 115th
plenary meeting and as indicated in the Journal of the
United Nations, the General Assembly Hall will have
the seating protocol of the seventy-first session as of 3
p.m. Therefore the delegation of the Plurinational State
of Bolivia will occupy the first seat in the General
Assembly Hall.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.
16-28236
