UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

FORTIETH

YEAR

2619’”

MEETING:

^. i 2 9 f$TS
$.,..,;:;

10 OCTOBER

1985

‘-. _

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2619)

Adoption

of the agenda

The Middle

East problem

.....................................

1

................................................

1

including

the Palestinian

question:

Letter dated 30 September
1985 from the Permanent
Representative
of
India to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 7507) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

S/PV.2619

1

NOTE

._,

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are .published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2619th
Held

MEETING

in New York on Thursday,

10 October

1985, at 10.30 a.m.

President: Mr. Vernon A. WALTERS
(United States of America).

letter dated 9 October 1985 [S/175.52] which reads as
follows:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina-Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

“I have the honour to reauest that the Securitv Council extend an invitation to kr. Farouq Qaddoumi, head
of the Political Department and member of the Executive Committee of the Palestine Liberation Organization, to participate in the Council’s discussion of the
item entitled ‘The Middle East problem including the
Palestinian question’, in accordance with the Council’s
past practice.”

Provisional agenda (S/AgendaI2619)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

3. The proposal by Egypt is not made pursuant to rule 37
or rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, but if
approved by the Council, the invitation to participate in
the debate would confer on the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) the same rights of participation as
those conferred on Member States pursuant to rule 37.

2. The Middle East problem including the Palestinian
question:
Letter dated 30 September 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17507)
The meeting was called to order at II.25

4. Does any member of the Council wish to speak on
that proposal?

a.m.

Adoption of the agenda

5. Since that appears not to be the case, I shall make the
following statement in my capacity as the representative of
the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

The agenda was adopted
The Middle East problem including the Palestinian
question:
Letter dated 30 September 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17507)

6. The United States has consistently taken the position
that, under the provisional rules of procedure, the only
legal basis on which the Council may grant a hearing to
persons speaking on behalf of non-governmental entities is
rule 39. For 39 years the United States has supported a
generous interpretation of rule 39 and *would certainly not
object had this matter been raised under that rule. We are,
however, opposed to special, ad hoc departures from
orderly procedure.

1. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received letters from the representatives ,of Israel, Kuwait and the Syrian Arab Republic in
which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the Consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the discus.sion, without the right to vote, in accordance with $he
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

7. The United states consequently opposes extending to
the PLO the same rights to participate in the proceedings
of the Couocii as if that organization represented a
Member State.
8. We certainly believe in listening to all points of view,
but none of that requires violating the rules. In particular,
the United States does not agree with the recent practice of
the Council which appears selectively to try to enhance the
prestige of those who wish to speak in the Council,
through a departure from the rules of procedure. We consider this special practice to be without legal foundation
and to constitute an abuse of the rules.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Netanyahu (Israe&
Mr. Abuihassan (Kuwait) and Mr. W%ttal (Syrian Arab
Republic) took the places reservedfor them at the side of the
Councjl chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT:
I sho,uld jike to inform the Council
that I have received from the representative of Egypt a
1

9. For those reasons, the United States requests that the
terms of the proposed invitation be put to the vote. Of
course, the United States will vote against. ;::
I _’
10. I now resume my function as PRESIDENT.
If no
other member of the Council wishes to speak; I shall take
it that the Council is ready to vote on the proposal by
Egypt.
A vote was taken by ihow ‘of hands.
In favour: Burkina Faso, China, Egypt, India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Repubiic, Union of S&et Socialist
Republics.
Against: United States of America.
Abstaining: Australia, Denmark, France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
There were 10 votes in favour, 1 against and 4 abstentions.
The proposal was adopted
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Qaddoumi (Palestine Liberation Organisation) took a pIace at the Council
table.
11. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the Council that I have received from the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People a letter dated 9 October which reads as
follows:
“1 have the honour to request that I be allowed to
participate in the Security Council’s consideration of
the item entitled ‘The Middle East probiem including
the question of Palestine’, in accordance with the provisions of rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, in
my capacity as Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.”
12. On previous occasions the Council has extended invitations to representatives of other United Nations bodies
in connection with the consideration of matters on its
agenda. In accordance with past practice in this matter, I
propose that the Council extend an invitation under rule
39 of the provisional rules of procedure to the Chairman of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People.
,

It was so, decided.

‘-

13. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council is meeting
today in response to the request contained in a letter dated
30 September from the representative of India to the President of the Council [S/Z5707J.
14. Mr. KRISHNAN
(India): The question of Palestine
and the tense situation in the Middle East have been continuously debated in the United Nations for several

decades now. Numerous resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the Security Council on various aspects
of the problem have remained unimplemented. Our meeting today, convened in pursuance of the decision taken at
the Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Luanda from 4 to 7 September 1985,
should provide an opportunity for an in-depth discussion
of the question in all its aspects with a view to analysing
the major obstacles which stand in the way of finding a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the Middle
East problem and restoring to the Palestinian people their
inalienable and national rights. We believe that a just solution of the question of Palestine, the core of the problem, is
the crucial element in a just and lasting political settlement
in the Middle East..
15. The Council last considered the question of Palestine
in a comprehensive manner in 1976 and, briefly, in 1977, at
the request of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. Since then, while
the Council has considered different aspects of the situation in the Middle East and pronounced on them, there
has been no opportunity for a comprehensive discussion.
Our request today is therefore aimed at focusing attention
on the basic issue of securing the legitimate right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination.
16. The conflict in the Middle East poses a serious threat
to international peace and security. Recent disturbing
developments in the area have introduced even more complex and dangerous elements into an already fragile environment. Israel’s occupation of Lebanon, in defiance of
Council resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982), its harassment of the Palestinian and Lebanese people, its policy of
establishing new settlements in the occupied territories and
its aggressive actions, including the latest attack on Tunisia, designed to intimidate its Arab neighbours with the
threat and use of massive force, have resulted in further
destabilization. The region has witnessed the introduction
of sophisticated armaments on an unprecedented scale.
The Middle East with its rich resources is a strategic area,
and preventing the conflict from causing a wider conflagration is therefore a matter of global concern. Time is of the
essence in finding an early solution to the problem.
17. ,The non-aligned countries are firmly committed to
the pursuit of peace. We are dedicated to the uplifting and
welfare of our peoples, free from outside influences, pressures or presences. Our objective is to work ardently for
peace by reducing tensions and eliminating conflict so that
we can concentrate on our development priorities. Unfortunately, however, the Middle East has known no peace
for a long time.
18. India’s own sympathy for the people of Palestine and
its support for the establishment of a Palestinian State are
rooted in our awareness of the historical, territorial and
national identity of the Palestinians. Even during the days
of our struggle for national independence, our leaders
identified themselves with the Palestinian cause and raised
their voices in support of the establishment of an indepen-

dent Palestinian homeland. The continuing strmrgle of the
brave Palestinians evokes sympathy and undztanding
among the people of India to this day. The decision to
partition Palestine was taken in the same year as India
became independent. India secured its independence, but
the people of Palestine were banished from their own
lands. Many countries since then have also become free
and are now masters of their own destinies. However, not
only do the Palestinians remain homeless, but even more
of their lands have since been occupied.

thirty-ninth sessions of the General Assembly. It will be
recahed that the General Assembly, in its resohttion 38158
C of 13 December 1983, requested the Secretary-General,
in consultation with the Security Council, urgently to
undertake preparatory measures to convene the intemational peaceconference on the Middle East and to report
to the General Assembly on his efforts, In its resolution
39149 D of 11 December 1984, the General Assembly reiterated its conviction that the convening of the conference
would constitute a major contribution by the United
Nations towards the achievement of a comprehensive, just
and lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict. It further
requested the Secretary-General, in consultation with the
Security Council, to continue his efforts with a view to
convening the conference. We are indeed grateful to the
Secretary-General for initiating a process of consultations,
in pursuance of the above-mentioned resolutions, with the
members of the Security Council and with other concerned
States for the convening of the proposed peace conference.

19. Valiant people have been driven from their hearths
and homes. Their lands, even beyond those defined by
General Assembly resolution 181 (II), adopted at the time
of the partition of Palestine, in 1947, have remained forcibly occupied. Israel continues to thwart the will of the
international community in spite -of numerous United
Nations resolutions. Acts of repression and terror, denial
of fundamental rights and various violations of human
rights have become the order of the.day. Such actions by
the occupying Power are in clear contravention of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949’ and are obviously
designed to consolidate Israel’s stranglehold on the occupied Arab and Palestinian territories and to annex them.
Further, Israel’s actions are undertaken on the pretext of
safeguarding its security. It is obvious that security is
equally vital and important to all States in the region and
there is no logic in treating the security of one of them as
pre-eminent. Israel is seeking to bring about permanent
geopolitical and demographic changes in the region at the
expense of the Palestinians. This must be prevented.

23. In its own response to the Secretary-General, the
Government of India conveyed its broad agreement with
the plan of action proposed by the Secretary-General. We
suggested, however, that some flexibility be retained in the
selection of participants for the conference. In regard to
the time frame for the conference, it was our view that the
situation in West Asia does not brook any delay and that
urgent preparatory measures should be undertaken so that
the conference could be convened at the earliest possible
time. We deeply regret that, while most of the States consulted have indicated their agreement to the proposed
peace conference, some others have not found it possible
to do so.

20. The efforts by the international community to find a
comprehensive solution to the problem of the Middle East
and its core, the question of Palestine, received a fresh
impetus at the International Conference on the Question
of Palestine, held at Geneva from 29 August to 7 September 1983. The Geneva Declaration on Palestine* called for
the convening of an international peace conference on the
Middle Fast on the basis of the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the relevant United Nations resolutions, with the aim of achieving a comprehensive, just
and lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict, an essential element of which would be the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State in Palestine.

24. In his report to the previous session of the General
Assembly on the situation in the Middle East, the
Secretary-General stated:
“The history of the Arab-Israeli conflict in the Middle
East and of the Palestine question has thus been a long
record of missed opportunities punctuated by wars and
violence that have only served to complicate the situation further and to create new misery and new obstacles
to peace.” [S/16792, para. 42.1
25. Indeed, the time has come to pursue with determination our search for ways and means to remedy the injustice
done to the Palestinian people and to find an early solution
to this tragic conflict.

21. It was envisaged that the proposed peace conference
would be convened under the auspices of the United
Nations with the participation of all parties to the ArabIsraeli conflict, including the PLO, as well as the United
States, the USSR and other concerned States, on an equal
footing. In this context, the Security Council was given the
primary responsibility for creating appropriate institutional arrangements to guarantee and carry out the
accords of the conference. The importance of the time
factor in achieving a just solution was stressed. It was
further stressed that partial solutions are inadequate and
that delays in seeking a comprehensive solution will not
eliminate tension in the region.

26. The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries has from
its inception consistently advocated a comprehensive solution to the question of Palestine, the core of the Middle
East problem and the root cause of the Arab-Israeli conflict. It was at the initiative of the non-aligned countries
that the majority of United Nations resolutions on the
subject have been adopted. In past years, the non-aligned
countries have been particularly active in mobilizing inter-,
national support against Israeli actions in the occupied
territories and its invasion of Lebanon. The non-aligned
countries have also reaffurned their firm opposition to
Israeli practices and policies in occupied Arab and Pales-

22. The recommendations of the Geneva Conference
were overwhelmingly endorsed at the thirty-eighth and
3

tinian territories and called for the withdrawal of Israel
from the occupied Syrian Golan Heights.
*

32. This question has become a great challenge to the
conscience of man. The passage of time may make more
difficult and more remote the possibility of resolving the
Palestinian problem through peaceful negotiations. It is
therefore imperative that there be no further delay.

27. At the Seventh Conference of Heads ,of State or
Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at New
Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983, this question was exhaustively examined. Fundamental principles for the solution
of the problem were again reaffIrmed. In the declaration
adopted by the Conference, the Heads of State or Government affirmed:

33. As a first step, we call for the discontinuation of the
Israeli policy of settlements, an immediate freeze on new
settlements and the dismantling of those already established. At the same time, Israel should withdraw totally
and unconditionally
from Lebanon. Israel should also
withdraw from all Arab and Palestinian territories occupied since 1967 and from the Golan Heights. Increased
and sustained efforts towards a just, durable and comprehensive settlement must be undertaken as a matter of the
highest priority. To achieve this, the only viable course is
the early convening of the international peace conference
on the Middle East in accordance with wellestablished
guidelines endorsed by the United Nations.

“that a just and durable peace in the Middle East cannot be established without the total and unconditional
withdrawal of Israel from a!! Palestinian and other
Arab territories occupied by it since 1967, including
Jerusalem, and without the achievement of a just solution of the problem of Palestine on the basis of the
attainment and exercise in Palestine of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, including the right . . .
to establish the Palestinian Independent State in its
homeland, Palestine.” [S/1567.5 and Corr.2 and 2,
annex, p. 25.1

34. We hope that the Security Council will demonstrate
the necessary will to take resolute action.

The recently concluded Conference of Foreign Ministers
of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Luanda, reaffIrmed
these well-established principles.

35. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA.

28. We should like to acknowledge the important role
played by the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, under its distinguished
Chairman, in finding a just solution to the question of
Palestine. As a member of the Committee, India has
always supported its efforts to secure the rights of the
Palestinian people and to promote their cause. Though the
basic recommendations of the Committee have so far
remained unimplemented,
its activities during the past
years have served to increase support. from the intetiational community for the cause of Palestine.

36. The Council meets once again today to consider the
situation in the Middle East. The situation is indeed
serious. It is not improving. It grows more violent daily.
Yesterday, the number of innocent lives lost in the search
for peace in the Middle East increased again, with the
murder of my countryman. Terrorism is but one aspect of
the Middle East situation but it dominates al! others and
makes the quest for peace even more klusive.
37. The United States welcomes a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East. Let me say unequivocally that the
peace we a!! desire will not be achieved by terrorists or
through their actions, but only at the negotiating table.

29. Like others, we are profoundly shocked and distressed by acts of violence against innocent persons. We
condemn terrorism in all its forms, wherever it occurs and
by whomever it is committed. The sense of indignation
and outrage felt by a!! members of the Council was
unequivocally expressed in the statement we issued yesterday through you, Mr. President [S/17554J.

38. Relief is the word which best describes the emotion
we fee! at the news that the passengers and crew of the
Italian ship AchiZle Luuro have been released and that this
latest act of terrorism and violence has ended. Our relief is
tinged with sadness and anger, however. Sadness to learn
that one American, 69-year-old Leon Klinghoffer, has
been brutally murdered by these terrorists and anger that
once again the contagious disease of terrorism has claimed
a victim. We are relieved, but we are not satisfied. We are
not satisfied because we are not at al! comforted that this
terrifying cycle of violence and terrorism against innocent
victims will not continue and increase.

30. It should be clear to a!! by now that in the Middle
East the surest way to put an end to violence is through a
just peace. And that peace cannot be achieved except
through a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the
question of Palestine which secures for the Palestinians
their inalienable rights.
31. It is we!! known that the primary reason for the lack
of progress in finding a comprehensive solution is the
intransigence of Israel, which has deliberately defied the
will of the international community. We appeal to all
members of the international community to display statesmanship and to join in the effort to find a speedy and just
solution to the problem, based on the principles enunciated by the United Nations and the Movement of NonAligned Countries.

39. On this occasion most of the passengers were quite
fortunate. They at least are safe and sound and on their
way home. Mr. Klinghoffer and the victims of other terrorist acts have not been so lucky. We need only reflect for a
moment on those who have been brutally slaughtered at
the hands of terrorists. These have included nationals of
countries represented around this table. They include a
Soviet diplomat and an American sailor, as well as private
4

citizens of Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and many
other countries. In addition, nationals of France, the
United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, the United’States and
other countries are still as we meet being held hostage.
These victims’ only crime was to fly on a plane or cruise on
a ship or work at an embassy or engage in some other
totally peaceful activity. They are not as lucky as most of
the passengers and crew of the Achille Laura.

the skies, just as we acted together to rid the seas of
piracy at the turn of the last century.”
45. The world again seems to be gravely threatened by
pirates. Over the last few centuries the civilized world was
thought to have made progress in establishing non-violent
rules of political conduct. International
rules of war,
human rights resolutions and, indeed, the fundamental
premises underlying the establishment of the United
Nations are all based on the assumption that political violence and political freedom do not mix. Political intimidation, the object of the use of terrorism, is antithetical to
freedom of political expression, the cornerstone of democratic society.

40. The world must condemn vigorously and actively
these actions. As Secretary Shultz said this morning in
Washington, “terrorism is a great threat to all of us, and it
must be dealt with and stopped”.
41. For centuries, pirates have justly been designated as
hostis humani generis, the common enemies of all mankind.
The long experience that the international community had
with their outrages led to the recognition of and confirmed
the universal criminality of these sea-based terrorists. We
know today that terrorists of all sorts are also common
enemies of mankind. Whether their attacks are on land, on
sea or in the air, they are cut from the same sorry fabric.
They are of one ilk. There is today no people, no government, no diplomat, no traveler who can count himself
immune from the terrorists. They are the enemies of us all.

46.

As Secretary of State Shultz said:
“Terrorism is a step backwards. It is a step towards
anarchism and decay. In the broadest sense, terrorism
represents a return to barbarism in the modem age. If
the modern world cannot face up to the challenge, then
terrorism and the lawlessness and inhumanity that
come with it will gradually undermine all that the modem world has achieved and make further progress
impossible.”

42. The terrorist has put himself beyond the pale of civilized humanity. He should be shunned by all. If he seeks
sanctuary he should be turned away. If he claims support
he should be denounced. If he is apprehended he should be
prosecuted. Every terrorist attack is an attack on the world
community.
Every justification
offered for terrorism
undermines the rule of law. Every concession to the terrorist diminishes our humanity.

47. My Government is relieved that this particularly horrible event is over, but we must not lessen our vigilance.
We urge all peoples and governments to renounce further
acts of terrorism, whatever their presumed justification, as
inimical to the norms of civilization.
48. I now resume my function as PRESIDENT.
The next
speaker is the observer for the Palestine Liberation Organization, on whom I now call.

43. We are grateful to the President of the General
Assembly and to the Secretary-General for their statements of yesterday. The Secretary-General said that he
had learned with horror of the hijacking of the ship, which
constitutes yet another escalation of violence in the Middle
East. He urged those responsible to understand that their
act was criminal and unjustifiable and should be ended
without delay in a manner that would avoid further suffering by the innocent victims. The President of the General
Assembly was equally outspoken. We believe that those
strong statements have been beneficial in ending this terrible ordeal and in limiting its violence. The Council also
spoke out strongly and with one voice on this matter
yesterday.

49. Mr. QADDOUMI
(Palestine Liberation Organization) (interpretation from Arabic): I wish at the outset to
speak of the hijacking of the Italian ship carrying almost
400 passengers and crew. During the incident the Italian
Government asked the PLO to intervene and to attempt to
save the lives of those on board the ship. Consonant with
our belief in the rights of the individual, and having repeatedly made such efforts in the past, we stepped in. Earlier,
during the tenure of Secretary of State Kissinger, when we
were in Beirut, we provided protection for American lives.
We did indeed protect the lives of United States citizens as
they departed Beirut. Mr. Kissinger sent us a letter of
thanks, through the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Egypt
and Saudi Arabia. During President Carter’s term, we
were requested to intervene and assist in securing the
release of the hostages held in Iran. Through our intervention the fraternal country of Iran released 13 American
hostages. We protected the United States Embassy in Beirut even though we knew perfectly well that the United
States maintained a position hostile to our cause. But
American policy is one thing, and American lives are
another. We hold civilian lives to be of great importance.

44. We call upon the United Nations to speak out firmly
and unmistakably against such acts of terrorism. President
Reagan said in July:
“Much needs to be done by all of us in the community of civilized nations. We must act against the criminal menace of terrorism with the full weight of the law,
both domestic and international. We will act to indict,
apprehend and prosecute those who commit the kind of
atrocities the world has witnessed in recent weeks.

50. We co-operated and saved the 400 people who were
on board that ship because we .believe in the freedom of
man and his right to live. We have condemned, at our

“We can act together as free peoples who do not wish
to see our citizens kidnapped or shot or blown out of
5

National Council, international as well as State terrorism,
such as the kind that has been practised seve-al times by
Israel.
‘8

role as a super-Power, a permanent member of the Security Council, a State that assumes responsibility in -that
capacity for the implementation
of the resolutions of the
United Nations as well as for ensuring international peace
and security.

5 1. I should like to ask: is there evidence-that those
hijackers killed that civilian? Where is that evidence? He
was 69 years old and his family stated that he had frequently suffered before from heart attacks. He was also
suffering from paralysis. I wonder why and how those
people could attack or kill such an old person. I am not
defending that act, but .I am defending logic and reality.
Has the United States forgotten about the I65 Palestinians
who were killed in Tunisia, while today it makes an accusation without having any sound material evidence to substantiate the charge.

56. That wanton Israel aggression against the sovereignty of a small peaceful country that is located several
thousand miles away from Israel and whose constructive
role in and quest for the maintenance of peace in the area,
is rather well known, led some to believe that the United
States would open its eyes and reconsider its position
which is biased towards and limitlessly supportive of
Israel. Thus the United States can give credibility to its
claims that it seeks to establish peace in the Middle Past
and to confront real terrorism, .whatever its source.

52. Despite all that, Chairman Arafat expressed his condolences to the ,family of the.passenger who was killedalthough there is no proof so far that he was
murdered-because he believes in the right of every person
.
to life and liberty..
*
53. Enough of that. I shall now deal with the main issue,
which is at the root of all the problems and in which the
United States and Israel are the only obstacles to a solution. Israel is the creator of terrorism and tension in the
..
area.

57. However, most unfortunately, this latest event has
undoubtedly proved that the United States of America still
ignores the glaring facts in the area, to which all those who .
participated in the debate during the last few days have
referred. The United Nations has also repeated the facts in
its resolutions on the Middle East and on the Palestinian
question.
58. We closely followed the debates last week, which
dealt with the essence of the question about which the
Council is meeting today. Those debates clearly showed
the extent of the isolation of Israel and the United States
and how they do not conform to the international understanding of the nature of the conflict in the area and the
methods necessary to achieve a solution.

54. I should like first to thank the representatives of the
States that afforded us the opportunity once again to
address the Security Council and to participate in the work
of the current meeting, which is devoted to a debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the question of
Palestine. We see this invitation as a reaffumation of the
complete faith of the international community, which has
been repeatedly expressed on different occasions and in
numerous resolutions of the United Nations, and the conviction that the Palestinian question is at the core of the
Middle East conflict and that the participation of the PLO,
as the sole legitimate representative of the -Palestinian
people in all the endeavours and efforts aimed at reaching
a comprehensive and just solution to that conflict, is an
indispensable element that can never be circumvented.

59. The persistence of such a situation does not augur
well for the future of peace in the area but rather threatens
a widening of the cycle of violence and an escalation of
tension to rather grave and unpredictable dimensions.
60. Everyone real&s that the recent Israeli act of aggression against Tunisia and against the PLO is actually a blow
against peace efforts in the area, and not merely an act of
limited retaliation. It was carried out and justified on
flimsy and unacceptable pretexts. We warned in our statement a few days ago about such criminal acts of ,aggression, which are part and parcel of the Zionist dogma and
of Israeli policy and practices and are directed against the
Palestinian people and the Arab nation. Those acts can
never intimidate us into capitulating. On the contrary, they
give us more strength to persevere in confronting such acts
and in defending our rights and our territory, whatever the
sacrifices.

55. During the last few days the Council has been seized
of the question of the perfidious Israeli aggression against
fraternal Tunisia and against the PLO [see S/Z750ql. The
Council condemned that act of aggression, although,
unfortunately, it failed to impose the necessary sanctions
against Israel under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations. Israel has proven throughout its history
that it is not a peace-loving State and that its policies and
practices pose great dangers to international peace and
security. Similarly, we were not surprised at the unwillingness of the United States to vote in favour of the moderate
resolution adopted by the Council [resolution 573 (2985)].
That course of action ‘proved that the United States persists in the same role that it had played earlier in impeding
the proceedings of the Council and in preventing it ‘ftom
deterring Israel and from taking the necessary steps that
would contribute to advance the peace process in the Middle East. The United States thus did not measure up to its

61. This meeting of the Council is convened at the
request of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries to
consider the Middle East problem, inchrding the Palestinian question. It is taking place within the framework of
General Assembly resolution 38/558 C of 13 December
1983, which called for the convening of an international
peace conference on the Middle East and requested the
Secretary-General, in consultation with the Security Council, urgently to undertake preparatory measures to convene the conference. The resolution also invited the
6

:..

Council to facilitate the organization of the conference and
requested the Secretary-General to report on his efforts to
the General Assembly at the thirty-ninth session.

expropriatiiig its lands and property and preventing the
return of the Palestinian refugees. In addition, it waged
wars against the neighbouring Arab countries. It ,committed retaliatory raids as ivell as acts of genocide in D&r
Yassin, Qibya, the refuge& tiamps at Sabra and Shatila and,
finally, in the Tunisian capital. Can such a policy and such
practices constitute e&dence of a desire for peace?
-’
.. I67. In 1967 Israel waged war against the Arab States. It
occupied all the Palestinian territories and other Arab territories in Egypt, Syria and other countri&.’ In 1982 it
waged an aggressive war against Lebanon, and still occupies part of Lebanon’s territory. It has been bent on widening the circle of war and violence to embrace Iraq and
Tunisia and perhaps other countries where Palestinians
live as a .result of their displacement from their homeland.
Could such a policy and such practices constitute proof of
a desire for peace?

62. As is well-known from the Secretary-General’s report
[S/Z6409 and Add 11, the United States obstructed all those
good efforts. In 1976, when the question of Palestine was
before the Council, the United States exercised the right of
veto in order to frustrate the adoption of a constructive
draft resolution [s/I194aJ calling for a reaffirmation of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and for measures to ensure the sovereignty and independence of all the
States in the area and the right of peoples to live in peace
within secure and internationally recognized borders. As is
crystal clear from the draft resolution, the American veto
was directed solely against the inalienable national rights
of the Palestinian people, because the other points in the
draft resolution were no different from the framework of
resolution 242 (1967), which is the only resolution the
United States insists should be implemented out of all the
United Nations resolutions on the question of Palestine
and the situation in the Middle East. As its representative
told the General Assembly in 1978; the United States had
had to recognize that resolution 242 (1967) did not deal
with the political dimension of the Palestinian question.

68. Israel’s occupation of the West Bank.and the Gaza
Strip, which are Palestinian territories, took place more
than 18 years ago, and since then it has appropriated our
territories and established settlements, thus flouting the
resolutions of the Security .Council. It has expelled our
peopl!, detaining thousands of them in prisons and detentidn camps. It has expelled civic leaders and tried to assassinate some of them, closed schools and universities,
desecrated houses of worship and enacted oppressive laws
and legislation, turning our country into a huge concentration camp. Could that policy and these practices constitute
evidence of a desire for peace?

63. Furthermore, when the PLO, in a joint effort with
our brothers in Jordan, participated in advancing the.
march for peace, the United States regressed and even
refused a meeting with a joint Palestinian-Jordanian
delegation, putting forward conditions that can never be
accepted, since they are detrimental to a matter that is
uncontroversial-that
the PLO is the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people. The right to selfdetermination of our Palestinian people is a sacred right
that can never be disregarded or compromised.

69. Tragically, through. this policy and these practices,
Israel brings destruction and suffering not only on the
Palestinians but also on the Jews themselves. Israel has
become a hotbed of racism and extremism. Its expansionist and aggressive policy has brought economic destruction
upon Israel itself, as well as moral and ethical bankruptcy,
thus showing its disregard of the tenets of the Jewish religion and of the victims who suffered at thz hands of the
Nazis, from whom Israel has inherited all its systeins,
ideals and practices.
1 ,.
“.

64. When the Israeli representative speaks of peace an;
when the United States expresses its desire to advance the
peace process in the Middle East, time and again events
prove that Israel and the United States are the ones that
obstruct the achievement of the desired peace in the area.
Events and facts have proved that the PLO has made
sincere and constructive efforts in that respect. Ail those
efforts have met only further denial of our rights, more
suppression, terrorism, murder and displacement of our
people. That simply means that what Israel and the United
States wish to impose on us is capitulation, not peaceand that we shall never ‘accept.

70. Indeed it seems that Israel’s arrogance of power, in
which it can indulge’ thanks to the support it receives from’
the United States, prevents-it from seeing the facts clearly
and makes it cynical about the rights of our peopleand the
international community. It has never put forward a single
peace initiative; it has never accepted a single peace initiative. Qn the contrary, it has always been bent on aborting
and impeding such initiatives. While .our Palestinian
people, under the leadership of the PLO, .confronts the
most extreme conditions of occupation, displacement and
aggression and faces the Israeli war machine and its inconceivably repressive, terrorist practices, it has never given up
its peaceful goal: a just and lasting peace that would guarantee the inalienable rights of our people as recognized by
the United Nations, including its right to return, to selfdetermination and to establish its independent State on its
national territory.

65. In its resolution 181 (II) of 29 November 1947, the
General Assembly accepted the establishment of an Arab
state in Palestine side by side with a Jewish State. It
requested the Security Council to make efforts to implement that resolution, but, most unfortunately, the Council
at that time did not shoulder its responsibilities. On the
contrary, it recommended that Israel be accepted as a
Member State of the United Nations, without taking
account of the results.
66. Since then; until this very day, Israel has systematically tried to obliterate the Palestinian people and to efface
its national identity, usurping its territory and homeland,

71. In the light of that noble goal, the PLO has welcomed all constructive international efforts and initiatives
7

designed to bring peace to the area. We welcomed the joint
Vance-Gromyko statement of 1 October 1977 calling for
the resumption of the meetings of the Peace Conference on
the Middle East at Geneva, which took into account the
legitimate rights of the Palestinians.

accordance with its whims and for the situation to be exacerbated and create negative consequences for the prospects
of peace there as well as international peace and security.
The peoples of the world have become impatient with the
Israeli position. Our people and our nation too have
become impatient, but we are not discouraged from confronting the Israeli occupation that weighs so heavily on us
or from resisting that occupation by all legitimate means.

72. Our Palestinian National Council also welcomed the
Soviet initiative put forward by President Brezhnev. In
1982, we made a substantial contribution to the forging of
the Arab peace plan adopted by the Twelfth Arab Summit
Conference, held at Fez [see S/1.55X? annex], which met
with wide acceptance in the international community. At
the last two sessions of our Palestinian National Councilthat is the sixteenth and seventeenth sessions, held in Algeria and at Amman respectively-the Arab peace plan was
also adopted. In 1983 the United Nations organized an
international conference-the International Conference on
the Question of Palestine, which was held at Geneva from
29 August to 7 September-at
which numerous resolutions were adopted, and these were later endorsed by the
General Assembly. The PLO accepted those resolutions,
foremost among which was that known as the Geneva
Declaration on Palestine,2 which contains guidelines and
practical measures that we believe it would be appropriate
to restate here, because in our view they still represent a
valid foundation for the establishment of peace in our
area. Paragraphs 5 and 6 of the Geneva Declaration read
as follows:

‘75. Allowing this situation to continue, maintaining the
status quo, can only worsen that situation and make it more
complex. The despair about the achievement of a just and
comprehensive solution will lead to extremism. And the
price of extremism is high, and sometimes even tragic. It is
paid by the peoples of the world.
76. It is high time that responsibilities were shouldered
by everyone,-kspecially the S&.uity Council, which has the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. It is high time that everyone realized that
all attempts to circumvent the exercise by the Palestinian
people of their inalienable rights, to deny them those
rights-including
the attempt to ignore the PLO, which the
Palestinian people, out of a deep awareness of the situation
and out of their faith, have accepted as their sole legitimate
representative-will
never lead to the desired peace.
77. We therefore call on the Council to bear in mind
General Assembly resolution 38/58, to which I have
already referred, to clear the way for the Secretary-General
to continue his efforts and prepare the convocation of an
international conference, within the framework of the
United Nations and on the basis of all the United Nations
resolutions concerning the Palestinian question. That is the
right path to take towards the achievement of a just and
comprehensive peace in our region.

“In order to give effect to these guidelines, the Conference considers it essential that an international peace
conference on the Middle East be convened on the basis
of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, with
the aim of achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict, an essential element of which would be the establishment of an independent Palestinian State in Palestine. This peace
conference should be convened under the auspices of
the United Nations, with the participation of all parties
to the Arab-Israeli conflict, including the Palestine Liberation Organization, as well as the United States of
America, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and
other concerned States, on an equal. footing. In this
context the Security Council has a primary responsibility to create appropriate institutional arrangements on
the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions in
order to guarantee and to carry out the accords of the
international peace conference.

78. I wish to quote now from the statement made by
Brother Yasser Arafat, the Chairman of the Executive
Committee of the PLO, to the General Assembly in 1974.
He appealed to the Member States to continue their quest
for peace, and he said:
“Today I have come bearing an olive branch in one
hand and a rifle in the other hand. Do not let the olive
branch fall from my hand.“’
79. Those words are still vibrant with truth and reality.
The events and the facts prove that war has started in
Palestine and that there can be no peace without the Palestinian people.

“The International Conference on the Question of
Palestine emphasizes the importance of the time factor
in achieving a just solution to the problem of Palestine.
The Conference is convinced that partial solutions are
inadequate and delays in seeking a comprehensive solu-tion do not eliminate tensions in the region.*’

80. Mr. KHALIL
(Egypt)
(interpretation from Arabic):
-__
The Council is meeting today, pursuant to a decision taken
by the Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned
Countries, held in Angola from 4 to 7 September 1985, to
consider “The Middle East problem including the Pales.
tinian question”-as
the agenda item is worded.

73. The Conference also adopted the Programme of
Action for the Achievement of Palestinian Rights3
intended to allow the Palestinian people to exercise their
inalienable rights.

81. We believe that that decision responded to a general
feeling-whether on the regional level, in the Middle East,
or at the international level-that a new and strong impe-

74. Time is of the essence. We must not allow conditions
in the territory that make it possible for Israel to act in
8

tus must be given to the efforts to achieve a settlement to
the Middle East problem including the Palestinian question, an impetus that would reaffirm confidence in the
peace efforts and put an end to the present estialation of
tension in the region.

rity, foremost among which is Security Council resolution 242 (1967), demand a more reasonable response.
Resolution 242 (1967) should be implemented and all its
provisions should be complied with. The commitment
to the resolution as a whole should be followed up, in
conformity with the principle of the inadmissibility of
the conquest of territories by force, with a view to
returning to their owners all the occupied Arab territories in the West Bank, including Jerusalem, Gaza and
the Syrian Golan Heights.” [2608th meeting, para. 220.1

82. This call made by the Foreign Ministers of the nonaligned countries for the Council to consider once again
the situation in the Middle East and the Palestinian question is a reaffirmation of confidence in the United Nations,
during the fortieth anniversary of its founding, and in the
primary role of the Security Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security. What we all expect from
the Council, in the light of what I have just said, is that it
discharge its primary function and set the Palestinian
question-the
core of the conflict in the Middle East-on
the right path that will lead to the achievement of a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of that conflict.

87. Such statements have not been confined to members
of the Security Council. Statements made by representatives of all Member States who have spoken in the general
debate in the General Assembly have pointed to the need
for speedy and responsible steps to be taken in order to
reach a just and comprehensive settlement of the conflict
in the Middle East. Yet, as we celebrate the fortieth anniversary of the signing of the Charter of the United Nations,
the question of Palestine is, unfortunately, almost as old
without having found any solution, and today we are witnessing a serious escalation of violence in the region.

83. The Secretary-General’s
report (A/40/1)
on the
work of the Organization in 1985’ contains a general
assessment of the activities and achievement of the United
Nations during the past 40 years.

88. Israel’s practices against the Palestinians, whether on
the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and in Jerusalem or against
those who have been forced out of their homeland because
of Israel’s occupation of their territories, will not lead to a
solution of the Middle East conflict.

84. With regard to the work
of the Council, the
Secretary-General
in his report suggested that it should
make a deliberate and concerted effort to solve one or two
of the major problems before it by making fuller use of the
measures available to it under the Charter.

89. Over the past four weeks the Council has heard a
great deal about such practices, and we need not dwell
upon them again today, confident as we are that all
members are fully aware of them and of the danger they
pose to the peace process.

85. In their statements at the commemorative meeting of
the Security Council, held on 26 September 1985, a
number of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of States
members of the Council made specific mention of that
recommendation and spoke of the need to reach a settlement of the situation in the Middle East. They pointed out
the fact that the resolutions adopted by the Council in that
connection formed ‘the legal and political basis for the
establishment of peace, in particular resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973), which called for the convening of an international conference for the settlement of disputes in the
region.
86. At that meeting, the Minister
Egypt stated:

90. The escalation of the situation will not weaken
*Egypt’s resolve to continue to make serious efforts
towards peace on the basis of our belief that the future
peace and stability of the region is conditioned upon overcoming difficulties, however numerous or severe, as well as
upon seizing all opportunities that present themselves.
91. Peace based upon justice in the Middle East is an
urgent need in the light of the dangers that beset the
region. That need has found its clearest expression in the
decisive step taken by King Hussein and Yasser Arafat, in
their agreement opening the way towards moving jointly
along the path to peace and to establishing rights within
the framework
of international legitimacy. That step was
taken in light of an awareness of present-day historical
realities. In its content and its implications, their agreement represents not only a courageous step in the right
direction but a!so a response to the enormous challenges
that are inherent in the question of Palestine at this important juncture. It is not only an attempt to break the stalemate but also a practical and positive dev&Pment
that
can serve the cause of peace in all its aspects. In this connection the role of the United Nations must continue to be
one of providing support for the positions and initiatives
adopted by those two Arab parties and of encouraging any
dialogue or negotiation aimed at reaching a just and lasting settlement to the conflict.

for Foreign Affairs of

“Dozens of resolutions adouted bv the Council. reoresenting a basis of international unanimity which’should
be respected and implemented, still await effective
mechanisms through which to do this. For example, the
Council’s resolutions on the Middle East and the Palestinian question still lack the practical and executive
mandatory measures necessary in the absence of a
serious response by the parties concerned. Furthermore,
resolutions enabling the Palestinian people to exercise
its right to return and to self-determination
remain
unimplemented because of the absence or paralysis of
the political will on the part of some parties, and this is
unacceptable. Resolutions on the establishment of a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in accordance
with international law and respect for the right of the
peoples and States of the region to existence and secu9

92. The experience gained over the long years the conflict
has gone on, with the concommitant threat or use of force,
makes it abundantly clear that the policy of occupation
and domination has not achieved either the peace or the
security that its advocates have sought. Rather, experience
has made it clear that the restoration of the occupied Arab
territories in return for the establishment of peace, safety
and good-neighbourliness
is the key to any real security
and coexistence, which must be based on mutual consent.
Security cannot be established by force of arms. The future
will also prove the validity of the proposition that recognition of the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian
people and of their right to self-determination is the guarantee for the consolidation and spread of peace in the area.

98. We therefore hope and expect that the Council,
responsible as it is for the maintenance of international
peace and security, will take positions that will allow such
a settlement to take place and will continue to push for the
implementation of all its pertinent resolutions.
99. Despite the fact that the item on our agenda today is
the Middle East problem including the Palestinian question, there is nevertheless another matter, which has of
course been dealt with by those speakers who have preceded me. The President was kind enough to point at the
beginning of his statement on behalf of the United States
to the statement adopted by the Council yesterday concerning the incident of the hijacked Italian vessel. I should
therefore like to point out here, in turn, that Egypt, since it
first knew of this incident-which
took place outside of its
territorial waters, on the high seas-proceeding
from its
firm principle to condemn acts of violence by whomsoever
committed, condemned that incident. I have before me the
statement issued on that day by the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs. I should merely like to point out that in its last
paragraph, the statement notes that Egypt affirms that the
establishment of a just and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East is the best guarantee of a halt to acts of violence and counter-violence and the only path that can lead
to stability in the region and the maintenance of regional
security.

93. The Arab parties have made it unequivocally clear
that under the joint Palestinian/Jordanian
programme of
action they wish to move to serious negotiations with the
other party to the conflict within an appropriate international framework.
Egypt believes it is high time for a new
initiative to be taken that will advance efforts to reach a
settlement step by step. Conscious of its responsibilities in
our region, Egypt is fully prepared to play its part in that
regard. In so doing, we are prepared to work with the
parties concerned in reaching the settlement desired by all.
It remains for the Israeli side to show a real and serious
response in this regard.
94. In our view, the peace we are striving to establish,
and for which we have taken many initiatives over the
years, requires the following: first, the affirmation of the
right of all peoples and States in the region to live in peace
and security within indisputable borders and free from any
form of outside interference in their internal affairs;
secondly, recognition of the legitimate national rights of
the Palestinian people, including their right to selfdetermination in a way acceptable to them; thirdly, Israel’s
withdrawal
from all occupied Arab territories, including
the West Bank, the Gaza Strip, the Syrian Golan Heights
and, first and foremost, the Holy City of Jerusalem;
fourthly, the establishment of normal relations between all
the parties to the conflict in the Middle East on the basis of
equality and good-neighbourliness.

100. As I have said, that sad incident took place outside
Egyptian territorial waters, on the high seas, on a vessel
that is not Egyptian but was flying the flag of a country
friendly to Egypt and to the Palestinians themselves.
Egypt, through humanitarian motives, so as to save the
lives of the innocent, carried out a difficult task under
difticult circumstances. That task was to convey messages
between the parties concerned. Egypt undertook that task
without any hesitation. We were happy, as was everyone
else, when the crisis was resolved and the hijackers on the
vessel itself told us that all the passengers on the vessel
were safe and sound. The developments which have been
dealt with by the news media followed. Upon the return of
the specialists on the vessel and their statement that one of
the passengers had disappeared in a manner indicating
that a crime had been committed, we condemned that act.
We still condemn it, and we are sorry, as is everyone else,
that the happiness caused by having saved all the passengers was then tinged by sorrow for an innocent victim.
Egypt carried out its humanitarian role believing that its
conduct and motives were very clear.

95. This international Organization has long been and
continues to be the forum witnessing the interactions taking place in this historic crisis. It has considered its complications and registered its victims. It has attempted as much
as possible, through its mediation efforts, its envoys, its
observers and the peace-keeping troops of its Member
States, to contain the repercussions of that crisis and deal
with its implications.

llie meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

96. It is high time, as we begin the fifth decade in the life
of our Organization, that we start with real collective will
to weave the fabric of peace before it is torn apart, so as to
establish stability and safety for the peoples of the region.

NOTES
’ United Nations,
Treary Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
* United Nations publication,
Sales No. E. 83. I. 21, chap. I, sect. A.
3 Ibid., sect. B.
4 Official
Records of the General Assembly,
Twenty-ninth
Session,
Plenary Meetings,
2282nd meeting,
para. 82.
5 Ibid., Fortieth
Session, Supplement
No. I (A/40/1).

97. The peace we desire and are attempting to achieve is
a peace that maintains right and established justice and
opens the way towards dignity for a genuine Arab people
which deserves to live in dignity and honour like the rest of
the peoples on earth-that
is, the people of Palestine.
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00300

90-61439-March

199%-1,925
