27

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

---------------------------------- -------------the urgent problems {lf international trade and develop3. Urges Governments that have pledged. contribument, in particular those of developing countries,
tions of commodities or services for the penod 19661968 to make every possible effort to carry over ~nd
1. Takes note u.rith satisfaction of the report of the
make available for the period 1969-1970 any portion
Trade and Development Board for the period from
of such pledges that may remain unused at the end
25 September 1<J()(J to 9 September 1967 and, in p:irof 1968, and to indicate their readiness to effect such
ticular, of the agree11,<:nt re<lched at the fifth session
carry-over when announcing pledges at the 1968 pledgof the Board on the various aspects of the preparatory
ing conference;
work for the second session of the United Nations
4. Decides that the following pledging conference,
Cnnfrrence on Tracie and Development;
subject to the review provided for in General Assembly
2. Invites the Governments of the States members
resolution 2095 (XX), should be convened, at the
of the Conference to give serious consideration, in their
latest, early in 1970, at which time Governments would
preparations for the second session of the Conference,
be invited to pledge contributions for I 971 and 1972,
to
the Charter of .\lgiers, in particular to part two
with a view to reaching whatever target may be recomentitled "Programme oi action'', bearing in mind that
mended by the General Assembly _an1 the Confe,re_ncr
special measures are to be worked out for the less
of the Food and Agriculture Orga111zat10n of the lJmted
developed of the developing countries, as suggested in
Nations.
that Charter;
1623rd plenary meeting,
3. I )rau.•s the attention of the Conference to the state8 December 1967.
ment made bv the President of the Trade and Development Board at its fifth session, 20 which was com2296 (XXII). Second session of the United Nations
mended by the spokesmen for the groups of member
Conference on Trade and Development
States as a valuable guidt' to the work of the ConferThe General Assembly,
ence, in particular the following part:
Recalling its resolutions 2085 (XX) of 20 December
"( Jur discussions have above all enabled us to
1965 on the United Nations Conference on Trade and
clarify the objectives of the Conference. These have
Development, 2206 (XXI) of 17 December 1966 on
been ·defined with certain shades of meaning. I think,
the second session of the Conference and 2209 (XXI)
however, that a consensus has emerged on three basic
of 17 December 1966 on the implementation of the
objectives that can be stated thus:
recommendations made by the Conference at its first
" (a) To re-e\·aluate the economic situation and
session,
its irnplications for the implementation of the recomTaking note of Economic and Social Council resomendations of the first session of the United Nations
lutions 1266 (XLIII) of 3 August 1967 and 1282
Conference on Trade and Development;
(XLIII) of 1 November 1967,
" ( b) To achieve, through appropriate forms of
Having considered the annual report of the Trade
negotiation, specific results that ensure real progress
and Development Board for the period from 25 Sepin international co-operation for development;
tember 1966 to 9 September 1967, 18
" ( r) To explore and investigate matters requiring
Noting with great interest the Charter of Algiers
more th~;ough study before agreements can be
adopted by the ministerial mee~ing of t~e group of
envisaged ;
seventy-seven developing countries, submitted to the
4.
N.enews its appeal to the Governments of the
19
General Assembly at its twenty-second session, in
States
1m:mbers of the Conference to make the maxiparticular part two entitled "Programme of action",
mum efforts. both in their preparations for the second
regarded by the developing countries as the most urgent
session and during the deliberations of the Conference,
and immediate step to be taken by the Conference,
to ensure its success with a view to the fulfilment of its
Expressing serious concern at the lack of progress
basic objectives;
in solving, in the light of the Final Act adopted by
5. Decides to consider at its twenty-third session,
the Conference at its first session, substantive problems
as a matter of high priority, the results of the second
of international trade and development with which the
session of the Conference.
Conference was faced and at the adverse economic
1626th plenary meeting,
trends, which have contributed to the continuing unsatis12 December 1967.
factory economic situation of the developing countries.
Recognizing the urgent need for improvi_ng the eco-nomic situation of the developing countne~ through
2297 (XXII). International Trade Centre
the adoption of appropriate measures on the part of
The General Assembly,
both developed and developing c~untries,_ thus contributing to the elaboration of an mternat1onal. develConscious of the particular needs of the developing
opment strategy,
countries for international assistance in promoting their
Recognising further the need for the Conference at
exports,
its second session to concentrate on fundamental and
Considering that several recommendations of the
specific subjects with a view to achieving practical and
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
concrete results by means of negotiation aimed at securat its first session call for international action to help
ing the greatest measure of agreement in order to solve
the developing countries in marketing and promoting
their exports, in particular the recommendations con18 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/6714).
•
19 /bid., Twenty-second Session, Annexes, agenda item 38,
document A/C.2/237.

20 !/>id.,

para. 31

Twenty-second Session, Supplement N~. 14 (K/67T4)
•
