3. That the permanent representative, in case
of temporary absence, shall notify the SecretaryGeneral of the name of the member of the missi~n. who will perform the duties of head of the

3. Que le representant permanent, en cas
d'absence temporaire, notifie au Secretaire general le nom du membre de la mission qui exercera
les fonction~ de chef de la mission;

IlllSSlOn;

4. That Member States desiring their permanent representatives to represent them on one
or more of the organs of the United Nations
should specify the organs in the credentials
transmitted to the Secretary-General,
· lmtruets the Secretary-General to submit, at
each regular session of the General Assembly, a
report on the credentials of the permanent
representatives accredited to the United Nations.

Hundred and .~i.1:t1-ninth plenary meetin1r
,~ Decembe1· 194H.

ft. Que les Membres desirant ~tre representes
aupres d'un ou de plusieurs organes des Natio~s
Unies par leurs representants permanents, spec1fient ces organes dans les pouvoirs communiques au Secretaire general,
Charge le Secretaire general de presenter a
chaque session ordinaire de l' Assemblee generale un rapport sur les pouvoirs des representants perrnanents aupres de \'Organisation des
Nations Unies.
Cent-soi'.rante-neu1•ibne seance pleni"1lre,
fo 3 difcembre 1948.

B

B

The General Assembly,
lmtructs the Secretary-General to study all
questions which may arise from the institution
of permanent missions, including permanent
missions to the European Office of the United
Nations, and, if necessary, to report on this
subject to the next re~ular session of the General

Assembly.
Hundred and nxty-mnth plenary meeting,
3 December 1948.

L' Assemblee generale,
Charge le Secretaire general d'etuclier toutes
les questions quc l'institution des missions permanentes, y compris les missions permanentes
aupres de !'Office curopeen des Nations Unies,
pourrait poser et de faire, si necessaire, un rapport ace sujet a la prochaine session de l'Assemblee generale.

Cent-soixante-neuvieme seance pleniere,
le 3 decembre 19 4 8.

258 (III).

Reparation for mJuries
incurred in the service of the United Nations

258 (III). Reparation pour dommages

Whereas the series of tragic events which have
lately befallen agents of the United Nations

Connderant que la serie d'inciclcnts tragiques
affectant ces derniers temps des agents des
Nations Unies dans l'exercice de leurs fonctions
souleve, d'unc fai;on plus urgente que jamais, la
question des dispositions a prendre par les
Nations Unies pour assurer a l'avenir a leur
agents une protection maximum et la reparation
des dommages subis 1 ,

engaged in the performance of their duties raises,

with greater urgency than ever, the question of
the arrangements to be made by the United
Nations with a view to ensuring to its agents the
fullest measures of protection in the future and
ensuring that reparation be made for• the
injuries suffered, 1 and
Whereas it is highly desirable that the Secretary
General should be able to act, without question,
as efficaciously as possible with a view to obtaining any reparation due,

subis au i.ervice de }'Organisation
des Nationi. Unies

Connderant comme hautement souhaitable que
le Secretaire general puisse, sans conteste, agir
de la maniere la plus efficace en vue d' obtenir
toute reparation due,

The General Assembly

L 'Assemblee generate

Decides to submit the following legal questions
to the International Court of Justice for an
advisory opinion ,

Deci'de de demander a la Cour internationale
de Justice un avis consultatif sur les questions
juridiques suivantes :

tt I. In the event of an agent of the United
Nations in the performance of his duties suffering
injury in circumstances involving the responsibility of a State, has the United Nations, as an
Organnation, the capacity to bring an international claim against the responsible de jure or

« I. Au cas ou un agent des Nations Unies
subit, dans l' exercice de ses fonctions, un dommage dans des conditions de nature a engager
la responsabilite d'un Etat, !'Organisation des
Nations Unies a-t-elle qualite pour presenter
contre le Gouvernement de jure ou ~ facto

1 See

document A/674.

1

172

Voir le document A/67 4.

de /acto Government with a view to obtaining
the reparation due in respect of the damage
caused (a) to the United Nations, (b) to the
victim or to persons entitled through him?

responsahle une reclamation internationale en
vue d' obtenir la reparation des dommages
causes a) aux Nations Unies, b) a la victime OU a
ses ayants droit ?

« II. In the event of an affirmative reply on
point I (b), how is action by the United Nations
to he reconciled with such rights as may be
possessed by the State of which the victim is a
national? i,
Instructs the Secretary-General, after the Court
has given its opinion, to prepare proposals in
the light of that opinion, and to submit them
to. the General Assembly at its next regular
sess10n.

« II. En cas de reponse affirmative sur le
point I b), comment l'action de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies doit-elle se concilier avec les
droits que l'Etat dont la victime est ressortissante pourrait posseder?"
Charge le Secretaire general, lorsque la Cour
aura donne son avis, de preparer, a la lumiere
de cet avis, des propositions et de les presenter
a l'Assemblee generale lors de sa prochaine
session ordinaire.

Cent-8oixante-neuvieme seance pleniere.
le 3 decembre 1948.

Hundred and sixty-ninth plenary meeting,
3 D,cember 1948.

259 (III). Privileges and immunities

259 (III). Privileges et immunites de

of the United Nations

!'Organisation des Nations Unies

The General Assembly,
Having taken note of the Secretary-General's

L' A,semb!Je genbale,
Ayant pris connai,sance du rapport du Secretaire

report 1 on the steps taken with a view to the
entry into force and application of the agreements
concluded between the United Nations and the
United States of America regarding the headquarters of the United Nations, and on the state
of accessions to the Convention on the Privileges
and Immunities of the United Nations,
Coniidering that the agreements regarding the
headquarters of the United Nations are complementary to the Convention on the Privileges and
Immunities of the United Nations, since these
instruments taken together are intended to define
the status of the United Nations in the country
where these headquarters are located,
Coniidering also that a number of States
Members have not yet acceded to the Convention
on Privileges and Immunities,
Considering that, if the United Nations is to
achieve its purposes and perform its functions
effectively, it is essential that the States Members
should unanimously approve the provisions of
the said Convention,
Note, with satisfaction the steps taken with a
view to the entry into force and application of the
agreements concluded between the United Nations and the United States of America regarding
the headquarters of the United Nations, and
Invite, those States Members which have not
yet acceded to the Convention on the Privileges
and Immunities of the United Nations to deposit
their instruments of accession to the said Convention with the Secretary-General at the earliest
possible moment.

general 1 sur les mesures prises pour la mise en
vigueur et l'application des accords conclus entre
!'Organisation des Nations Unies et les 'Etats-Unis
d'Amerique relativement au siege de l'Organisation, de m~me que sur I' etat des adhesions a la
Convention sur les privileges et immunites des
Nations Unies,
Comiderant que les accords relatifs au siege de
!'Organisation ont un caractere complementaire
par rapport a la Convention sur les privileges
et im.J1lunites des Nations Unies, ces instruments
devant definir ensemble le statut de l'Organisation des Nations Unies dans le pays ou elle a son
siege,
Connderant par ailleurs qu'un certain nombre
d'Etats Membres n'ont pas encore adhere a la
Convention sur les privileges et immunites,
Comiderant que, pour que !'Organisation
puisse atteindre ses buts et exercer ses fonctions d'une maniere efficace, il est essentiel que
les Etats Membres approuvent unanimement
les dispositions de ladite Convention,
Prend acte avec satisfaction des mesures prises
pour la mise en vigueur et I'application des accords
conclus entre !'Organisation des Nations Unies
et les Etats-Unis d'Amerique relativement au
siege de l'Organisation,
Invite ceux des Etats Membres qui n'ont pas
adhere jusqu'ici a la Convention sur les privileges et immunites des Nations Unies a deposer
aupres du Secretaire general, le plus tt,t possible, !'instrument relati! a leur adhesion a cette
Convention.

Hundred and 181Jfflty-filth pumary meeting,
8 Deumber 1948.

Cent-aoixant6-qui~ ,Ja"" pUnim,
"8 tUcemJm 1948.

1 See document A/626.

1 Voir le document A/626.

173
