Resolutions adopted on the reporte of the Fourth Committee

29

1. Reiterates its resolutions 65 (I) of 14 December
1946, 141 (II) of 1 November 1947, 227 (III) of 26
November 1948, 337 (IV) of 6 December 1949, 449
B (V) of 13 December 1950, 570 B (VI) of 19
January 1952, 749 B (VIII) of 28 November 1953,
852 (IX) of 23 November 1954 and 940 (X) of 3
December 1955, to the effect that the Territory of
South West Africa be placed under the International
Trusteeship System;
2. Reasserts that the normal way of modifying the
international status of the Territory would be to place
it under the International Trusteeship System by means
of a trusteeship agreement in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XII of the Charter of the United
Nations.
661 st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.

ants be cancelled on the ground that they had improperl y submitted to the United Nations a petition
expressing views contrary to those held by the original
inhabitants of the Rehoboth Community,
1. Decides to call the attention of the petition to
its resolution 935 (X) of 3 December 1955;
2. Further decides to inform the petitioner that ail
inhabitants of the Mandated Territory, including the
so-called immigrant members of the Rehoboth Community, have the right to submit petitions to the
United Nations.
661st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.

1056 (XI). Hearings of petitioners on conditions
in the Territory of South West Africa

The General Assembly,
Having accepted the advisory opinion15 of 11 July
1950 of the International Court of Justice on the question of South West Africa,
Having authorized the Committee on South West
Africa, by resolution 749 A (VIII) of 28 November
1953, to examine petitions in accordance with the
Mandates procedure of the League of Nations,
H aving received a report from the Committee on
South West Africa dealing with a petition dated 14
January 1956 from the Ukuanyama Tribal Congress,
Ovamboland, 17
N oting that the petitioners allege that, while the
Reverend T. H. Hamtumbangela was petitioning on
their behalf to the United Nations, the Minister of
Native Affairs of the Union of South Africa ordered
his removal from Ovamboland, and that headmen and
sub-headmen who supported the Reverend Hamtumbangela were to be deposed,
N oting that the petitioners request that the case
of the Reverend Hamtumbangela be brought before the
International Court of Justice for its compulsory jurisdiction,
N oting further that the petitioners raise questions
on which the General Assembly, in resolution 937 (X)
of 3 December 1955 concerning a petition and a related
communication from the Reverend Hamtumbangela,
has already taken action,
l. Decides to inform the petitioners that it has at
present insufficient information upon which to take
any action with respect to their complaints concerning
the alleged order for the removal of the Reverend T.
H. Hamtumbangela from Ovamboland and the deposing of headmen and sub-headmen who supported him;
2. Decides to transmit to the petitioners resolution
937 (X) of 3 December 1955, and the reports of the
Committee on South West Africa18 submitted to the
General Assembly at its tenth and eleventh sessions
containing the observations and recommendations of
the Committee regarding other questions raised by the
petitioners ;
3. Decides to draw the attention of the petitioners,
in particular, to the observations and recommendations

The General Assembly,
Having granted hearings to Mr. Mburumba Kerina
Getzen, a petitioner from South West Africa, and the
Reverend Michael Scott, a petitioner on behalf of
African inhabitants of South West Africa,
1. T akes note of the statements of the petitioners
on behalf of African inhabitants of the Territory of
South West Africa under the administration of the
Union of South Africa;
2. Decides to transmit to the Committee on South
West Africa the statements of the petitioners for study
and consideration.
661st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.
1057 (XI). Petition and communications from
Mr. Jacobus Beukes concerning the Territory of South West Africa

The General Assembly,
Having accepted the advisory opinion15 of 11 July
1950 of the International Court of Justice on the question of South West Africa,
Having authorized the Committee on South West
Africa, by resol ution 749 A (VIII) of 28 N ovember
1953, to examine petitioners in accordance with the
Mandates procedure of the League of Nations,
H aving received a report from the Committee on
South West Africa dealing with a petition and related communications dated 4 July, 1 August and 5
November 1955 from Mr. Jacobus Beukes, Burger
Secretary of the Rehoboth Community of South West
Africa,16
N oting that the petitioner rai ses questions on which
the General Assembly has already taken action in resolution 935 (X) of 3 December 1955,
N oting that the petitioner raises a further question
concerning the right of petition to the United Nations
by the original citizens of the Rehoboth Community
and by the "immigrant citizens" of that Community,
and demands that the "citizenship" rights granted by
the Rehoboth Community to certain immigrant inhabit-

1058 (XI). Petition from Ukuanyama Tribal
Congress concerning the Territory of South
West Africa

Ibid., chapter V, section B, and annex IX.
Ibid., Tenth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/2913), and
ibid., Eleventh Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/3151 and
Corr.l ).
11

11

Official 1Records of the General Assembly, Elroenth Session,
Supplement No. 12 (A/3151 and Corr.l), chapter V, section
B, and annex VI.

lB

30

General Aalelllb17-Eleventh Seaion

of the Committee on South West Africa concerning
the tt'ansfer of "Native" administration to the Minister
of Native Affairs of the Union of South Africa and
concerning the rights and freedoms of the inhabitants
of the Territory of South West Africa.
661st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.

1059 (XI). Solution of the question of South
West Africa
The General Assembly,
Considering that, of the Territories that were under
class B and class C Mandate of the League of Nations
at the time of the League's demise, the Territory of
South West Africa remains the only one that has not
been placed under the International Trusteeship System established by the Charter of the United Nations,
Considering it in the best interest of all parties concerned that a satisfactory solution of the question of
South West Africa should be reached as soon as
possible,
Having accepted, by its resolution 449 A (V) of 13
December 1950, the advisory opinionu of 11 July 1950
of the International Court of Justice on the question
of South West Africa,
B earing in mind the various resolutions of the General Assembly concerning the Territory of South West
Africa and the desire expressed by Member States that
ail possible efforts be made to bring this problem to a
satisfactory conclusion in the spirit of harmony that
prevails in the Udted Nations,
Expressing the hope that the Government of the
Union of South Africa will offer to the United Nations
its full co-operation,
1. Draws the attention of the Secretary-General to
the discussions in the Fourth Committee and in the
General Assembly in plenary meeting on the question
of South West Africa;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to explore ways
and means of solving satisfactorily the question of
South West Africa and to take whatever steps he shall
deem necessary with a view to finding such a solution
in line with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report on this
matter to the General Assembly at his earliest convenience.
661st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.

1060 (XI). Study of legal action to ensure the
fulfi.lment of the obligations aNumed by
the Mandatory Power under the Mandate
for South West Afr:ea
The General Assembly,
H aving regard to the provisions of the Mandate for
South West Africa, the Covenant of the League of
Nations, the Charter of the United Nations and the
resolutions of the General Assembly in regard to South
West Africa,
N oting that its resolutions endorsing and accepting
the advisory opinion 15 of 11 July 1950 of the International Court of Justice and urging the Union of

South Africa to place the Territory of South West
Africa under trusteeship have been of no avail,
1. Requests the Committee on South West Africa
to study the following question :
"What legal action is open to the organs of the
United Nations, or to the Members of the United
Nations, or to the former Members of the League of
Nations, acting either individually or jointly, to ensure that the Union of South Africa fulfils the obligations assumed by it under the Mandate, pending the
placing of the Territory of South West Africa under
the International Trusteeeship System?";
2. Further requests the Committee on South West
Africa to submit to the General Assembly at its twelfth
session a special report containing conclusions and
recommendations on the question.
661st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.

1061 (XI). Composition of the Committee on
South West Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by its resolution 749 A (VIII) of
28 November 1953, it established, until such time as
an agreement is reached between the United Nations
and the Union of South Africa concerning the question
of South West Africa, a Committee on South West
Africa consisting of seven Members.
Considering that the continuing absence of such an
agreement requires that the Committee on South West
Africa should remain in existence for the purposes set
forth in resolution 749 A (VIII),
Decides that:
(a) The composition of the Committee on South
West Africa shall be increased to nine members appointed by the General Assembly on the recommendation of the Fourth Committee;
( b) One-third of the membership of the Committee
shall be renewed by the same procedure annually.
661st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.

*

*

*

At ils 661st ;lenary meeting on 26 Febrvary 1957, the Gmeral Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fourth Committee, appointed Ethio;ia and Finland as additional members
of the Committee on South West Afnca. The Commiltee i.s
theref ore com;osed as follows: BRAZ IL, ETHIOPIA, FINLAND,
MEXICO, PAKISTAN, SYRIA,
AMERICA and URUGUAY.

THAILAND,

UNITED

1062 (XI). Travel documents of
from Trust Territories

STATE$

OF

petitionen

The General Assembly,
Having received and granted several requests for
hearings from petitioners in the Trust Territories of
the Cameroons under British administration and the
Cameroons under French administration,111
H aving also received a memor.andum by the Secretary-General20 on this question,
,. Ibid., Eleventh Sessic,n, Annexes, agenda item 13, document A/C.4/330 and Add.l to 26.
., Ibid., document A/C.4/333.
