S/PV.8512

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8512th meeting

Monday, 15 April 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Heusgen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Ntsoane
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-10994 (E)
*1910994*

S/PV.8512

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

That, I hope, explains my persistence in planning,
hoping and pushing for a start of consultations leading
to that political solution.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen; Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator; Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict; and Ms. Muna Luqman,
Chairperson of Food for Humanity.
Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock are joining the
meeting via video-teleconference from Amman and
London, respectively.
Before I start the meeting, it is my pleasure, in my
capacity as the Permanent Representative of Germany,
to welcome the Chair of the Foreign Affairs Committee
of the Bundestag, the German Parliament, Mr. Norbert
Röttgen. In Germany, the legislative branch watches
the executive branch very carefully. I thank you, Sir,
for coming.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

15/04/2019

its

First, I will address the situation in Al-Hudaydah.
Lieutenant General Michael Lollesgaard has been
working without stop to secure agreement between
the parties on the operational plans for redeployments
in Al-Hudaydah, in line with what was agreed in
December in Sweden. I hope we will hear more of that
in a while.
It has been, as we all know, a long and difficult
process. I am happy to announce to you, Mr. President,
that both parties have now accepted the detailed
redeployment plan prepared by Lieutenant General
Lollesgaard for phase 1 of the redeployments in
Al-Hudaydah. I am grateful, as I am sure we all are, to
both parties and to Lieutenant General Lollesgaard for
the constructive engagement that has allowed us finally
to reach this point. We will now move with all speed
towards resolving the final outstanding issues related
to the operational plans for phase 2, redeployments
and the status of local security forces, which is to be
introduced in the coming days.
President Hadi Mansour has consistently
approached this, as I have said to the Council recently,
with the practicality of a former military man. As he
has also told me on more than one occasion, he wants
to see those redeployments happen and the city and
ports of Al-Hudaydah, Ras Isa and Saleef returned to
some kind of peace for its inhabitants. I am grateful to
President Hadi for his patience and commitment.

Mr. Griffiths: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council. It has been
almost exactly a year since I first had such a chance (see
S/PV.8235). I said then, back in April of last year, that a
political solution was available to resolve the conflict in
Yemen, but I added that at any time war could take the
chance of peace off the table. Both those propositions
hold as true today as they did a year ago.

I was in Sana’a a week ago exactly, where
Lieutenant General Michael Lollesgaard and I met
with Abdulmalik Al-Houthi, the leader of Ansar Allah.
We were able to hear again his reconfirmation in clear
terms — in detail as well as in general terms — of his
support for the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah
agreement. Of course, that was important in the leadup to the announcement that we have just heard today.
I was glad to hear it confirmed so directly and I am
grateful to him for the position he has taken on this and
other issues.

In addition, as I am sure Mark Lowcock will
describe, the plight of the people of Yemen has, if
anything, worsened during this period. The pursuit
of peace, which is the task to which I contribute, is
measured as much against the lives and livelihoods
daily lost across the various governorates of Yemen.

Let us be clear that when these redeployments
happen — and I hope it is “when”, not “if” — they will
be the first voluntary withdrawals of forces in this long
conflict. Making that happen is not an easy decision
for the parties to take and of course it is taking longer
than we had hoped, but the fact that it should happen

I give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.

2/26

19-10994

15/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

at all is extremely welcome. Al-Hudaydah is a test of
many things, the principal among which is leadership.
I like to hope that in the coming days we shall see the
people’s trust in that leadership vindicated in this test.
We should also not forget — and I am sure that
Mr. Lowcock will remind us — that since the ceasefire
came into force in the very early hours of 18 December
2018, levels of violence in Al-Hudaydah governorate,
while not adequately or sufficiently reduced, have
nonetheless fallen significantly. Civilian casualties are
down and there are reports that, as our colleague in
Sana’a Lise Grande often reminds us, those displaced
by the war have begun to return to their homes. Much
needs to be done to tighten and sustain the ceasefire,
but the positive developments that we have seen and I
hope will continue to see in Al-Hudaydah have already
shown what can be achieved through dialogue and
compromise. I hope that the parties recognize this and,
with the Council’s support, build on it.
Meanwhile, as I am again sure will be described by
Mr. Lowcock, the economic situation in Yemen remains
extremely fragile. Commercial ships face difficulties
accessing Al-Hudaydah and fuel prices are on the
rise. There have been some positive developments,
such as the Government of Yemen’s welcome decision
to start paying public sector salaries in Al-Hudaydah
and pensions throughout the country. I do not want to
trespass on Mr. Lowcock’s territory, but I mention this
because these are measures that cross the line between
the parties. Further action must be taken to reduce
prices and ensure the availability of basic commodities,
including fuel. I am grateful to be under the leadership
of Mark Lowcock and Lise Grande in these matters.
I need to say very clearly that I accept that we all need
to see tangible progress in Al-Hudaydah before moving
to focus on the political solution. I have actually said
that to the Council before. More importantly, perhaps,
than my saying it, the leadership of both parties have
said as much to me, including within the past 10 days.
Yes, we must see progress in Al-Hudaydah. Perhaps
today will be the first in that direction. We must see
progress in Al-Hudaydah — full stop.
But I would be derelict in my duty if we were not
also preparing the ground for political consultations, not
least because the war in Yemen, again as Mr. Lowcock
will tell us, shows no signs of abating. The tragedies
of war particularly pain us all when children are the
victims, as they have been, dramatically, of late. It

S/PV. 8512

should be so that this is a pain we all feel, but it is also
true that the larger battlefields should not be forgotten.
In Hajour, there have been some devastating battles
with all the human misery and civilian displacement
naturally attendant upon events of that kind. That
means that we must keep our focus, as the Council has
urged me to do before, on reaching a political solution,
and to do as fast as we can.
We all know the rough outlines of an agreement to
end the war, precisely in line with the three references
and the resolutions of the Council. None of us is
freelancing. We need to work with the parties on the
outlines of an eventual settlement in a way that fleshes
out the framework that I have discussed with members
of the Council before and that was on the table in those
days in Sweden in December last year. We need, in a
purposeful way, to seek their views on both the concepts
and the details. We need to do that now, in advance of
any formal return to process or political consultation.
That would prepare the ground for an eventual serious
consultation between the parties.
In preparing for that political road to peace, I make
it my job to meet with as wide a section of society
as possible. I was particularly lucky in that regard to
be invited to attend a recent meeting here in Amman
with more than 100 Yemeni women, organized by UNWomen. Many had travelled, courageously and with
great difficulty, to get here and make their contributions
to resolving the conflict. My pledge to them at that
meeting was that we would make sure in the months to
come that we would consult them and their networks on
all the different issues that will be debated between the
parties. As I will say before concluding these remarks,
there is no doubt that we can all do a lot better when it
comes to the inclusion of women and other sectors of
civil society in the political process.
I will also continue to meet with as many
representatives of the varied Yemeni political parties
as possible who can contribute their thinking. Doing
this will, of course, ensure that we benefit from their
experience. But it is more than that. These are the people
who will eventually return to their rightful positions in
running the politics and Government of Yemen once
the parties have agreed to resolve the conflict. If that is
to happen, those politicians and political class will need
to work together instead of competing with each other.
The engagement process that I have just been
describing builds on the rich past experience of

19-109943/26

S/PV.8512

The situation in the Middle East

negotiations, particularly the 100 days in Kuwait three
years ago, concerning which I doff my hat to Ambassador
Mansour. It is a process that, while led by the Office I
am privileged to be a part of, is not done only by my
Office. I have already mentioned the contribution of
UN-Women. I will have further discussions with our
own technical advisory group of women in Edinburgh
next week. Track-II organizations, where I have my
own background — including the Berghof Foundation,
IDEA, VMI and others — building on their own
extensive experience in Yemen over the years, are
active and valued partners in this endeavour and have
been centrally involved in the thinking and planning
that we go through in my Office when we begin to hope
that we may be able to engaged in the political process.
I am also grateful for the support and advice we
receive from the Peace Track Initiative and the Women’s
Solidarity Network, which represents a large number
of Yemeni women and women-led organizations. The
Council will hear shortly from Ms. Muna Luqman, one
of Yemen’s leading peace activists. I am sure she will
urge us to do better in our efforts to include women,
both in the formal delegations that come to rounds of
formal consultations and in the much more extensive
consultations that will, between sessions, help us to
refine the issues we put before the parties.
My primary responsibility in the next few months
will be to winnow down the differences between the
parties so that when they meet they can be asked to
answer precise questions about the nature of the
arrangements to end the war, in an equitable fashion
and in accordance with the resolutions of the Council. I
seek the support of the Council for this approach. Let us
together require those who can help us towards peace
be encouraged and the sceptics set aside while we work
to make our case.
I
cannot
conclude
without
reminding
everyone — and I am sure that Mr. Lowcock will do so
in a much more sufficient way — that Yemen bleeds.
Its people go hungry. Many of its children have not
seen the inside of a classroom. In many ways, it is one
of the world’s most tragic places. That is the spur that
encourages us to imagine, beyond Al-Hudaydah, that
we could see progress towards that solution, which
alone can bring back the hopes of Yemeni families and
the control of Yemen under its political class.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
4/26

15/04/2019

Mr. Lowcock: As Martin Griffiths just mentioned,
while the ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah has largely held, as
he also indicated we have seen a pronounced escalation
of violence in other parts of the country. In Hajjah,
just north of Al-Hudaydah, the conflict has intensified
in several areas. Fierce fighting in Kushar district
displaced up to 50,000 people in February and March,
and was marked by continuous reports of shelling and
air strikes causing scores of civilian casualties. In the
Bani Hassan area of Abs district, over the last two weeks
fighting has forced nearly 100,000 more people from
their homes. About half have fled to other areas in Abs,
which is an extremely poor and water-scarce district and
now hosts upwards of 300,000 displaced people. The
active front lines are now just a few kilometres from
Abs district’s main water source, which serves about
200,000 people. If fighting damages or cuts off that
facility, we could very quickly see a major catastrophe.
If fighting moves south to the Al-Hudaydah border,
up to 400,000 more people could be displaced. Fierce
fighting in Taiz in March among different factions in
a Government-controlled area resulted in numerous
casualties. Conflict has also intensified on established
front lines in Al-Dhale’e and along the northern
border in Sa’ada and Al-Jawf, displacing thousands of
more families.
On 26 March, an air strike in Sa’ada landed close
to a hospital supported by Save The Children, killing
eight civilians, including five children. On 2 April,
armed men broke into a hospital supported by Médecins
Sans Frontières in Aden, kidnapped a patient and killed
him outside the hospital. On 3 April, three women
were reportedly killed and two children injured by an
artillery shell that land near a school in Al-Hudaydah.
On 7 April, large explosions at a warehouse in Sana’a
killed 14 children attending school nearby. Sixteen more
were critically injured. Most of them were not even
9-years old. As the international community continues
to support the Stockholm Agreement, it is critical that
we not lose sight of escalating violence elsewhere. In
my briefing to the Council on 14 December 2018 (see
S/PV.8424), I called for a cessation of hostilities across
Yemen. I am reiterating that call today. All the men
with the guns and the bombs need to stop the violence.
We once again remind the parties that international
humanitarian law binds them in all locations and at
all times.
Humanitarian agencies are also confronting an
alarming resurgence in the cholera epidemic, which we
19-10994

15/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

had successfully rolled back last year. After two years
and more than 1.5 million suspected cases, cholera has
affected nearly every Yemeni family in some way. Two
weeks ago, Dr. Mohammed Abdul-Mughni, a highly
respected paediatrician treating cholera patients at a
public hospital in Sana’a, died of the disease himself. He
had just described the outbreak as “disastrous”, telling
journalists that, “We are working to the extremes of
our strength”.
So far in 2019, nearly 200,000 suspected cases of
cholera have been reported. That is almost three times
as many as in the same period last year. About a quarter
of cases are children under five. That spike has come
months before the usual increase during the main rainy
season in August. That means that, if not brought under
control, current trends could quickly result in mass
morbidity and death. Early rains are partly responsible,
but the major drivers remain forced displacement and
conflict-induced collapse of public infrastructure,
including the country’s water and sanitation systems,
and the public institutions that provide basic services.
We have seen the consequences of the destruction of
the health system elsewhere too. More than 3,300 cases
of diphtheria have been reported since 2018 — the first
outbreak in Yemen since 1982. Earlier this year, new
measles cases surged to nearly twice the levels reported
at the same time in 2018 — itself a record-breaking
year. As Mr. Griffiths just recalled, about 2 million
school-age children remain out of school, and some
2,000 schools are unusable because they have been
damaged, are hosting displaced people or have been
occupied by armed groups. Overshadowing everything
is the continuing and very real risk of famine. In the
past four years, millions of families in Yemen have
been reduced to paupers. They have little or no income,
even as the prices of basic commodities that they need
to survive increase relentlessly.
Humanitarian agencies are doing everything that
they can to save lives and protect people across the
country. Last year we reached an average of 8 million
people a month, making Yemen the world’s largest aid
operation. This year, we are doing more. The World
Food Programme has so far delivered emergency food
assistance to more than 9 million people every month.
It intends to increase that to 12 million people in the
coming months. Thousands of humanitarian personnel
are staffing approximately 1,500 cholera treatment
facilities in 147 districts across the country. Emergency
response teams are treating patients, distributing

S/PV. 8512

hygiene kits, chlorinating water sources, sponsoring
clean-up campaigns and educating the public. They are,
as Dr. Mughni said, working tirelessly.
Humanitarian agencies have kept millions
of people alive so far, but we still face two major
challenges. The first is access. We still encounter far
too many restrictions on humanitarian action. The Red
Sea Mills in Al-Hudaydah, about which we have talked
to the Council previously, are a compelling example.
The Mills contain enough grain to feed 3.7 million
people for a month, and they became inaccessible
in September 2018, as coalition forces advanced
into the city. Ever since then, we have faced serious
challenges in accessing the Mills, which Mr. Griffiths
and I both addressed in public statements in February
(see S/PV.8464). A United Nations team was able to
conduct a one-day visit — finally — on 26 February.
That mission allowed us to establish that most of the
grain could still be salvaged if it were immediately
fumigated. Efforts have repeatedly been made since
then to cross the front lines to bring in workers to do the
fumigation and start milling the grain — a process that
would take several weeks. We continue to work with all
the parties to find the safest, most efficient way to get
that food to millions of desperately hungry people who
need it as soon as possible.
The litany of other problems involving access
that we have reported to the Council before continue.
Movement and customs clearances are withheld,
visas are denied, project agreements are side-tracked
and missions are delayed at checkpoints. Most of the
restrictions that we are currently facing are imposed
by Ansar Allah-affiliated authorities in the north. We
appreciate their recent decision to grant additional visas,
and we hope that that will lead to further improvements
in the access situation. In Government-controlled
areas, we also continue to engage the coalition with
regard to requirements introduced in December 2018
at Al-Dhubab checkpoint, which have caused delays
for agencies seeking to deliver aid in Governmentcontrolled areas along the west coast. Commercial
food imports through Al-Hudaydah and Saleef in the
first quarter of the year were about 40 per cent lower
than the previous quarter, and average food prices were
more than twice the pre-crisis level. Commercial fuel
imports are only 30 per cent of estimated requirements.
Correspondingly, fuel prices have nearly quadrupled
in some places in the past several weeks. People are

19-109945/26

S/PV.8512

The situation in the Middle East

waiting for days to secure the very limited supplies of
fuel that are available.
With huge numbers of desperately poor, hungry
families being priced out of local food markets,
decision makers on all sides need urgently to find ways
to speed up the berthing of ships in Al-Hudaydah, ease
credit requirements and facilitate in-country shipments
of fuel. As I discussed with the new Governor of the
Central Bank two days ago, we also need to see the
exchange rate stabilized at a level that, as Mr. Griffiths
alluded to, makes it affordable for ordinary people to
buy food.
We are also increasingly concerned about the FSO
SAFER oil tanker, a floating storage and offloading
facility about eight kilometres off the coast of Ras Issa
terminal in the Red Sea. Used to store and export oil
since 1998, the tanker currently has about 1.1 million
barrels of oil on-board. It is in poor condition and has
had no maintenance since 2015. Without maintenance,
we fear that it will rupture, or even explode, unleashing
an environmental disaster in one of the world’s busiest
shipping lanes. We have been working with all parties
to address the risk, supported by funding from the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates,
starting with a technical assessment. Final approvals
for the assessment have been pending since September.
We hope that recent indications that a United Nations
project will soon be able to begin work on this critical
issue prove correct.
The second, potentially insuperable, challenge we
face is funding. In February donors pledged $2.6 billion
for humanitarian action in Yemen this year, including
a further $1 billion joint pledge for the United Nations
by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates. Last year’s contribution from those two
donors was channelled through the United Nations as
a single, unearmarked grant early in the year, which
I consider a best practice in humanitarian donorship.
That was also a major factor in enabling us last year to
counter the cholera outbreak, roll back food insecurity
in half of the pre-famine districts and help us save
more children suffering from complicated severe acute
malnutrition — more children than we were able to
save in any other comparable operation globally.
While we were encouraged by the pledges made
in Geneva, I need to tell the Council that, nearly
four months into the year, the United Nations Yemen
humanitarian response plan has actually received in
6/26

15/04/2019

cash only $267 million. That is about 10 per cent of
what was pledged, and 6 per cent of requirements. And
it is 80 per cent less than what we had received in cash at
this time last year. United Nations agencies are rapidly
running out of money for essential relief activities. The
World Health Organization projects that 60 per cent
of diarrhoea treatment centres — the central approach
we have to tackle the cholera outbreak — could close
in the coming weeks, and services at 50 per cent of
secondary-care facilities could be disrupted. The
World Food Programme reports that its pipeline for
food vouchers and the in-kind food pipeline will break
in June, unless they immediately receive new money.
Closing or scaling back such programmes — at a time
when we are struggling to prevent widespread famine
and roll back cholera and other killer diseases — would
be catastrophic. And I therefore implore all our donors
to convert their pledges — the promises they made in
Geneva — into cash as quickly as possible.
We remain keenly aware that — as Mr. Griffiths
said — a sustainable peace would be the most effective
remedy for the humanitarian crisis in Yemen. Without
peace we will simply go on treating the symptoms of
this crisis instead of addressing the cause.
Let me summarize. Violence has again increased.
The relief operation is running out of money. Barring
changes, the end is nigh.
The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Mr.

Lowcock

for

Mark mentioned the suffering of the children in
Yemen. In that connection, I now give the floor to
Ms. Gamba.
Ms. Gamba: I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
enduring and tragic impact of the conflict in Yemen
on children.
As Council members know, the monitoring and
reporting mechanism on children and armed conflict
established through resolution 1612 (2005) enables the
collection of information on the six grave violations
against children in armed conflict, including on
recruitment and use, killing and maiming, rape and
other forms of sexual violence, attacks on schools
and hospitals, abductions, and denial of humanitarian
access. The mechanism was formally established in
Yemen 2013. As of today, there are six parties listed
in the annexes to the annual report of the Secretary19-10994

15/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

General on children and armed conflict for having
perpetrated one or more grave violations against
children in Yemen.
A country-specific report on Yemen will shortly
be presented to the Security Council Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, covering the period
between April 2013 and the end of 2018. The figures
for verified grave violations against children in Yemen
during that period are staggering: more than 3,000
children were verified as recruited and used; more than
7,500 children were killed or maimed; and over 800
incidents of denial of humanitarian access to children
were documented. In addition, over 350 attacks against
schools and hospitals were verified. Unfortunately,
due to difficulties in gathering information, sexual
violence against children is chronically underreported
in Yemen, and only a few cases could be verified in that
period. In addition, due to the ongoing conflict, access
restrictions, detention and threats against monitors,
as well as intimidation of communities reporting on
grave violations, the numbers I present to the Council
today represent a mere fraction of violations committed
against children in Yemen.
The impact of this conflict on children has been
horrific. All parties to the conflict have acted and
reacted militarily to events, resulting in the use and
abuse of children in multiple ways. There have been
exponential increases in violations throughout the years,
as was the case at the end of 2014, when recruitment
and use increased significantly, and in 2015, which was
a devastating year for children, with over 900 children
recruited and used, 2,400 killed or maimed and over
150 attacks against schools and hospitals.
As military surges occurred, children continued
to take the brunt of them. At the end of 2017, during
intensified fighting in Sa’ada, Al-Hudaydah and
Hajjah, killing and maiming of children increased
25 per cent as compared to 2016. And last year, fighting
and offensives in Al-Hudaydah alone resulted in the
killing and maiming of more than 500 children. As the
fundamental principles of international humanitarian
and human rights law have been violated by all parties to
the conflict, children have paid a high price. I would like
to draw the attention of the Council to three persistent
concerns in Yemen, notably the denial of humanitarian
access for children, children’s recruitment and use and
their killing and maiming.

S/PV. 8512

My first concern is about humanitarian access for
and to children. The cumulative effects of years of
war, compounded by the economic crisis, have taken
a devastating toll on children, who have been dying
of curable diseases such as cholera and starvation. Yet
the fact that close to 70 per cent of districts in Yemen
are currently at risk of famine cannot be explained
by the raging conflict alone. The United Nations
has verified more than 800 incidents of denial of
humanitarian access since the establishment of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism in Yemen. Most
cases have involved restrictions on humanitarian
movement, violence against humanitarian personnel
or the destruction of their assets and facilities. Key
civilian infrastructure, such as water reservoirs that
are indispensable to the survival of surrounding
communities, have also been attacked, and a recent air
strike close to a hospital resulted in casualties among
civilians, including children.
The consequences of each and every one of those
cases are tragic, as 80 per cent of the Yemeni population
is currently in need of humanitarian assistance
and protection and 2 million children are acutely
malnourished and fighting to stay alive. In a case in
point, on 11 March, a mission delivering food, including
to schools, in Saada governorate was cancelled owing
to obstructions and checkpoints on the road. A large
majority — more than 70 per cent — of the incidents
of denial of humanitarian access were attributed to
the Houthis, with almost 10 per cent attributed to the
coalition and 7 per cent to Yemeni Government forces.
The recruitment and use of children remains a key
concern. Between April 2013 and December 2018, more
than 3,000 children were verified as recruited and used
by the parties to the conflict in various roles — fighting
on the front line, manning checkpoints, delivering
supplies and assisting in intelligence-gathering. In
2018, almost 40 per cent of those children, 50 per cent
of whom were under 15 years old, were used in active
combat. In the same period, more than 200 children were
killed or injured while being used by the parties to the
conflict in Yemen. This recruitment and use continues
unabated, with more than 500 children verified as
recruited and used in the first three months of this year.
Two thirds were recruited by the Houthis, followed by
the Popular Resistance Committees, the Yemeni armed
forces and the Security Belt Forces, as well as Al-Qaida
in the Arabian Peninsula and the Salafist movement, to
name only a few.

19-109947/26

S/PV.8512

The situation in the Middle East

The raging conflict has fuelled that trend, which
is exacerbated by the deteriorating humanitarian
situation. Joining a party to the conflict has increasingly
become a coping mechanism for families on the brink
of survival, and the children recruited are often among
the poorest. Many children have explained how they
felt that they had no choice but to join in order to
sustain their families. As the war continues, I fear that
this push factor will only get stronger. The ideological
indoctrination of children to defend their communities
against a perceived enemy has also been an important
factor in inciting children to join a party to the conflict.
Children have reportedly been forcibly recruited from
schools, orphanages and communities. While the vast
majority are boys between the ages of 15 and 17, for the
first time cases of the recruitment of girls were verified
in 2018. The girls were used to pressure their peers to
send male members of their families to the battlefields,
and they were threatened with expulsion from school if
they refused to comply.
The level of the killing and wounding of children
are unsettling. Between April 2013 and January of
this year, the United Nations verified the killing and
maiming of more than 7,500 children, one third of them
girls, making it the most prevalent type of violation in
Yemen. Almost half of those casualties were caused
by air strikes, for which the coalition bears the main
responsibility. As for fighting on the ground, which has
caused 40 per cent of the casualties among children, the
shelling of urban areas and the use of mortars and small
arms were the predominant causes of child casualties.
The Houthis were responsible for the majority of child
casualties as a result of ground fighting, followed by the
Yemeni Government forces, among others. Landmines
and unexploded ordnance have also been a major
source of danger for children, causing more than 700
casualties between 2013 and now.
During this time I have consistently engaged with
the parties to the conflict in urging them to end and
prevent grave violations, which is at the very core of
my mandate in support of United Nations efforts on the
ground. To that effect, in December 2018, the Yemeni
Government endorsed a road map aimed at revitalizing
and expediting the implementation of the action plan
signed in 2014 to end and prevent the recruitment and
use of children. The road map lays out measures to
ensure the release, reintegration and prevention of child
recruitment. In October 2018 the Government of Yemen
also endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration, which is
8/26

15/04/2019

an important first step to improving the protection of
schools, education personnel and children. We now look
to the Government to swiftly implement the road map
and prioritize the development of standard operating
procedures for releasing and reintegrating children
associated with armed forces and groups.
In March, following engagements with the coalition
since 2017, I signed a memorandum of understanding
on strengthening the protection of children affected
by the armed conflict in Yemen. It includes provisions
on building the capacity of the child protection unit
established at the coalition’s headquarters in September
2017, as well as on accountability and the revision of
the standard operating procedures for the handover
of children intercepted during military operations.
Most importantly, however, it stipulates that a work
plan containing concrete measures to strengthen the
protection of children will be developed in the next few
weeks and months.
In conclusion, the violence that Yemeni children
have been subjected to, and are still being subjected to,
is simply unacceptable. I urge the parties to the conflict
to take immediate measures to ensure that their military
operations are conducted in full compliance with
international law, including by respecting the principles
of distinction, proportionality and precaution. Today
thousands of children and their families are in dire need
of assistance and support, from basic aid to reintegration
assistance. I reiterate my call to the parties to facilitate
the rapid and unimpeded passage of the delivery of
life-saving assistance to children and families in need.
I also call on the international community to prioritize
funding for Yemen, or the disbursement of funds that
have already been pledged, in order to give children
a chance to survive, learn and build the Yemen of
the future.
There is no alternative to peace. To end the suffering,
the Stockholm Agreement late last year provided hope.
Yet, as fighting continues and intensifies in parts of
the country, I urge the parties to swiftly implement the
commitments made. The tragedy of Yemeni children
and their role in the Yemen of tomorrow serves to
underscore the need to put them at the heart of the
peace process.
Provisions related to the unconditional release,
handover and reintegration of children associated
with parties to conflict should be given priority, and
children deprived of liberty for their alleged association
19-10994

15/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

with opposing parties should be treated primarily as
victims and with dignity. Importantly, perpetrators of
grave violations should be held to account for their acts
before the relevant jurisdictions. This is why I urge
the Security Council to heed my call and ensure that
child protection is central to efforts for peace in Yemen
going forward.
The President: I thank Ms. Gamba for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Luqman.
Ms. Luqman: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on behalf of
Food for Humanity and the Women Solidarity Network.
I am a survivor of the devastating war in Yemen. I
was in Taiz, the third-largest city, and vividly recall the
terrifying air bombardment and indiscriminate shelling
there, as well as the siege of the city and the horrors
perpetrated by all parties in complete disregard of
international humanitarian law. My own home in Taiz
was partially destroyed by an air strike by the Saudi-led
coalition that targeted a nearby school being used by
the Houthis as a military warehouse and prison. I woke
up to what seemed to be a volcanic eruption lighting
up the sky, followed by what felt like an earthquake.
Our neighbours — a family of five — perished under
the rubble.
I also experienced the siege of Taiz. As the Houthis
tightened their grip on the city, they deprived civilians
of food, water and basic living necessities. The siege
started three years ago and has continued to this day. The
Houthis and armed-resistance groups loyal to President
Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour are engaged in
vicious hostilities in populated areas. I mediated the
evacuation of children from an orphanage that had been
stormed by Houthis seeking to position snipers. After
the children were successfully evacuated, a Saudi-ledcoalition air strike hit a nearby building and terrified
the children, many of whom sustained injuries from
shattered windows. I visited families trapped in the
crossfire, brought them food and supplies and facilitated
their evacuation, thereby mitigating the risks of being
targeted by snipers or stepping on mines. Escaping
death in Yemen is becoming increasingly difficult.
The Stockholm peace consultations successfully
brought parties together, but they excluded women
and led to an agreement that is blind to gender. The
establishment of the United Nations Mission to Support
the Al-Hudaydah agreement reflected the seriousness

S/PV. 8512

of the Council to bring peace to Yemen. However, we
have yet to see the Stockholm Agreement enforced.
Four months after the Stockholm Agreement, our
team members in Al-Hudaydah report to us that armed
clashes continue and that more families are being
displaced every day. People are collectively being
punished and deprived of basic necessities, including
food, medicine, fuel and electricity. Roads leading to
downtown Al-Hudaydah, where the main hospital is
located, are blocked. Many have lost their lives trying
to get there.
New fronts have opened in Hajjah, leading to
a catastrophic humanitarian-displacement crisis
and famine. Government forces continue to liberate
locations, while the Houthis attack opposing tribes,
persecute tribal leaders and their families and destroy
their homes. The Saudi-led coalition air strikes continue
to target civilian areas, including in Saada. A week ago,
a devastating explosion near a girls school in Sana’a led
to the death of 14 children, mostly girls, and injured
dozens of civilians. The parties to the conflict blame
each other for that horrific crime, and the victims
will see their right to justice denied if no independent
investigation takes place.
Humanitarian access remains restricted due to the
overall blockade imposed by the Saudi-led coalition,
and the Houthis have resorted to laying siege to areas
where they deny delivery of humanitarian aid to areas
under their control. More recently, they prevented the
delivery of badly needed cholera vaccines. Hunger is
still used as a weapon of war. Thousands of Yemenis
cannot afford to buy food because their salaries have
been suspended or diverted, cutting off people’s
livelihoods. Girls are married off for dowry money, and
boys continue to be forced into becoming fighters.
The prisoner-exchange agreement signed prior
to Stockholm has yet to be implemented. The
Association of Mothers of Abductees shared concerns
that arbitrarily detained civilians are being tortured,
badly treated and denied fair trials. The Stockholm
Agreement converts their status to that of prisoners of
war and proposes exiling released detainees to other
governorates, thereby separating them from their
families. In addition, women human rights defenders,
journalists and religious minorities such as Baha’is
are detained and have no representatives in the current
peace consultations who can negotiate their release.

19-109949/26

S/PV.8512

The situation in the Middle East

Space for civil society organizations is becoming
increasingly restricted, especially in areas under Houthi
control. Women peacemakers are arbitrarily detained
and forced to abandon their work in peacebuilding and
promoting women’s and human rights. Beyond physical
threats against women human rights defenders to
deter their activism, accusations of immoral acts and
defamation are another tool used against women.
Women are not passive victims of this war. With
limited resources, they have been leading efforts to
bring peace to Yemen and hold communities together.
In tribal areas, women can contribute to mediation
efforts because they are respected and trusted.
The patriarchal society in Yemen had already been
challenged when women went into the streets to demand
change and secured their 30 per cent representation in
the National Dialogue.
We have consulted the only woman member in
the Government delegation to the peace consultations,
Ms. Rana Ghanem, who proposed increasing the
number of seats for women within delegations — seats
that must remain vacant if no women are selected.
We have also approached Houthi women who express
their readiness to participate in peace negotiations. It
is not impossible to envisage including Houthi women
in the peace process, because the Houthis had women
representatives in the National Dialogue. There is no
longer any excuse for continuing to exclude women,
but that is the effective result of a poorly designed
peace process.
Among other groups excluded in the peace process
are the southerners, who continue to demand a just
solution for the southern issue. Continuing to delay
addressing their demands constitutes a ticking time
bomb for another layer of conflict that could be just
around the corner.
Today, almost five years into the devastating
war in Yemen, we members of the Women Solidarity
Network have been working hard to fill the gap left by
the State, providing internally displaced persons with
food and life-saving necessities, diverting youth away
from fighting towards peacebuilding, mediating for the
release of detainees, and ending armed conflicts over
water and land resources. We are disappointed that all
national, regional and international parties have yet to
take bold action to end the war and the suffering of the
Yemeni people. We are frustrated because, despite our
continuous calls for the inclusion of women, the role of
10/26

15/04/2019

women in peacebuilding continues to be ridiculed, and
women — who are the real peacemakers — continue to
be excluded in the ceasefire and peace process. I invite
Council members to take a serious stand with us and
adopt a bold new approach to addressing the following.
The Security Council should act to end this
devastating conflict and facilitate an immediate
comprehensive ceasefire that includes the Saudiled coalition air bombardment campaign and the
Houthi missile and drone attacks, both within Yemen
and across our borders. The Council should enforce
the Stockholm and prisoner exchange agreements,
unconditionally release all arbitrarily detained civilians
and hold all parties to account, especially spoilers.
It should establish mechanisms to implement the
previous resolutions focusing on aspects related to the
disarmament and demobilization of Houthis, as well
as humanitarian access, starting with operationalizing
medical evacuations through Sana’a airport and,
ultimately, lifting the aerial, naval and land blockades.
It should continue to adopt an approach to
deconstruct the conflict and localize the peace process
by creating local peace agreements in conflict areas,
including in Taiz, which entails opening humanitarian
corridors, as well as the withdrawal of fighters from the
city and civilian institutions and ensuring that they are
not redeployed to other fronts.
Starting with liberated areas, the Council should
support the restoration of Government institutions to
full functionality, including institutions that deliver
services, such as the social welfare fund, and assist
the Government in addressing core conflict issues
and grievances in areas under its control. It should
demand serious efforts to demilitarize liberated
cities, ensuring the relocation of military depots and
camps away from populated areas, and facilitate the
development of professional security forces that are
well trained, including in human rights. It should
urge for the disbursement of civil servants’ salaries in
Houthi-controlled areas by ensuring the Government’s
commitments based on the 2014 civil servant lists.
The Council should demand that the negotiating
parties include no less than 50 per cent of women in
their delegations and that the United Nations Special
Envoy and the Chair of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee consult regularly with women and ensure
women’s meaningful inclusion in all peace processes,
as well as the use of stronger language in its legally
19-10994

15/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

binding texts that call for an inclusive peace process,
emphasizing the inclusion of women, young people,
southerners and other marginalized social groups.
We hope that our recommendations will inform the
Council’s decisions and lead to firm and decisive actions
towards peace spoilers, as well as contribute to ending
this unnecessary suffering of millions of Yemenis.
The President: I thank Ms. Luqman for her briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank all the
briefers. I will divide my remarks between what we
heard from Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and what we
heard from Ms. Gamba, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
and Ms. Luqman, Chairperson, Food for Humanity. They
all made compelling points. I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Mark Lowcock, Mr. Griffiths and Lieutenant
General Lollesgaard, Chair of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee, who we will hear from later,
for their tireless efforts to push the implementation of
the agreements reached in Stockholm.
The testimony of Ms. Luqman was very powerful,
but we know that the United Nations has been working
very hard for implementation. I believe that I speak for
everyone in the Council in saying that it really wants
to stay united behind the Special Envoy in pushing for
that. As he said, the fact that agreements on the concept
of operations for phase 1 have been achieved is helpful.
I do not think that we underestimate the scale of the
task. The Special Envoy referred to the fact that it
would be the first time that there have been voluntary
withdrawals in the Yemeni context. We appreciate the
scale of the task. But, at the same time, we want the
parties to be aware that the lack of implementation is
very worrying, and we urge them all to put in place
whatever steps need to be taken to achieve the full
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement. We
also look to the parties to remove all impediments to
the United Nations ability to operate effectively in
Al-Hudaydah. We will have a couple of questions to
follow up on when we go into closed consultations.
I wanted to turn to what Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock said. I think that it is shocking that we cannot
get access to the Red Sea Mills after all this time.
After the last briefing (see S/PV.8464) we were very
hopeful but it is very disappointing to hear that those

S/PV. 8512

obstacles still continue. I just want to echo Mark’s
call that if it is possible for the grain to be salvaged,
even at this late stage, we should look to the parties to
redouble their efforts to work with the United Nations
to ensure that can happen. Clearly, the contrast between
the figures that he provided regarding the 80-per-cent
drop in humanitarian assistance and what we know is
already the greatest humanitarian crisis in the world is
extremely alarming. I am running out of superlatives to
echo how worrying that is.
There have been some very welcome pledges from
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. They have
just announced dispersing $200 million of the pledges
that they have made. But there is still a $1.5 billion-dollar
funding gap in the humanitarian response plan. For our
part, we have pledged $300 million and we have brought
forward our disbursement so that we can support the
United Nations. But I would like to encourage all
donors today to disburse their funds rapidly and to
pledge additional funds throughout the year.
Turning to the very powerful testimonies that we
heard from the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Ms. Luqman, I thank them for placing the
focus on children. Today is a very good moment to reflect
how desperate the plight of children is in Yemen. I would
also like to pay tribute to the Permanent Representative
of Belgium and his Mission for all the work that they
have done regarding children in the Yemeni conflict.
We need to consider very carefully what he told us. We
heard a very graphic account from Ms. Luqman of what
the continuing conflict means for individuals. I think
she is quite right to hold the Council to account and to
ask us to work with the United Nations to do more. We
will take that very seriously and will do what we can.
Finally, I wanted to end by returning to the Stockholm
Agreement. It was designed to build confidence and to
prepare the road for a comprehensive political process
to end the conflict. That is a very important goal. The
stakes are too high for us to let that fail. In our view,
the Council should be ready to take stronger measures
if there is no progress by our next meeting. I would like
to follow that up in today’s consultations.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to thank all the briefers. In my
statement I will focus on two main topics: the status
of implementing the Stockholm Agreement and the
humanitarian situation in Yemen.

19-1099411/26

S/PV.8512

The situation in the Middle East

With regard to the status of implementing the
Stockholm Agreement, notwithstanding the first phase
of redeployment, which is at a stalemate, in addition
to the ongoing impediments facing the work of the
Redeployment Coordination Committee (RCC) due
to deliberately hampering the activities of its Chair
and personnel, frequently affecting their freedom
of movement and obstructing the implementation of
their mandate under the relevant Security Council
resolutions, we welcome what Mr. Griffiths said in his
briefing today on reaching a detailed agreement among
the parties concerned to implement that phase.
As Special Envoy Mr. Griffiths said, the political
will of the two parties is an extremely important matter
in order to achieve the desired progress. However,
we reiterate that it is of the utmost importance to
demonstrate goodwill and to translate words into
action by fully implementing all aspects of the
Stockholm Agreement, including the Al-Hudaydah
and the prisoner exchange agreements, in addition
to the memorandum of understanding on Taiz, as
the best approach towards resuming the next round
of consultations, which will focus on cross-cutting
issues to end the crisis, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
2216 (2015), the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and its Implementation Mechanism, as well as the
outcome of the National Dialogue Conference.

15/04/2019

Mills, where there are vast grain stocks that could feed
3.7 million people for 30 days, as noted by Mr. Lowcock
in his briefing.
Despite the positive cooperation on the part of
the Yemeni Government in the form of announcing
its willingness to ensure safe access to roads and to
open routes for humanitarian delivery, access to the
Mills remains stalled. The impediments placed before
the RCC in reaching the Mills could cause the stocks
to spoil.
The humanitarian situation in Yemen has seen a
significant reaction from the international community,
as clearly reflected in the magnitude of the response to
the United Nations response plan for 2019, which was
commensurate with the scope of the crisis. Kuwait has
pledged $250 million. Since 2015 we have provided
a total of $600 million, in addition to the generous
donations by major donors such as the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, the United
Kingdom, Germany, the European Union and other
countries. This underscores the need to address this
difficult aspect of the crisis that has afflicted Yemen
since September 2014.

We reiterate our full support for the efforts of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Martin Griffiths, as well as the Head of the
United Nations Mission to Support the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement and the Chair of the RCC. We are cognizant
of the fact that there can be no military solution to
this prolonged crisis, and we do not want the conflict
in Al-Hudaydah to go back to square one. We should
therefore immediately begin the implementation of
resolution 2452 (2019), which requested the SecretaryGeneral to report on instances of non-compliance.

Regarding the humanitarian concerns about the
recruitment of children, and taking into account what
was said by Ms. Gamba in her briefing, two thirds of
those children were recruited by the Houthis. We note
also that the joint command of the coalition has set up
a child-specialized unit in order to protect and receive
recruited children, rehabilitate them by providing
them with medical and psychological support and
ensure their handover to their families with the help
of international specialized agencies, including the
International Committee of the Red Cross. The unit has
handed over 120 children to date and has defined rules
of engagement so as to ensure that military operations
are carried out in accordance with international
humanitarian law.

On the humanitarian situation, we have repeatedly
stressed at previous meetings the importance of the
full implementation of the Stockholm Agreement as a
gateway to a political settlement. The Agreement has a
humanitarian dimension whose ultimate purpose is to
alleviate the suffering of the brotherly Yemeni people.
This includes the opening of safe corridors to enable
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to all affected
and to the areas most in need, while enabling the United
Nations and its relevant agencies to reach the Red Sea

In conclusion, we reiterate our call on the Yemeni
parties to fully implement the Stockholm Agreement on
Al-Hudaydah and its three ports, the prisoner exchange
agreement and the statement of understanding on Taiz,
in order to complement the efforts of the Special Envoy
to bring about a political solution underpinned by the
three agreed terms of reference: the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism;
the outcome of the comprehensive National Dialogue
Conference; and the relevant Security Council

12/26

19-10994

15/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

resolutions, in particular resolution 2216 (2015). That
would end the crisis and ensure the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Yemen as well
as prevent any interference in its domestic affairs.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the briefings
delivered today by the main briefers and listened closely
to the information provided us on the implementation of
the Stockholm Agreement as well as to the detailed and
alarming briefing on the humanitarian situation. Last
year the whole world welcomed the news of the signing
of the Stockholm Agreement as the path towards peace
in Yemen. The parties must maintain the same spirit of
commitment shown in December and translate words
into tangible action on the ground by demonstrating the
political will required to resolve the conflict.
Protecting the civilian population and civilian
infrastructure are basic principles under international
humanitarian law. That is why we view with concern
the attacks carried out in the past few weeks across the
country, in contravention of the rules of war. Civilians
are often denied the protection to which they are
entitled and once again are paying the highest price for
the conflict in Yemen. It is for that reason that we call
on the parties and on States to support civilians through
greater focus on their protection during the planning
and implementation phases of military action.
We have already heard here that almost
80 per cent of Yemen’s total population — 24 million
people — require some type of humanitarian assistance
and protection. Ten million people are but a step away
from starvation, and 7 million are undernourished.
These are catastrophic levels and require a response
commensurate with the situation. In a food-disaster
situation such as the one being experienced in Yemen,
it is unacceptable that so far humanitarian workers have
not been ensured access to the Mills in Al-Hudaydah.
We call for this situation to be resolved as soon
as possible.
Ms. Luqman brought to the table perhaps one of the
most critically important elements of today’s discussion.
In a humanitarian context of unprecedented scale, the
role of Yemeni women as negotiators of humanitarian
access, confidence-builders in affected areas and even
as care providers is absolutely essential. That is why we
must focus on them and on local women’s organizations
a large part of humanitarian action in Yemen, from

S/PV. 8512

the planning stage to the implementation of relief
operations, along with the necessary financing.
It is crucial that, given the progress made towards
peace in Yemen, we continue to do everything possible
to pursue a political solution that would include the
significant participation of women and young people in
the process of resolving the conflict there.
Apart from the appalling humanitarian food crisis,
which is for the most part man-made, there is another
equally important factor: access to safe drinking water.
In Yemen, the lack of sanitation has led to an increase in
waterborne diseases. Hundreds of thousands of persons
were affected by cholera in 2018. As Mr. Lowcock quite
rightly pointed out, since the beginning of 2019 that
rate has increased, with more than 120,000 potential
new cases of cholera. We therefore believe that there
must be a robust response in this sector as a critical
element in improving the living conditions of the most
vulnerable Yemenis, especially children.
We have not seen any appreciable change in the
lives of children since the signing of the Stockholm
Agreement. Children are the ones who are continuing
to pay the high price of war in Yemen. Parents have
to watch their children die in their arms, and vehicles
transporting food are being attacked. The children of
Yemen have been robbed of their right to life, health
and education. How many more children will have to
be affected before we put an end to the conflict? We
ask the parties to prioritize the protection of children
at all times. That must go hand in hand with the
identification and punishment of the perpetrators. The
international community must lend its expertise to
develop the tools necessary to ensure that victims of
human rights violations find justice — justice that is
impartial, respectful of due process and safe.
The Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment
to contributing, through the Council, to efforts to
implement the Stockholm Agreement, as well as
the Redeployment Coordination Committee and the
United Nations Mission to Support the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement. The lives of millions of Yemenis have
become unsustainable. The resurgence of violence
perpetrated by both parties in some areas of the country
as led to more displacements. The safety and wellbeing of hundreds of thousands of war-weary Yemenis
continue to be compromised as we enter the fifth year
of the conflict.

19-1099413/26

S/PV.8512

The situation in the Middle East

Finally, the Security Council maintains its unity
in its pursuit of a political solution to the conflict in
Yemen, and we would like to reiterate our delegation’s
strong support for Mr. Griffith’s tireless efforts to
find a solution. We call on the parties to participate in
those negotiations in good faith and to maintain their
commitments in the same spirit they demonstrated in
Stockholm in December, 2018.
We do not want to end without highlighting the
heroic work being undertaken on the ground by the
personnel of the United Nations and its agencies,
together with non-governmental organizations, who
tirelessly face the human dimension of that conflict
every day to ensure the survival of millions of victims
of that humanitarian catastrophe. They need to know
that their work will not go unnoticed. The Security
Council is with them.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
warmly thank our four briefers for their enlightening
interventions. I would also like to welcome the presence
of Mr. Norbert Röttgen, Chair of the Foreign Affairs
Committee of the German Parliament. I would like to
make three points today.
First of all, I would like to strongly reaffirm
France’s support for the tireless efforts of the Special
Envoy and of Lieutenant General Lollesgaard, the latter
within the Redeployment Coordination Committee and
as Head of the United Nations Mission in Support of
the Al-Hudaydah Agreement. We must stress that
only a political solution can put an end to the conflict
in Yemen. We are sending that message to all our
interlocutors, including regional interlocutors.
The Special Envoy has told us, and we share his
analysis, that the window of opportunity to put an
end to the conflict is still open and must urgently be
taken advantage of by the parties. We also support
the proposals submitted to the Yemeni Government
and the Houthis to facilitate the implementation of
the Al-Hudaydah agreement. We call on both parties
to respect their commitments and start redeployment
operations without delay or seeking to exploit any
redeployments that may be carried out by the other
party. Achieving results in Al-Hudaydah must indeed
enable us to recreate a virtuous cycle for a political
solution and forge bonds of trust between the parties,
which is an absolute must. The military solution is less
of an option than ever.
14/26

15/04/2019

Secondly, we remain very concerned about the
situation on the ground. The relative holding of the
ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah is a positive development,
which should be welcomed. Nonetheless, the intensity
of hostilities has increased throughout the rest of
the country and the humanitarian situation remains
extremely worrisome. The parties must therefore
maintain their commitment to the Special Envoy
and General Lollesgaard and play a responsible and
constructive role in order to avoid jeopardizing the
process. Against that backdrop , the role played by the
United Nations Mission in Support of the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement, deployed in January, and the strengthening
of the United Nations presence on the ground are
essential. It is important that the remaining observers
provided for in the Mission’s mandate be able to arrive
as soon as possible. We expect the parties, in accordance
with their commitments, to ensure the security and free
movement of United Nations personnel.
The parties must also do everything necessary to
ensure that humanitarian actors can work safely and
have the required access. Bureaucratic impediments,
threats,
harassment,
arrests
and
defamation
campaigns, in particular in Sana’a, must stop.
Infrastructure — especially hospitals, which have
been damaged by hostilities in Taiz and Saada — and
schools, where children are particularly vulnerable,
must also be protected.
I would like to draw the Council’s attention in
particular to the situation of children in Yemen.
Children are among the first victims of the conflict and
are widely recruited and used. The Secretary-General’s
next report on that subject should shed light on that
unacceptable situation. In Yemen, as in other conflict
situations, every effort must be made to put an end to
serious violations against children in particular.
After the hope created by the Stockholm
agreements, the impact on the people of a further failure
of the political process would be catastrophic and would
push us into unknown territory. It is therefore urgent to
make progress in the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement in order to create the necessary confidence
to resume discussions with a view to a comprehensive
political agreement. But the political process cannot be
conditioned on the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah
agreement alone; the two processes must move forward
in parallel in order to fuel genuine momentum.
Resuming the discussions on a comprehensive and
inclusive political agreement that takes into account
19-10994

15/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

the diversity of Yemen’s political and civil society
actors is the only real prospect for putting an end to the
suffering of the Yemeni people. The Special Envoy’s
attention to the role of Yemeni women is essential in
that regard. Strengthening women’s participation in
peace discussions, in Yemen as it is elsewhere, is an
essential condition for success.
The Council, after unanimously adopting
resolutions 2451 (2018) and 2452 (2018), must at
all costs avoid the trap of letting the hope generated
in Stockholm die. We simply cannot allow it. Our
collective efforts are needed now more than ever,
and the Council’s unity on the arduous path towards
peace in Yemen is our greatest asset. That is not the
case, as we know, in all crises, to put it diplomatically.
Therefore, let us leverage that unity in order to put the
full weight of the Security Council behind seeking a
political solution, which today, despite the magnitude
of the challenges, is within our grasp.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to convey my appreciation
for the briefings by Special Envoy Martin Griffiths,
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Virginia
Gamba, as well as Ms. Muna Luqman’s statement.
China commends the efforts of the United Nations
and the relevant humanitarian agencies to advance the
political process and ease the humanitarian situation
in Yemen.
At present, the ceasefire is generally holding
in Al-Hudaydah and surrounding areas, but the
security situation is fragile and there has been limited
progress in the implementation of the agreements.
The conflict in Yemen has been going on for many
years, and the security landscape gives us no cause
for optimism. The humanitarian situation is dire, and
the country is confronted with multiple economic and
social challenges. However, the desire remains for all
the Yemeni parties to promote the implementation of
the agreements in search of a political solution. The
United Nations mediation efforts have not let up for
one moment, thereby achieving a measure of success
over the past several months. It is incumbent upon the
international community to remain seized of the issue
of Yemen with greater input. Continued patience is
needed, and we must not lose confidence. In China’s
view, work should be focused on the following areas on
the path ahead.

S/PV. 8512

First, we must continue to push for the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, which
did not come about easily. It is an important starting
point for Yemen’s journey from conflict to peace. The
Yemeni parties must implement it in earnest. With
regard to the issue of redeployment in particular, they
should step up cooperation with the United Nations,
resolve differences through dialogue and operationalize
concrete arrangements. Consultations should continue
on prisoner exchanges and the issue of Taiz, and efforts
should be made to reach a workable arrangement as soon
as possible, while continuously enhancing mutual trust.
The process of deploying the United Nations Mission to
Support the Al-Hudaydah agreement in Yemen should
continue, with guarantees for the safety and security of
United Nations personnel to support and supervise the
implementation of the agreements.
Secondly, the Yemeni parties must be encouraged to
maintain effective political dialogue and negotiations.
The various parties in Yemen are currently sharply
divided. The foundation for establishing mutual trust
remains far from solid. The road ahead leading towards
a political settlement remains long. In the long-term,
resuming political peace talks remains imperative to
finding a holistic solution to the issue of Yemen. The
United Nations should continue to work as the main
mediator. The Security Council should remain united,
fully consider and respect the views of the countries
concerned and of those in the region, continue to
provide political support for dialogue and negotiations
among the Yemeni parties and urge the countries of
the region to maintain their constructive assistance to
that end.
Thirdly, robust efforts must be made to alleviate
the humanitarian situation in Yemen. The international
community should increase humanitarian assistance
to Yemen, honour its pledges and provide targeted
financial and in-kind support, including food and
medicine, to help the country respond to famine, the
cholera outbreak, displacement and other challenges.
The work of the United Nations humanitarian agencies
on the ground should be supported with humanitarian
access, while ensuring the safety of humanitarian
workers. The humanitarian needs of women, children
and other vulnerable groups should figure prominently
on the agenda, and support should be provided to
Yemen to improve its economy so that it can meet the
basic needs of its people.

19-1099415/26

S/PV.8512

The situation in the Middle East

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014) recently visited countries in the region to
engage meaningfully with the countries concerned.
That was a positive exercise that helped deepen our
understanding of the positions of the various parties
and aligned the 2140 Committee’s agenda with the
overarching goal of a political settlement of the Yemeni
issue. China was represented on the Committee’s
mission to support strengthened dialogue between
the Committee and the parties concerned. In order
to settle the Yemeni issue, there is no alternative to
a political solution. The parties concerned should
uphold Yemen’s sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity, and support a broadly inclusive
political solution, to be achieved through dialogue and
negotiations, based on the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Arab Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative, its Implementation Mechanism and the
outcome of the comprehensive National Dialogue
Conference. The role of the international community is
to create a favourable environment in which the Yemeni
parties will be able to implement agreements and reach
a political solution.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the convening of this meeting and
thank the briefers for their briefings. We commend
and support the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen to end the conflict
in the country, which is the best way to protect the
suffering population.
Peru notes with deep concern the lack of tangible
progress in the implementation of the important
agreements reached in Sweden and the escalation of
violence in various areas of the country in recent weeks.
We believe that it is essential to act quickly and firmly
to maintain the gains made during the meeting held
in Sweden and implement the Stockholm Agreement,
especially with regard to the agreement concerning
the port of Al-Hudaydah as a necessary step towards
reaching a political settlement to the conflict. In that
regard, we welcome the commitment, flexibility and
patience demonstrated by the Government of President
Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour. We are looking
forward to a similar approach on the part of Ansar
Allah, in line with the expectations of the international
community. Accordingly, we are encouraged by the
information provided by Martin Griffiths on the
agreement reached on the implementation of the first
phase. We urge that this window of opportunity, based
16/26

15/04/2019

on the assurance that the Council will ensure the
parties’ strict compliance to their commitments, not be
missed. We also urge them to honour their commitments
concerning the exchange of prisoners. To that end, we
must emphasize that any difficulty encountered in
the process cannot be interpreted as justification for
resuming a military course of action, as that would only
aggravate what is already considered to be the greatest
humanitarian crisis in the world today.
We also stress importance of those countries
with influence over the warring parties being able to
help them comply with the Stockholm Agreement,
refrain from confrontational rhetoric and reciprocal
accusations and address all differences through
diplomatic channels. We must also recall the obligation
of all parties to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
We deplore the deaths of children and the many other
fatalities and injuries that resulted from the recent
air strike near schools in Sana’a. We hope that those
reprehensible and other previous acts will be the subject
of exhaustive investigations that duly identify and
punish those responsible. We emphasize the importance
of concurrently addressing the humanitarian situation,
which appears to be worsening on the ground. We are
particularly concerned about the alarming levels of
food insecurity and worsening economic indicators,
resulting in the increased suffering of the population.
We also note the urgent need to contain the new
and worrisome outbreak of cholera with the approach
of the rainy season. To that end, special focus must
be placed on the repair and maintenance of water
and sewage systems to prevent its spread from
reaching devastating levels, as was the case last year.
Furthermore, as Ms. Gamba mentioned, we believe
that priority attention should be given to the tragic
situation involving women, and especially children,
given their greater level of vulnerability to acts of
psychological, physical and sexual violence. We must
therefore welcome the 25 March signing in Riyadh of
the memorandum of understanding to strengthen the
protection of children affected by armed conflict in
Yemen signed with the coalition to support legitimacy
in Yemen. Moreover, we commend the efforts of the
Government of Yemen to arrange for the payment
of salaries to public officials, including those of
Al-Hudaydah, and we urge the Government to refrain
from adopting negative trade measures that could
worsen the dire humanitarian situation in the north
19-10994

15/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

of the country. We note that achieving sustainable
peace will require broad consensus based on a shared
vision for the future. As Ms. Luqman highlighted, all
sectors of the Yemeni population should be adequately
represented, including the meaningful participation of
women and young people in political processes.
In conclusion, I express my gratitude to the
authorities of Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Iran, Jordan and
Oman for having recently received the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), which
I have the honour to chair. We especially appreciated
the high level of our interlocutors, the breadth of
the discussions and the unanimous support for the
political solution advocated for by the United Nations.
We extend our gratitude to the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, the Head of United
Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement,
the Resident Coordinator in Yemen and other United
Nations officials for the valuable information provided
to the Committee and the dedicated work they carry
out under very difficult conditions. We believe that
that visit, while carrying out on-site verification of the
implementation of the sanctions regime, was useful in
sending a strong political signal that the Security Council
and its respective subsidiary body are prioritizing the
situation in Yemen and closely following developments
on the ground. We will provide a more detailed report
to the Council in the near future.
Lastly, I reaffirm Peru’s commitment to achieving
sustainable peace in Yemen that will end the
humanitarian catastrophe and foster regional stability.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank our briefers today.
We share the frustration over the delay in
implementing the agreement on Al-Hudaydah
redeployment plan. Given the humanitarian emergency,
it must not fail. We therefore welcomed this morning’s
announcement of an agreement on the first phase of
redeployment, and we call on all parties to implement it
as soon as possible. We also call on all the parties to fully
respect the ceasefire and to implement the agreement
in good faith generally. In that regard, we reiterate our
full support for the efforts of Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths and Lieutenant General Michael Lollesgaard.
Secondly, efforts to improve the catastrophic
humanitarian situation continue to be crucial. I would
like to echo the call made by Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock regarding humanitarian access,

S/PV. 8512

particularly access to the Red Sea Mills. We also heard
his call to disburse our pledges as soon as possible.
Belgium’s contribution to the Yemen Humanitarian
Fund will be available in May, and we call on other
contributors to do the same.
Thirdly, we are particularly concerned about the
situation of children in Yemen. They are the main
victims of this conflict, as Special Representative
Virginia Gamba has just described. Children have been
recruited, killed and even mutilated by all the parties.
Air strikes are still hitting schools and hospitals even
though the coalition was censured for this violation
last year. Sexual violence is a major issue, and child
marriage has increased dramatically. There have been
several cases of denial of access to humanitarian aid for
children. We therefore call on all the parties to respect
international humanitarian law and take effective and
urgent measures to end all such violations. In that
context, we welcome the signing of a memorandum of
understanding between the Special Representative and
the coalition, and we look forward to the development
of a programme of activities for implementing it in a
concrete and meaningful way. We ask Mr. Griffiths to
ensure that child-protection measures are at the heart of
the peace process.
Finally, Ms. Muna Luqman’s courageous testimony
reflects the importance of civil society in Yemen. Her
experience as a mediator in Taiz shows the importance
of involving women in peace processes and in the
implementation of agreements.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
all the briefers for their informative, if alarming,
interventions. I would also like to take this opportunity
to reiterate our full support for the efforts of Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths and express our appreciation
for the work of all United Nations agencies in Yemen.
Despite the efforts to translate the outcomes of
the consultations in Stockholm into tangible results
on the ground, progress on the redeployment of forces
from Al-Hudaydah has so far been very limited. We
note the compromise reached by the parties on the
first redeployment phase and urge them to start the
withdrawal process without further delays. At the same
time, it is vital that the ceasefire be upheld and the
parties respect the Stockholm Agreement by renouncing
violence and showing restraint. Although the Council
continues to consider progress on Al-Hudaydah very
important, we remain mindful of developments in other

19-1099417/26

S/PV.8512

The situation in the Middle East

15/04/2019

parts of Yemen. We are deeply concerned about the
threat of violence across various governorates and by
the impact of the ongoing atrocities on civilians. We
are particularly shocked by the suffering of Yemeni
children, who continue to bear the brunt of the
conflict. The loss of civilian lives is not only contrary
to international humanitarian law and international
human rights law; it is also morally abhorrent. I want
to reiterate that all parties must fully comply with
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. All cases of violations should be
investigated and those responsible held accountable.

Since December, the Council has urged the
parties to demonstrate their commitment to a political
settlement by redeploying from Al-Hudaydah in
line with the terms of the Stockholm Agreement.
While we should not minimize the importance of the
Al-Hudaydah ceasefire, which is narrowly holding,
continued violence risks jeopardizing the Stockholm
Agreement. But the ceasefire is not an end in and of
itself. Now is the time to seize on the momentum of
the ceasefire and on the agreement on the concept of
operations for the first phase of the withdrawal. We
need to move to further talks to end the conflict.

Poland is also deeply concerned about the deepening
humanitarian crisis. Currently, more than 20 million
Yemenis are food insecure, and nearly 240,000 are
starving to death. The recent outbreak of cholera has
further exacerbated the already dire humanitarian
situation. As the humanitarian needs continue to rise,
we welcome the outcomes of the high-level pledging
event in Geneva and the generosity of the donors, whom
we join by pledging our contribution. The effectiveness
of the financial support, however, will remain limited
unless all the impediments to humanitarian access and
commercial deliveries are lifted. The parties must allow
and facilitate the flow into Yemen of humanitarian and
commercial imports, including fuel, and ensure safe
and unhindered access for humanitarian assistance
and personnel, including by lifting all bureaucratic
restrictions and ensuring the timely issuance of
visas. We also expect them to prioritize the opening
of humanitarian corridors and allow access to all
humanitarian facilities without further delay. The
delivery of humanitarian assistance into Yemen must
not be politicized by any of the stakeholders.

The Yemeni Government has been working with the
United Nations Special Envoy for more than a month to
identify redeployment terms that it can accept. We thank
President Hadi Mansour and the Yemeni Government
for their support for the Redeployment Coordination
Committee. We appreciate the fact that the Houthis
have finally agreed to the phase one withdrawal concept
of operations, and we will be watching closely to see
if they make good on that agreement. The Yemeni
Government has demonstrated a clear commitment to
the United Nations-led process. It is now time for the
Houthis to show the international community that they
too are serious about the United Nations process and the
agreements that they themselves reached in Stockholm.

The situation in Yemen requires swift and decisive
action. The developments on the ground show how
pressing it is to relaunch the political process and find
a comprehensive political solution to the crisis. The
resumption of an intra-Yemeni political dialogue with
the meaningful participation of all groups of Yemeni
society, including women and young people, is a
prerequisite to bringing an end to the suffering of the
Yemeni people and should happen as soon as possible.

Our support for Martin Griffiths and Lieutenant
General Lollesgaard remains steadfast. They, their
staffs and the international humanitarian community
are doing what they can to help the parties reach a
resolution to the conflict and save Yemeni lives. We
applaud the Yemeni Government for joining them in
that effort, and we call on the Houthis to do the same
without further delay.

Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
today’s briefers, and especially the United Nations
teams on the ground in Yemen, for their tireless efforts
in exceptionally difficult conditions.
18/26

For the past three months we have also expressed
our strong concerns about continued postponement of
the World Food Programme’s mission to rehabilitate
and reopen the Red Sea Mills. But today, as we heard
from Mark Lowcock and a number of other speakers,
the Mills are still closed and the food stocks within may
be rotting. At this point, only the Houthis are blocking
access to them, and they alone will be to blame if the
food spoils.

Mr. Ntsoane (South Africa): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on the
humanitarian situation in Yemen. We would also like to
thank the briefers for their remarks. My delegation would
like to address three points today — the implementation
19-10994

15/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

of the Stockholm Agreement, the humanitarian situation
and the impact of the conflict in Yemen on women and
especially on children.
First, with respect to the Stockholm Agreement,
South Africa is encouraged that the Agreement
continues to hold despite its many challenges. We urge
the parties to fully implement it, as it remains the only
hope for bringing peace and stability to Yemen. We also
welcome this morning’s announcement that both parties
have accepted the redeployment plan. We are sorry to
have to note the recent clashes around Al-Hudaydah,
which are the most intense that we have seen since
the signing of the Stockholm Agreement. We urge all
the parties to refrain from further escalation and call
for a resumption of the exchange of prisoners and the
statement of understanding on Taiz, as the Stockholm
Agreement requires, and other confidence-building
measures. It is also vital that all parties redeploy their
forces from Al-Hudaydah. That requires a political
solution with compromises on the part of all the parties
concerned. We are encouraged that neither side has
sought to seize new territory in Al-Hudaydah so far.
We are also encouraged by the positive developments
on the ground, including the recent session of Yemen’s
House of Representatives, the first in more than four
years to convene more than 130 parliamentarians.
Secondly, it is clear that the humanitarian situation
remains dire. South Africa continues to call on all the
parties to respect international humanitarian law and
protect the safety and security of humanitarian workers
in order to ensure the delivery of humanitarian aid.
Where there have been reported violations, we call for
independent investigations. Furthermore, we call on
all the parties to the conflict to take tangible steps to
address the country’s humanitarian crisis, particularly
the risks of famine and another cholera outbreak.
We further appeal to the donors to work urgently to
disburse pledges made to the humanitarian response
plan in order to address the humanitarian situation on
the ground.
Thirdly and importantly, on the issue of the safety
of women and children, we welcome the signing of a
memorandum of understanding to develop a programme
of activities in the next two months to strengthen the
protection of children. South Africa is encouraged
by those positive steps and looks forward to seeing
further steps to strengthen child protection. It is also
important that the memorandum of understanding be
fully implemented to ensure the safety and security of

S/PV. 8512

vulnerable groups. Despite that positive commitment,
we were appalled at the reports of the killing of civilians,
including four children, on 26 March in an explosion
near two schools in Sana’a, and again on 7 April, in
which 14 children died. Schools should be places of
learning and should never be targeted during a conflict.
Children are among the most vulnerable members of
society. Our collective conscience cannot allow us to
condone such acts and we therefore condemn these
attacks on children. We call on all the parties to the
conflict to put in place measures to ensure that such
incidents are never repeated in future. South Africa
also calls for the perpetrators to be listed accurately in
the Secretary-General’s annual report on children and
armed conflict, in line with United Nations practices.
In conclusion, my delegation continues to call for a
peaceful, Yemeni-led solution to the conflict. It is our
hope that the sum of the positive momentum gained
with the discussions in Stockholm and the signing of
the Agreement will lead to further progress on the
political front. The differences in Yemen cannot be
solved militarily and will only be further exacerbated
as this avoidable conflict continues. The current talks
are hampered by the continued fighting, which is not
conducive to building trust, the first step in creating
a negotiated settlement. If the status quo remains, the
international community will have failed the people,
particularly the children, of Yemen.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Мy
delegation commends Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their
detailed briefings on developments in Yemen. We also
thank Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, and Ms. Muna Luqman, Chairperson of the
Food for Humanity, for their briefings and their strong
commitment to the peace process in Yemen.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the adoption of resolutions
2451 (2018), 2452 (2019) and 2456 (2019), which
respectively established the Redeployment Coordination
Committee and the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hudaydah Agreement (UNMHA) and renewed the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014) and the mandate of the Panel of
Experts. However, we note with regret that despite the
progress that has been made, including the conclusion
of the Stockholm Agreement, providing for a ceasefire

19-1099419/26

S/PV.8512

The situation in the Middle East

and the withdrawal of forces, there have been more than
3,000 cases of violations of the truce. Since 2015, the
continuing hostilities have forced Yemen to endure the
worst humanitarian crisis in the world, according to
the United Nations. It has affected nearly 22 million
Yemenis, 14 million of whom are acutely food insecure
and exposed to endemic diseases that are difficult to
eradicate. In addition, Côte d’Ivoire remains particularly
concerned about the resurgence of the problem of child
soldiers in the Yemeni crisis.
We are also deeply concerned about the extent
of the dropout rate affecting children in Yemen.
According to the United Nations, more than 2 million
of the 7 million children of school age are not in
school. According to several non-governmental human
rights organizations, that situation is the result of the
non-payment of teachers’ salaries and the destruction
of school buildings. We condemn the attacks on
schools and call on all the parties to the conflict to
implement the United Nations action plan to end the
use of child soldiers in Yemen and respect the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict. In
that regard, my delegation would like to commend
UNICEF for all its efforts in support of education in
Yemen and encourage it to continue its programme for
paying the salaries of approximately 100,000 teachers
in arrears. We welcomed the holding on 26 February of
a pledging conference in Geneva at which donors raised
the significant amount of $2.6 billion for financing the
United Nations humanitarian response plan in 2019.
My country also urges the warring parties to respect
their commitments and calls on them to observe the
ceasefire, which is an essential condition for the safe and
unhindered delivery of food, aid and basic necessities
to populations in distress.
In conclusion, my country urges the actors in the
Yemeni conflict to prioritize dialogue with a view to
reaching a political settlement of the crisis, respect
their obligations under international humanitarian
law and refrain from any unilateral action that could
undermine the peace process. We affirm our support to
Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock for their commitment
to a definitive and lasting resolution of the crisis in
Yemen, as well as to the Redeployment Coordination
Committee and UNMHA observation teams for their
determination to bring the peace process to a successful
conclusion. We once again commend Ms. Gamba for her
commitment to taking action to combat the systematic
20/26

15/04/2019

use of child soldiers in the crisis in Yemen and urge
Ms. Luqman to continue her efforts as part of a more
inclusive peace process.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank all of today’s briefers for their
comprehensive overview of the situation on the
political, military and humanitarian fronts in Yemen.
Russia and Yemen are linked by a tradition of
decades of friendly relations imbued with mutual trust
and multifaceted ties in many areas. We are deeply
pained by what is happening in Yemen today. We have
been compelled to acknowledge that the situation in
Yemen is still tragic. Despite the efforts being made both
through the United Nations and bilateral channels, the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, including
the redeployment of armed forces in Al-Hudaydah, the
exchange of prisoners and de-escalation in Taiz, has
stalled. The opposing parties are blaming one another.
That must stop. We call on all Yemenis to abandon
unilateral steps, which undermine the prospects for
launching a full-fledged political process and make
the United Nations mediation efforts very difficult.
We are awaiting the implementation of the first phase
of redeployment.
While the fragile ceasefire regime in Al-Hudaydah
is holding, we are concerned about the intensification
of hostilities in other parts of the country. The
growing tension is complicating the efforts to begin
redeployment. All the parties to the conflict in Yemen
should refrain from aggressive rhetoric and unilateral
action and show restraint. The principle of country first
and foremost, rather than individual narrow interests,
should define the attitude of all the parties.
We want to emphasize that the chances do exist
of making progress in Al-Hudaydah and transitioning
to discussing the parameters for a settlement, which is
what Martin Griffiths is working on. The international
community should collectively support his efforts.
Coordinating the work of all stakeholders will enable
us to unblock the other aspects of the Stockholm
Agreement. Attempts to marginalize individual parties
to the conflict are counterproductive. We have to
understand that the package of accords developed and
agreed on in Sweden is a unique opportunity to break
out of the closed circle of the tragedy in Yemen. We
commend the selflessness and professionalism of the
work of Martin Griffiths, Michael Lollesgaard and our
colleagues on the humanitarian front in getting the
19-10994

15/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8512

Yemeni parties to implement the agreements reached
in Stockholm.

The indiscriminate use of force, including strikes on
civilian targets, is unacceptable.

Russia will continue to support United Nations
mediation efforts in Yemen in its national capacity,
cooperating with regional and international partners
while making use of its contacts with all the parties.
If they are to succeed, the United Nations mediation
efforts must be based on the cooperation of the parties
to the conflict themselves as well as on regional and
international assistance. There can be no military
solution to the conflict in Yemen. Everyone has to
acknowledge that and collaborate with the United
Nations on that basis. We are certain that the further
deployment of the United Nations Mission to Support the
Hudaydah Agreement will facilitate the disengagement
process of the opposing forces and will also help to
stabilize the situation in Yemen as a whole.

We want to point out, however, that despite the
importance of providing humanitarian assistance,
the answer to Yemen’s challenges lies in reaching a
sustainable and comprehensive political settlement.
That is the framework in which the violence can be
stopped, functioning Government bodies established,
the army restored and economic recovery begun. An
all-important issue in Yemen is combating terrorism,
which is exploiting the current state of chaos. We
would like to emphasize that establishing the political
process in Yemen would contribute significantly
to stabilizing the situation in the entire region to a
similar degree. Launching a process of security- and
confidence-building measures in the Persian Gulf, and
ultimately throughout the Middle East, in line with the
well-known Russian initiative in that regard, would
help to resolve some crisis situations, including the
conflict in Yemen. Once again, we urge our friends in
the region to respond positively to Russia’s proposal
and the international community to support efforts
in that direction. Threats and confrontations should
give way to dialogue and cooperation in which every
one of the States of the region should participate,
including Iran and the other countries of the Persian
Gulf. We have to work together urgently to improve
the atmosphere, which will enable all of us to focus on
settling the conflicts in the region under the auspices of
the United Nations.

The people of Yemen desperately need peace. We
urge all the parties to de-escalate. We demand that they
put aside all their differences immediately, cooperate
with the United Nations and start working in earnest
to improve the disastrous humanitarian situation in the
country, the scale of which Mr. Lowcock spoke about
today. A majority of the Yemeni population is starving
and in need of one or another kind of assistance — and
this is the twenty-first century. The country is once
again on the brink of a cholera epidemic, and children
are suffering the most, as Ms. Gamba reported. We
all have to assume that even if the conflict ends in the
near future, the people of Yemen will be dependent on
outside help for a long time. The civil and economic
infrastructure is in ruins and the cost of rebuilding it is
rising steadily every day. We urge the donor community
to recognize the extent of the problem and respond to
the Emergency Relief Coordinator’s appeal. Bringing
emergency humanitarian assistance to the people of
Yemen is a priority. Like many other States Members
of the United Nations, including Yemen’s neighbours,
we will continue helping to assist the country’s longsuffering people.
Another important point is that humanitarian
assistance to Yemen from abroad should be distributed
in a non-discriminatory manner among the entire
population in all parts of the country, regardless of
who controls which parts of it, and that is exactly
Russia’s approach. We want to draw the Council’s
attention to the importance of complying strictly with
the provisions of international humanitarian law and
ensuring unimpeded access for humanitarian workers.

I would like to once again remind the Council of
resolution 598 (1987), which requested the SecretaryGeneral, together with the States of the region, to
develop a security architecture. The conditions for
starting that work have long been ripe and are very
much needed.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I would first like to thank your delegation,
Mr. President, for scheduling today’s important
meeting during your presidency. I would also like to
thank all the briefers for the informative and detailed
reports that they have just presented to us on the most
recent developments in Yemen.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea has been closely
following the sad events that continue to trouble the
people of Yemen. In the past few weeks a significant
delegation from the Security Council that included my
country had the opportunity to visit parts of this region,

19-1099421/26

S/PV.8512

The situation in the Middle East

where we met informally with some of the parties to
the conflict, who updated us on the current situation
and expressed their concern about the persistence of
the conflict.
Since the Stockholm Agreement was signed more
than 100 days ago, to date it has not been possible to
implement phase 1 of the redeployment of forces. We
welcome with satisfaction the news that both parties to
the conflict have agreed to implement the redeployment
of their forces in Al-Hudaydah in line with the plan
established by Lieutenant General Lollesgaard to
improve the situation, as provided for in phase 1 of the
Stockholm Agreement. We hope to see such acceptance
by both parties followed by the effective realization of
that redeployment.
We recognize the efforts of the parties to improve
the situation but we would like to ask them for a deeper
commitment without preconditions or any attempt to
delay the implementation of the Agreement so as to
put an end to the suffering of millions of Yemenis. We
are facing a blockade that is causing difficulties due
to the lack of humanitarian access. On the one hand,
there is a delay in implementing important elements
of the Stockholm Agreement, such as the exchange
of prisoners and the memorandum of understanding
on the port of Taiz, which would facilitate the entry
of humanitarian aid, and, on the other, the impasse
regarding the city of Al-Hudaydah, preventing access
to the Red Sea Mills, which contain enough grain to
feed 3.7 million people for a month.
We would also like to echo the statements of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Michelle Bachelet, on the human rights situation
in Yemen. She emphasized that the grave human rights
situation deserves attention and called for the lifting of
restrictions on humanitarian supplies.
The security of both the Yemeni people and the
staff of humanitarian agencies providing assistance in
Yemen is also of the utmost concern to my delegation. In
that regard, we urge the parties to respect international
humanitarian law and human rights by protecting the
lives, health and dignity of the population in general,
as well as the assets for their development. Despite the
ongoing difficulties, we acknowledge and commend
the efforts made by the Government to pay salaries to
some civil servants and teachers.
The time that has passed since the beginning of this
conflict has shown us that the military option cannot
22/26

15/04/2019

restore peace to the Yemenis. We would therefore call
on the parties to facilitate a lasting political solution to
ensure peace and stability throughout Yemen by means
of a frank and inclusive dialogue, with the mediation
and good offices of Mr. Griffiths, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, in a climate
of confidence-building, respecting international law
and the Security Council resolutions. To that end, we
cannot ignore the risk of instability expressed by the
leaders of the Southern Transitional Council if they do
not participate in the ongoing peace talks.
We were pleased that the Houthis and Mr. Mohamed
Ali al-Houthi agreed to take part in the negotiations
with the Government that took place in Stockholm.
We also particularly appeal to them to contribute to
the effective and comprehensive implementation of the
peace agreement that resulted from those negotiations.
Without that, the Yemeni people, in particular women,
children and the elderly, will continue to experience the
enormous suffering reflected by the alarming figures.
According to Save the Children, since the beginning of
the conflict, more than 85,000 children under the age of
five have died from extreme hunger or disease and more
than 8 million children do not have adequate access to
safe drinking water, sanitation and hygiene. In addition,
more than 24 million people, that is, 80 per cent of the
population, need assistance and 20 million suffer from
food insecurity, with approximately 10 million at risk
of starvation.
It is very sad to learn that there have been recent
clashes in Abs in Hajjah and in other areas, causing
the displacement of 100,000 people. As if all that were
not enough, the incidence of cholera cases has tripled
this year as compared to the first quarter of 2018 and
the value of the rial has greatly depreciated against the
dollar, which strongly affects the purchasing power of
the people. Do those devastating figures regarding the
level of suffering of the Yemenis not tell them that it
is time to definitively resolve the conflict, which the
journalist Cesar Chelala has described as a massacre,
not a war?
Finally, I would like to reiterate the sincere support
of Equatorial Guinea for the Yemeni people by calling
on the Council, the United Nations system and the
international community to continue to support the
mediation efforts of Mr. Martin Griffiths and all those
working on the ground, with the sole aim of saving the
victims and finding a peaceful and sustainable solution
19-10994

15/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

to this conflict and the massacre of children, women
and elderly, in short, the civilian population in Yemen.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, I would
like to thank all the briefers for providing us with
comprehensive and valuable information on the
situation in Yemen.
My delegation’s very first statement on this issue in
January (see S/PV.8441) was full of hope, optimistic and
projected that in the following three months, we would
hear a better story for the people of Yemen. However,
from what we heard from the briefers today, that seems
not to be the case. The calls made in resolution 2451
(2018), which the Council adopted on 21 December
2018, have not been met. That said, and in response
to the briefings, Indonesia would like to underscore
three points.
First, parties must honour their commitments
and push for the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement, in particular the Al-Hudaydah agreement.
The Houthis must increase their efforts to redeploy
troops from the ports of Al-Hudaydah and to the city of
Al-Hudaydah and to allow the United Nations Mission
to Support the Hudaydah Agreement to operate fully
and monitor the implementation of the Agreement.
Humanitarian corridors must be established without
further delay to allow the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. The exchange of prisoners must urgently
take place, as it is approaching the holy month of
Ramadan. They should have been united with their
families during this month. Before the second dialogue
planned by the Special Envoy starts, the discussion on
the city of Taiz should begin and make progress and the
joint committee should have been established.
Secondly, parties must honour international
humanitarian law and human rights law. Indonesia
is concerned about the information provided by
Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, related to the use and unlawful
recruitment of children in armed conflict. According to
last year’s report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2018/465), in relation to the
Yemeni conflict the United Nations verified that there
had been 842 cases of the recruitment and use of boys
as young as 11 years old. Of those cases, 534 were
attributed to the Houthis.
We are also concerned over the recent attack that
killed at least 14 people, including children, and injured

S/PV. 8512

others. In that connection, all parties must honour the
rules of engagement and not target schools or medical
facilities. Indonesia also calls on all parties to abide
by their obligation under international law to protect
children from all forms of violence. The protection of
civilians should also be a priority, as tens of thousands
of people, mostly civilians, are reported to have been
killed in the conflict since 2015.
Thirdly, continuous efforts should be made to hold
a second dialogue and to find a comprehensive and
lasting solution to the conflict and crisis in Yemen. As
the Security Council is in the business of making peace,
such negotiation and dialogue should be at the centre
of our work; results should not be achieved through
military pressure. Indonesia therefore fully supports
the Special Envoy’s efforts to ensure the holding of a
second dialogue. A continuing and inclusive dialogue
involving women will allow the various sides in Yemen
to come together, and it is hoped that in this way the
confidence-building measures under way will continue
to develop.
As Ramadan — the holy month for the Muslim
sisterhood and brotherhood — will be starting soon,
we hope that the Yemeni people will be able to feel a
difference compared with Ramadan in previous years.
The Yemeni people should start to feel the breeze of
peace and keep their hopes high for a lasting peace and
the reconstruction of their country.
The international community stands with the
Yemeni people, and we are intensifying our efforts to
see progress in the agreement reached last year.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Germany.
Having listened to all the statements and appeals
around the table, I think that we all sound a bit like
broken records. Since we last spoke (see S/PV.8469),
neither the humanitarian situation nor the human rights
situation has improved. International humanitarian law
is being violated. We hear about new attacks on schools
and hospitals; famine is worse; and cholera is spreading.
It is very, very frustrating. The only one of the only
positive things is what our French colleague mentioned
and the fact that the Security Council is united.
Again, having listened to all speakers, I think that
we all agree that there can be no military solution to
this conflict. We have to do everything possible to

19-1099423/26

S/PV.8512

The situation in the Middle East

15/04/2019

ensure that a political solution is found, and I think that
the voice of the Security Council must be heard.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

Like others, we fully support Martin Griffiths.
We are extremely encouraged by the fact that he
never gives up but starts again and again. I offer him
congratulations on the agreement that he has achieved
on the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement. Of
course, the proof of the pudding will be in the eating.

I now give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

We believe that it is also important to think about the
next steps and to work towards a framework agreement
with respect to the transitional phase. Germany is ready
to host a possible next meeting and supports the work of
the United Nations Mission to Support the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement on the ground; we are ready to support up
to 10 monitors to assist in the work there. We are also
ready to work with our Berghof Foundation, which
he mentioned, behind the scenes on the second track,
because we believe that this track is important and that
it is important to speak to all parties in the region in
order to make progress.
On the peace process, we deem vitally important,
and here I would echo what Ms. Luqman said, that we
have to include women in the peace process. It cannot
be like it was in Stockholm; I think there was only one
woman sitting at the table. The next round must have
more women around the table, not only because women
are those most affected, but because they are half of the
population, and experience shows that when women are
involved in peace negotiations, we can actually achieve
progress.
The inclusion of youth is also key, and here I want to
thank Ms. Gamba for her report, which was devastating.
I can only echo what she said in her statement: children
have to be given a chance to survive. I can only
encourage her to continue to raise her voice and speak
out on the fate of children that are being dragged into
war and are suffering. Anatolio gave some terrible
figures in this respect. I also encourage her to go to
the Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict
to report on the situation in Yemen. We also support
what she and others said with regard to accountability.
It cannot be that those committing serious crimes are
not punished.
Lastly, concerning the humanitarian situation,
Germany has also provided $100 million again for 2019,
most of it disbursed. We want to support in particular
UNICEF’s WASH programme and others that are
fighting cholera.
24/26

Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like first of all to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month and to wish you and the delegation of
friendly Germany every success.
The people of Yemen aspire to peace, security
and stability. The need for peace has been repeatedly
underscored by President of the Republic Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour, in particular in his most
recent speech before Parliament, which convened
in Hadhramaut governorate last Saturday. In this
regard, the Yemeni Government has made major
efforts to arrive at a lasting peace. To that noble end
we participated in many rounds of negotiations under
the auspices of the United Nations. Nonetheless, the
armed Houthi militias, supported and pushed by Iran,
have deliberately worked to ensure the failure of the
negotiations and to undermine prospects for peace
through their rejection of what was agreed upon by the
most recent Stockholm Agreement.
More than four months have elapsed without
the slightest progress in the implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement because the Houthi militias
refuse to work towards peace, while using delaying
tactics accompanied by arrogance, in order to benefit
from the suffering of the Yemeni people and achieve
political and military gains so as to implement their
sectarian and dynastic projects.
During this period, the Government of Yemen
has shown a great deal of patience and flexibility,
as have our brothers in the coalition, with a view to
implementing the Stockholm Agreement. This would
be a positive step towards achieving lasting peace based
on the agreed terms of reference, namely, the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation
Mechanism, the outcome of the comprehensive
National Dialogue Conference and Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2216 (2015), with
a view to relieving the suffering of the Yemeni people
and ensuring that humanitarian assistance reaches
those who are starving, ill or suffer from cholera. This
disease has resulted in the death of hundreds of our
people because the Houthi militias refuse to allow the
delivery of vaccines to the areas affected. I would have
liked to hear Mr. Lowcock refer to this issue, which has
19-10994

15/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

caused an increase in the number of deaths resulting
from cholera, which is spreading in areas controlled by
the Houthi militias.
The Government of Yemen has worked
constructively with the United Nations, through its
Special Envoy for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths. We have
supported all the redeployment and withdrawal plans,
including the plan presented by Lieutenant General
Michael Lollesgaard on 18 February, which has two
phases. We agreed to begin implementing the first phase
by taking measures and actions to resolve securityrelated issues. His Excellency President Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi, during a meeting with the Special Envoy
at a time when the Houthi militias had rejected the
redeployment, presented his vision for addressing the
security issues, including the establishment of a joint
tripartite mechanism. That proposal was approved by
the Special Envoy and Lieutenant General Lollesgaard.
However, the Houthi militias rejected it. Those militias
often send messages to the Council on the eve of its
meetings on Yemen, providing verbal acceptance and
later refusing to implement on the ground. They go
back on their statements by deceiving the international
community and the Security Council. The militias
hamper the work of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee in Al-Hudaydah and prevent any kind of
progress. They have repeatedly refused to allow the
Chair of the Committee to pass through and meet with
the Government team in regions under the Yemeni
Government’s control.
On the other side, members of the Government
team risk their lives to participate in the meetings that
are convened by Lieutenant General Lollesgaard in
areas under the control of the Houthi militias in order
to facilitate the work of the United Nations mission and
support its efforts to carry out withdrawals and execute
redeployment. The militias target the sites of the joint
meetings with the Chair of the Committee by launching
mortar shells, drones and Katyusha rockets against
them. That is a flagrant violation of United Nations
rules and clear intention to undermine the Al-Hudaydah
agreement and the peace process as a whole.
Last week, the Houthi militias targeted the convoy
of Lieutenant General Lollesgaard and humanitarian
workers preventing them from reaching the Red Sea
Mills, which contain 51,000 tons of grains, enough to
feed 3.7 million Yemenis for a month. That could allow
the grain stocks to rot.

S/PV. 8512

I agree with the representative of the United
Kingdom in asking Mr. Lowcock: Who is preventing
United Nations agencies and World Food Programme
from reaching the Red Sea Mills? The Yemeni
Government is always ready to cooperate with the
United Nations and its agencies, including the World
Food Programme, in order to facilitate access to the
Mills and make sure that humanitarian assistance
arrives to the safe areas that are under the control of the
Yemeni Government.
The number of violations committed by the Houthi
militias since 18 December 2018 has surpassed 3,047.
They have sought to provoke the national army forces
and the Arab coalition, claimed numerous victims and
caused enormous material damage. In fact, 134 martyrs
have fallen and 668 people have been injured, including
women and children. The militias continue to intensify
their confrontation with the national army forces.
They use the territories of Al-Hudaydah governorate
to launch their drones and speed boats. They continue
to target civilians and public and private facilities and
to send more military reinforcements and fortify their
defensive sites by planting mines, erecting barricades
and digging tunnels. More than 777 tunnels have been
dug to date, while the number was 70 in December
2018. All of that demonstrates that the Houthi militias
do not have a sincere desire to implement Stockholm
Agreement. Instead, they are exploiting time,
misleading the Council and deceiving the international
community.
The Houthis are not only creating obstacles to
the Al-Hudaydah agreement, but are also refusing to
implement the agreement concerning the release of
prisoners, arbitrarily arrested detainees, the forcibly
disappeared and those who are under house arrest. That
was the only agreement which was reached before the
round of negotiations in Sweden. The Houthi militias
are trying to manipulate the agreement, which calls
for the release of everyone, in order to make gains
to the detriment of those who and their families are
suffering. There can be no political bargaining on this
humanitarian issue.
The Yemeni Government has adopted a number of
economic measures and taken decisions in an attempt
to save the Yemeni economy, improve the economic
situation, end the collapse of our national currency,
relieve the suffering of our people, improve living and
humanitarian conditions, and reclaim the monetary
cycle, financial flows and business transactions from

19-1099425/26

S/PV.8512

The situation in the Middle East

the black market to the official banking market,
which is committed to installing controls and meeting
international requirements in order to combat the
financing of terrorism and money-laundering and to
limit randomized speculation against our currency,
while dropping the demand concerning foreign
currency.
The Yemeni Government has undertaken a number
of measures to honour its commitments to our citizens.
We pay salaries to retirees and to public civil servants in
Al-Hudaydah governorate, as well as to those who work
in the education and health sectors. We intend to pay
the salaries of all civil servants as soon as we can start
collecting and managing all governmental revenues, in
cooperation with the international community.
We thank donor countries and international
organizations for their generous support pledged at the
2019 high-level conference to fund the humanitarian
response in Yemen, which was convened in Geneva on
26 February with the aim of alleviating the suffering of
the Yemeni people. We particularly thank the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, the State
of Kuwait, the United States of America, the United
Kingdom and the Federal Republic of Germany as well
as all the friendly and brotherly countries. We reiterate
our appeal to make sure that those pledges are honoured.
On Saturday 13 April, an extraordinary session of
Parliament was convened in the city of Seiyun, in the
governorate of Hadhramaut. That was a confirmation
and demonstration of the unity of the Yemeni people,
regardless of their parties, positions and social class.
The session was based on legal grounds and national
spirit, while deferring to the leadership of Parliament
to activate the role of the constitutional institutions,
achieve many legislative tasks that support the executive
authority in restoring the State, put an end to the coup
d’état and armed rebellion by the Houthi militias,
supported by Iran, restore State control throughout
the country and attain peace, security and stability, in
addition to implementing the outcome of the national
dialogue and pursuing the political process. At this
session, Parliament is discussing, inter alia, the 2019
budget submitted by the Prime Minister.
In 2014, the Government of Yemen signed with
the United Nations a programme of work to put to an
end to child recruitment. In December 2018, it also

26/26

15/04/2019

signed a road map to implement the plan and prevent
the recruitment and use of children in armed conflicts.
The Government is working with the country team
to implement that plan. The Republic of Yemen has
endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration and the Yemeni
Government makes great efforts to rehabilitate and
reintegrate the children who had been recruited by
the Houthi militias. We return them to their families
through Ma’reb Rehabilitation Centre for Children,
which is funded by the King Salman Humanitarian Aid
and Relief Centre. In this regard, we thank the coalition
countries, notably the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, for
their great efforts to help the Yemeni Government
protect children and prevent their recruitment while
rehabilitating and reintegrating them into society.
I would like to ask Ms. Gamba the following
question on recruiting girls. Who is responsible for
recruiting girls? The Houthis have an armed group
called the Zeinabites. This armed group forces
girls to be recruited while taking advantage of their
humanitarian circumstances.
I want to reaffirm once again and to add to what
Mr. Lowcock said about the visa issue. The Yemeni
Government has demonstrated its willingness to
cooperate with the United Nations and its agencies by
issuing visas through all its embassies throughout the
world without delay or hindrance. It is our responsibility
as the Yemeni Government to support the United
Nations efforts. However, those who are impeding the
entry of United Nations personnel and its agencies to
Yemen are the Houthis themselves.
We call on the Security Council to shoulder
its responsibility and maintain credibility while
implementing its resolutions on Yemen. It should
exert greater pressure on the armed Houthi militias to
implement the Stockholm agreement without delay. The
agreement is the focus of attention and the cornerstone
of the political process. It is necessary therefore to
identify the entity that is undermining the agreement
because its failure would kill the hopes of the Yemeni
people to achieve sustained peace and end the conflict.
The President: I now invite Council Members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

19-10994
