S/PV.7575

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7575th meeting

Thursday, 10 December 2015, 2.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Mrs. Kawar
Mr. Baublys
Mr. Ibrahim
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Letter dated 3 December 2015 from the representatives of Chile, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2015/931)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-41634 (E)
*1541634*

S/PV.7575

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The meeting was called to order at 2.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
members of the Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is always opposed to intervention by the Council on
issues concerning the human rights situation in any
country. The Charter of the United Nations clearly
lays out the functions and division of labour among
the major organs of the United Nations, which should
discharge their respective responsibilities and refrain
from encroaching on the functions of others.
As bearer of the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security, the
Council should devote itself to addressing threats to
international peace and security. It is not the venue
for addressing issues of human rights, and the human
rights situation in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea does not constitute a threat to international
peace and security. China is against allowing the
Council to deliberate on the human rights situation in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We request
that a vote be held on the provisional agenda of today’s
meeting.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
In December 2014, under Australia’s critically
important leadership, the Security Council held its first
meeting on the situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea (see S/PV.7353), focused on the
widespread and systematic human rights violations
documented in the comprehensive report of the United
Nations Human Rights Council’s commission of
inquiry (A/HRC/25/63). Accordingly, the situation in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is now an
item on the Security Council’s seizure list.
Given that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea continues to carry out widespread and systematic
human rights violations, inflicting immeasurable
suffering on the North Korean people, and given the
ongoing threat posed by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to international peace and security,
the reasons for the Council to meet on the situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea persist.
For as long as the situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea remains unchanged, the Council

2/22

10/12/2015

should continue to hear briefings about and engage in
debates on the human rights situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, in this Chamber. We
therefore support the adoption of the agenda.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I wish to draw the attention of members to document
S/2015/931, which contains a letter dated 3 December
2015 from the representatives of Chile, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America addressed to the President of
the Security Council.
In view of the request contained in document
S/2015/931 and the comments made by the representative
of China, and the comments I made in my national
capacity, I propose to put the provisional agenda to the
vote. Accordingly, I shall put it to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Chile, France, Jordan, Lithuania, Malaysia, New
Zealand, Spain, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Against:
Angola, China, Russian Federation, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of)
Abstaining:
Chad, Nigeria
The President: There were 9 votes in favour, 4
votes against and 2 abstentions. The provisional agenda
has been adopted.
The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea
Letter dated 3 December 2015 from the
representatives of Chile, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2015/931)
The President: Since the provisional agenda was
adopted, I shall suspend this meeting and we shall
resume, after a brief recess, to continue consideration
of the agenda item.

15-41634

10/12/2015

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The meeting was suspended at 2.45 p.m. and
resumed at 2.50 p.m.
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Japan and the Republic of Korea to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
and Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: I thank you, Madam, for the
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
One year ago, on 22 December 2014, the Security
Council extended its debate on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea beyond nuclear concerns to include
human rights. It is fitting that we meet today, Human
Rights Day, commemorating the day on which, in
1948, the General Assembly adopted the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.
On 19 November, the Third Committee adopted,
by a recorded vote of 112 votes in favour, the draft
resolution on the situation of human rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The General
Assembly is due to formally adopt the draft resolution
later this month. As is well known, the commission of
inquiry concluded that
“the gravity, scale and nature of these violations
reveal a State that does not have any parallel in the
contemporary world” (A/HRC/25/63, para. 80).
Efforts to engage the Government of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to improve the human rights
situation in the country must go hand in hand with
efforts to hold perpetrators of crimes accountable.
In keeping with its obligations under international
law, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has a
responsibility to protect its population from the most
serious international crimes. And the international
community has a collective responsibility to protect
the population of the Democratic People’s Republic

S/PV.7575

of Korea and to consider the wider implications of the
reported grave human rights situation for the stability
of the region.
The international community has yet to find and
agree on an effective way to address the serious human
rights concerns raised by the report of the commission
of inquiry, and how to bring about positive and lasting
change for the North Korean people. Particular
challenges have been posed on how to balance calls for
accountability and focus on security matters, and the
need for engagement and dialogue.
Despite different perspectives on this matter,
discussion of human rights concerns by Member
States, including in the Council, allows for a more
comprehensive assessment and action when addressing
security and stability concerns in the Korean peninsula.
History has shown that serious violations of human
rights often serve as warning signs of instability and
conflict, especially in the absence of accountability for
such violations.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
on multiple occasions made clear its objection to the
General Assembly resolution on the human rights
situation in the country. Unlike in 2014, however, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has refrained
from raising the possibility of conducting a fourth
nuclear test in its statements rejecting the resolution.
We are concerned by the report that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea conducted a
further submarine-launched ballistic missile test on
28 November. The Security Council has repeatedly
demanded, through relevant resolutions, that further
launches using ballistic missiles be ceased and
obligations be met for verifiable denuclearization.
Although each challenge has different contexts, the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action with Iran shows
that diplomacy can work to address non-proliferation
challenges. There is strong international consensus on
the need to work for peace, stability and denuclearization
on the Korean peninsula. To achieve this goal, dialogue
is the way forward. Meaningful dialogue must be
revitalized and conducted in a sincere manner.
Over the past two years, the consistent efforts of the
humanitarian community to engage and the commitment
on the part of the Government to improving its disastermanagement capacity have resulted in concrete progress
in improving overall relations between the United
Nations and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.

15-416343/22

S/PV.7575

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The Government’s increasing openness to carrying
out joint assessments with United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations has facilitated
access and data collection, ensuring that assistance
reaches those in need. Continued engagement is key to
maintaining this momentum.
The engagement between the authorities of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the
United Nations in the preparation of the 2016 needs
and priorities document is welcome. The document
will provide an overview of the urgent humanitarian
priorities in the country and will call on Member States
to support the activities of the humanitarian community
in this regard.
International assistance plays a critical role in
safeguarding the lives of millions in the country.
Humanitarian funding to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has, however, steadily declined
during the past decade, from $183 million in 2003 to
less than $50 million in 2014. Lack of timely, predictable
and sufficient funding is crippling humanitarian
agencies’ ability to respond effectively to the affected
communities. The United Nations urges Member States
to increase humanitarian assistance to those in need in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The new 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda
(General Assembly resolution 70/1) is a promise by
leaders to all people everywhere. As we move to
implement the 2030 Agenda and achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals, the principle of leaving no one
behind is a challenge that every nation must address.
The United Nations country team is in discussion with
the Government on a new strategic framework, starting
in 2017, that would cover both humanitarian assistance
and development support for the coming five years.
This year marks the seventieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations, as well as the division
of the Korean peninsula. Inter-Korean relations have
remained deadlocked for far too long. The United
Nations therefore warmly welcomes the holding of
family reunions between the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea from
20 to 26 October at Mount Kumgang. Humanitarian
measures such as the reunions of separated families
should be regularized and not subject to political and
security considerations.
The Secretary-General is encouraged by the positive
trends related to inter-Korean relations, particularly

4/22

10/12/2015

the August agreement, and plans for inter-Korean
talks on 11 December. He hopes that the recent
momentum will pave the way for greater inter-Korean
dialogue, people-to-people contact, reconciliation and
cooperation. He further hopes that more dialogue and
exchanges will contribute to the promotion of human
rights, and peace and stability on the Korean peninsula.
For the second time, Foreign Minister Ri Su Yong
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea attended
the General Assembly debate in September 2015 (see
A/70/PV.24) and met with the Secretary-General,
confirming the commitment of his country to sustaining
and continuing the dialogue with the United Nations.
The Secretary-General has often stated his willingness
to play a constructive role if there was an opportunity,
including through a visit to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, in an effort to promote inter-Korean
peace and reconciliation.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
extended invitations to the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, for the first time in history, and the
European Union Special Representative for Human
Rights to visit. While the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea continues not to recognize the mandate of the
Special Rapporteur or the Seoul Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the invitations are
positive signals that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea may become more substantively engaged with
the United Nations human rights system.
It is worth noting that several members of the
Council have previously made it known that they stand
ready to adjust their positions in response to concrete
steps that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
takes to improve human rights in the country. The
international community’s attention to the human
rights situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, including the discussion today, is an opportunity
for that country’s authorities and the international
community to take concrete steps to improve human
rights and the living conditions of the people of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. I urge both
the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and concerned Member States to begin taking
these steps. The United Nations is committed to helping
towards that end.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Al Hussein.

15-41634

10/12/2015

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Mr. Al Hussein: I welcome this invitation of the
Security Council to provide a briefing on the human
rights situation in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, where gross violations continue, the
institutional nature and severity of which pose a threat
to international peace and security. The abduction
of foreign nationals, the enforced disappearances,
the trafficking and continued movement of refugees
and asylum-seekers make this point clearly. These,
in addition to a litany of other gross human rights
violations, have still not been halted or reversed by the
Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. Victims are still unable to find judicial redress,
and there is still no accountability grounded in the work
of an independent judiciary.
It is appropriate that today’s discussion falls on
Human Rights Day, which this year focuses on “our
rights, our freedoms, always”. Millions of people in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continue
to be denied their basic rights and freedoms. They are
not allowed to move freely within and outside their
country or to speak out about injustices. They are not
allowed to follow their faith. They are denied access to
information not sanctioned by the regime and the right
to form organizations that can, in any way, be seen to
be critical of the Government.
The independent international commission of
inquiry established by the Human Rights Council
described in graphic detail the appalling nature of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s political
prison-camp system, where people, including children,
have been deliberately starved, made to carry out forced
labour, subjected to extrajudicial killings and summary
executions, tortured and raped. The commission of
inquiry stated that hundreds of thousands of people
have died in these camps over several decades and that
they are still believed to contain between 80,000 and
120,000 prisoners.
Over the past year, my Office began implementing
the recommendations of the commission of inquiry,
which concluded that “the gravity, scale and nature of
[the human rights] violations reveal a State that does
not have any parallel in the contemporary world”
(A/HRC/25/63, para.80) and stated unequivocally
that a wide range of crimes against humanity had
been committed. Their recommendations included
the establishment of a presence by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR); I inaugurated that Office in Seoul in June,

S/PV.7575

and it is now fully operational, in accordance with its
mandate. The Office has begun collecting testimonies
from individuals who have left the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, documenting developments in the
human rights situation and deepening the evidentiary
basis for the accountability that surely is owed to the
victims and deserved by the alleged perpetrators.
During my visit, I met with a number of defectors,
men and women, and their personal experiences were
indeed extraordinarily harrowing. I must also mention
my concern over the threats issued by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea authorities and media
against the OHCHR Office in Seoul when it was first
established. I reiterate that it is wholly unacceptable
for a Member State to issue threats like that against a
United Nations office and its staff, and I hope it will
not reoccur.
Three types of allegations have emerged from
OHCHR’s recent monitoring and documentation efforts.
First, victims and witnesses have spoken of the
severe treatment of detainees in political prison camps
and in other detention locations, especially at the early
stages of criminal proceedings. Detainees have no
access to independent lawyers and, we have been told,
endure inhuman detention conditions, as well as torture
during interrogation, adding weight to the findings of
the commission of inquiry.
Secondly, food insecurity is an ongoing concern.
While food availability may have improved relative to
past periods of massive starvation, the systemic failure
of the public distribution system has not been addressed.
Given the social inequalities within the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, the vulnerability of those
lacking adequate cash income remains worrisome.
Thirdly, as in many other countries, women in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are subject
to gender-based violence and discrimination. Their
suffering appears to be exacerbated by a lack of
awareness that such violence is unacceptable and by
the absence of appropriate support mechanisms. Recent
restrictions on movement across the border with China,
often used by women engaging in private trade, are also
said to have had a strong negative impact on women,
restricting their ability to provide for their families,
increasing vulnerability to trafficking for those seeking
to leave, and augmenting the risk of detention and illtreatment for those who try to cross the border or are
repatriated.

15-416345/22

S/PV.7575

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The family reunions that took place in October were
a welcome development, and such reunions should be
regularized. Today, on the occasion of Human Rights
Day, my Office in Seoul is organizing a workshop on the
human rights implications of the separation of Korean
families, which affects more than 130,000 individuals.
Most have reached an advanced age and are longing to
be reunited with their loved ones. The very few who
were selected for previous reunions have to live with
the psychological impact of a one-off meeting, with
no possibility of maintaining contact. I hope that the
commitment and collaboration shown by both sides
through the most recent reunions will continue.
The matter of international abductions remains a
cause for very grave concern. While the establishment
of a special investigation committee in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea on this issue, following
bilateral talks between Japan and the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea in May 2014, was a positive
development, no information has been provided
since then on the results emanating from its work.
Equally, the fate of hundreds of victims of abduction
from the Republic of Korea must be established.
On 21 September, OHCHR organized consultations
on the situation of human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, including on the issue of
international abductions, enforced disappearances and
related matters. This was followed up by a visit to Japan
by my Seoul team.
Once again this year, the General Assembly
may well call on the Security Council to take action
by referring the situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to the International Criminal
Court, which I believe to be essential, given the scale
and extreme gravity of the allegations. Any call for
accountability must, however, go hand in hand with an
open dialogue with the Government of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, encouraging it towards
reform and urging it to accept assistance. My Office
has continued to engage with the authorities on possible
technical cooperation, with the goal of assisting them
to address the prevailing human rights challenges and,
ultimately, to trigger positive change in the lives of all
people in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
There are signs that the Government is making some
tentative efforts to engage in the international arena.
In this context, I very much welcome the invitation
extended to me by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to visit the

6/22

10/12/2015

country. My Office is now engaged with the authorities
to explore modalities for a possible future visit.
The continuing violations and systemic failings
simply heighten international anxieties over the
possibility of a precipitous turn, an event of great
centrifugal consequence that could rapidly engulf
the region. As we have stated time and again, if the
international community is serious about reducing
tensions in the region, more must be done collectively
to ensure respect for human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. Addressing the chronic
human rights situations in that country is urgent and
long overdue.
The President: I thank Mr. Al Hussein for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank UnderSecretary-General Feltman and High Commissioner Al
Hussein for the sobering briefings that they have just
given us. I agree with them that this debate is a sad but
fitting way to mark international Human Rights Day.
It has to be right that we focus on what is probably the
worst human rights situation in the world.
As the recent report of the Special Rapporteur
makes clear, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
remains an unnecessary and unending human rights
tragedy. Today we have heard yet more horrifying
accounts; we heard many times of summary executions,
arbitrary detentions, abductions and disappearances,
all this against a backdrop of secrecy and of fear.
This is the work of a totalitarian State with no parallel
anywhere elsewhere in the world today. It is a State that
deliberately starves its people; it is a State that punishes
relatives for the alleged crimes of their family; it is a
State that instrumentalizes forced labour, prison camps,
torture and rape. Such flagrant human rights violations
cannot go unchallenged by the Council.
Let me be clear: we are not here today to score
political points. We are here because a stream of factual
reports concerning systematic human rights violations
in a country cannot be ignored. The failure of States
to respect the principles set out in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights should concern everyone
in the Chamber. Without human rights, participatory
Government and the rule of law, peace and security are
at risk. That can be seen clearly through the focus of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on military

15-41634

10/12/2015

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

and nuclear programmes at the expenses of its people’s
welfare, and through its prioritization of spending on
weapons development and its nuclear programme at
a time of mass starvation. We cannot consider either
human rights or peace and security in isolation. And
concern for the situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea goes far beyond the Council, as I
think the audience here demonstrates today. Over 100
countries expressed their concern through the adoption
last month by the Third Committee of a draft resolution
on the subject. That was not a conspiracy, nor was it
propaganda. It reflected a shared belief from all parts
of the world that we all want North Koreans to have the
human rights that we all want and demand for ourselves.
It has been nearly a year since we last met to
discus the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (see
S/PV.7353). Given the absence of any tangible progress,
many of us will be looking today and asking what more
we can do to improve the human rights situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Yes, we can
point to the opening of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in Seoul. That
is a welcome move, sadly attacked, as aides have just
reminded us, by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea itself. We can speak of our encouragement to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that it engage
in the Universal Periodic Review last year; that was
a good thing. But nothing can mask the fact that the
onus to change the situation on the ground rests with
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea itself. It
is in its power to improve the lives of its citizens in a
meaningful way.
Pyongyang is likely to disregard, dispute and
deny the facts that have just been set out to us in the
Council. It has said that it does not have a human rights
problem, that people are treated fairly and that there
is accountability for all. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has claimed that it is willing to host
inward visits on that issue. Therefore, if the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea really has nothing to hide,
it should not fear transparency. We look forward to
proper access for international observers, including
the High Commissioner for Human Rights, to increase
our understanding of the human rights situation in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We look
forward to hearing from the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea how it will implement the Universal
Periodic Review recommendations that it has claimed
to accept.

S/PV.7575

Until we see the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea take steps to address the shocking crimes
detailed in so many reports, the Council should bear
witness to the shocking reality there. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea needs to know that the
world is watching. If the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea will not enable or ensure accountability, the
international community must be ready to do so. The
United Kingdom fully supports the call for the Council
to consider how it can best ensure accountability,
including through considering a referral to the
International Criminal Court.
One bilateral reflection, this week marked the
fifteenth year of diplomatic relations between the
United Kingdom and the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. We have built links in education, culture
and sport. We have done so because we firmly believe
that persistent, patient dialogue is the best way to help
the citizens of that country in the long term. We will
continue to use that dialogue, as well as this forum, to
stress the need for concrete action by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to improve its human
rights situation and ensure accountability. Until those
steps are taken, until the authorities of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea treat their obligations to
their people seriously, we have no option but to remain
seized of the matter.
We grow increasingly concerned about stability and
security on the Korean peninsula and what that means
for all of us, most of all for the citizens of a country
whose regime will allow them no voice in this debate at
all and has been trying its level best to ensure that they
do not hear it.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
has already expressed its position against discussion in
the Security Council of the human rights situation in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. China is
always opposed to the Security Council’s intervention
in issues that concern a country’s human rights. The
Security Council is not the place to address human
rights issues. More important, human rights issues
should not be politicized.
Currently, the situation on the Korean peninsula
remains complicated and delicate. Maintaining peace
and stability on the peninsula, realizing the goal of
de-nuclearization on the peninsula and resolving
relevant issues through dialogue and consultation are in
the common interests of all the relevant parties. China

15-416347/22

S/PV.7575

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

calls on all such parties to bear in mind the big picture
and to make greater efforts to de-escalate the tension
on the peninsula so as to promote dialogue and mutual
trust, rather than the contrary.
As a permanent member of the Security Council
and the host country of the Six-Party Talks, China has
for many years been actively promoting negotiation
and dialogue for peace and has made unremitting
efforts to maintain peace on the peninsula and achieve
de-nuclearization. We hope that all parties will work
with China to play a positive role in realizing the goals
of de-nuclearization on the peninsula and safeguarding
the common interests of all parties.
Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): We are meeting today at
the request addressed to the President of the Security
Council by nine separate Council Member States to
discuss the human rights situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
On 22 December 2014, the Council decided to add
to its agenda a new item, namely, the situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, separate from
the non-proliferation issue. At the time, we were not
a member of the Security Council. Had we been, our
vote would have been no, as it was today. Angola has
been extending its full support and cooperation to the
Security Council and to its Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), concerning the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, with particular
reference to the issue of nuclear proliferation by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Our position
is based on our unwavering support for the nuclear
non-proliferation regime and our conviction that nuclear
proliferation on the Korean peninsula constitutes a
threat to regional and international peace and security.
Concerning the human rights situation, however,
it is our conviction that it does not constitute a threat
to regional or international peace and security, and
therefore falls outside the mandate of the Security
Council, whose primary responsibility, conferred
upon it by the Charter of the United Nations, is the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Moreover, the General Assembly is already dealing
with the human rights situation in North Korea, and
the Human Rights Council is the appropriate forum
to discuss and deliberate on human rights issues.
Our position is also dictated by our disapproval of
the double-standards criteria that are so often applied
by the Council. There are country situations where
egregious human rights violations take place on a daily
8/22

10/12/2015

basis, as well as countries that sponsor terrorism and
promote conflict, without being subject to a word of
condemnation by the Security Council.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): New Zealand
believes that it is right for the Council to meet today to
discuss the human rights situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. The situation there
demands our continuing attention because it remains a
threat to regional peace and security.
Two years ago, the commission of inquiry on human
rights in the Democratic Republic of Korea, established
by the Human Rights Council, brought the gravity of
the violations in that country to the attention of the
global community. Violations were described as gross,
systematic and widespread. The commission found
that, in many cases, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea had committed crimes against humanity
based on State policies. We see little evidence that the
country’s regime shows respect for international law,
including international human rights law. Respect for
the rule of law is intimately linked with international
peace and security.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
engaged in an exercise of extreme militarization
under its Songbun — “military first” — policy. That
policy is predicated on the repression of North Korean
citizens. The commission of inquiry estimated that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea devoted up
to 25 per cent of its gross national product to defence
spending. Even a minor redistribution of that amount
would significantly alleviate suffering in the country.
This time last year, the Security Council added
the question of the human rights situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to its agenda.
With no discernible improvement in the country over
the year, it is appropriate for the Council to discuss the
situation again.
I thank High Commissioner for Human Rights Al
Hussein and Under-Secretary-General Feltman for their
briefings. New Zealand is deeply concerned about the
situation they have outlined.
According to the Special Rapporteur’s report
issued earlier this year (see A/70/362), 1,382 people
were publicly executed between 2010 and 2014. Some
of those victims were alleged to have done nothing
more than challenge State policies or have their loyalty
to the regime questioned. As we have heard today, the
commission of inquiry estimated that prison camps hold
15-41634

10/12/2015

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

up to 120,000 political prisoners. There are violations
of freedoms of thought, expression and movement.
New Zealand concurs that North Korea’s threats
of merciless punishment for the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) in Seoul are completely unacceptable. The
safety and security of United Nations staff must be
respected. New Zealand shares the concerns of other
Council members on reports of abductions, forced
labour, refoulement, human trafficking and much more.
New Zealand acknowledges certain positive
developments over the past two years. Pyongyang
has invited High Commissioner Al Hussein to visit
and to follow up on his Office’s interest in technical
cooperation. There have been positive signs of
improvement for persons with disabilities, including
free medical care and specialized education.
Over 200 recommendations were made during
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s second
Universal Periodic Review, with Pyongyang accepting
close to half of them. We were pleased that the
country accepted New Zealand’s recommendation to
work closely with humanitarian agencies to ensure
their free and unimpeded access to all populations in
need. Humanitarian assistance must be distributed
transparently and reach the most vulnerable citizens.
We require a collective effort to ensure that the
human rights situation genuinely improves. New
Zealand makes the following three calls for action.
First, we call on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to put an immediate end to human rights
violations, deliver on the promises made in the Universal
Periodic Review, sign, ratify and implement key human
rights instruments, open the door for discussions on
human rights and unconditional visits by the Special
Rapporteur and the United Nations leadership, engage
in the newly established contact group on human rights,
in which the country is a welcome member, and resume
the discussions with OHCHR on technical cooperation.
Secondly, we call on Member States to continue
to engage the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
on human rights, where possible. We need to do what
we can at the human level to bring North Koreans out
of their enforced isolation. At the same time, Member
States should continue discussions on accountability.
Finally, we call on the Security Council to remain
seized of the human rights situation in the Democratic

S/PV.7575

People’s Republic of Korea. We should be ready to
explore options to ensure that we are getting accurate
information. The frequency of our meetings should
correlate with the country’s progress in addressing the
situation.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
centrality of the Korean peninsula to the security of
the Asia-Pacific region, of which New Zealand is a
part. Addressing the militarization of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, as it manifests itself in
Pyongyang’s nuclear programme and the treatment
of its citizens, is a task to which the Security Council
and the wider international community must remain
committed. To that end, we welcome the inter-Korean
dialogue scheduled for 11 December in Kaesong.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, and Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein,
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
for their briefings.
It should be recalled that, in the same time period
last year, the Security Council took up the question
under consideration today following a report of
the commission of inquiry on human rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that reported
massive human rights violations in the country. The
report, which described some of those violations,
including crimes against humanity, recommended that
the international community and the Security Council
take urgent action, including by referring the situation to
the International Criminal Court, given the seriousness
of the situation in the country, which was characterized
by systematic, flagrant and widespread violations of
human rights. According to the latest reports on the
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
in 2015, those violations persist. As in 2014, we express
our deep concern with regard to allegations of serious
violations of human rights in the country.
We abstained today, as we did last year, because
the reports of serious violations are the result of
investigations conducted outside the country and
because the North Korean authorities categorically reject
them. That is why we call for caution and emphasize
the urgent need to conduct further investigations in
order to determine unequivocally whether the alleged
violations were actually committed, before assigning
responsibility. Furthermore, the special interest that
Council members bring to the issue of human rights
violations in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

15-416349/22

S/PV.7575

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

should be extended to all similar situations around the
world in order to avoid a double standard, which would
imply that the issue is being used for political purposes.
We therefore urge the members of the Security
Council to move beyond their political and ideological
differences and to find agreement on the ways and
means to create a suitable framework for cooperation
between the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and
the United Nations bodies responsible for investigating
violations of human rights. Accordingly, we call on all
States that can exert influence over the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to encourage the country
to engage in a genuine dialogue with the international
community and the countries of the region to facilitate
the access of independent investigators to its territory.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
President for holding today’s public meeting following
the request of 9 members of the Security Council,
including Jordan. I would like to thank the UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, and the United High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, for their briefings
on the situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.
Jordan is deeply concerned about the gross
violations that continue to be committed in North Korea
in a systematic manner and on a wide scale, particularly
against women and children. The violation of the right
to food, the right to expression and the right to free
movement, in addition to the forced disappearances
and the inhumane treatment in detention camps,
which are described in many United Nations reports,
are all violations of human rights and of international
humanitarian law and may be violations that constitute
crimes against humanity.
The situation in North Korea — in its internal
dimension with regard to human rights and in its
international dimensions in view of the continued
threat by North Korea to conduct nuclear tests,
to develop ballistic missiles and to launch those
missiles — represents a threat to international peace
and security and has led to violations of the relevant
Security Council resolutions and of the Charter of the
United Nations. We call upon the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to allow the Special Rapporteur of
the United Nations on the human rights situation in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to visit the
country. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
must engage constructively with the international
10/22

10/12/2015

community on all issues related to human rights and
comply with the relevant Security Council resolutions
in that regard. At the same time, we would like to stress
the need for the Security Council to work in a unified
manner so as to put an end to such practices, which
threaten peace and security on the Korean peninsula,
and to take concrete measures to deal with the present
situation.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the
presence of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, and
of the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman. We thank them for their briefings.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela notes with
concern that, over the past few years, the Security
Council has increasingly sough to deal with topics
outside its specific mandate, which has to do with
maintaining international peace and security. We
reject that trend. Our country believes that the Security
Council should focus on the specific mandate conferred
upon it by the Charter of the United Nations, which
sets out a strategic vision for a clear division of roles
among the various organs of the Organization. In that
way, there is an attempt de facto to alter the founding
principles of the Charter and, by way of employing a
double standard, to redefine what does and does not
constitute a threat to international peace and security
and the meaning of the principle of sovereignty,
including by invoking Chapter VII of the Charter to
deal with issues such as migrants.
The international community currently faces major
and complex challenges that require attention and
timely and concrete efforts on situations of conflict that
have often been prolonged owing to the geopolitical and
economic interests of certain Powers. In turn, that has
had a negative impact on the effectiveness of the work
of the Security Council and the credibility of this organ
in the eyes of international public opinion. The issue
of terrorism — and how it is promoted via geopolitical
interests in the Middle East — and the Palestinian
question should instead be among the top priorities for
Council action.
The topic we are discussing today, the human
rights situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, does not contribute to the proper and effective
functioning of the United Nations system. Meanwhile,
the Security Council has been expanding its activities
into areas that do not fall under its mandate. This forum
15-41634

10/12/2015

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

does not have the prerogative to address human rights
situations. Issues related to human rights should be
taken up by the General Assembly and by the Human
Rights Council in Geneva, the latter body having been
specifically established to debate such issues and
endowed with the necessary competence to deal with
them. We would therefore urge the Council to expand
upon the progress that has been achieved since the
establishment of the Human Rights Council and to
prioritize the Universal Periodic Review mechanism as
the most important cooperation format for addressing
the issue of human rights. In that context, Venezuela
supports the position of the Movement of Non-aligned
Countries with regard to its rejection of addressing
human rights issues for politically motivated ends
and in a selective, partial, unobjective and politically
motivated manner, with the goal of exerting pressure
on specific countries under the pretext of protecting
human rights, while at the same time often applying
double standards for political and economic reasons.
The situation on the Korean peninsula continues
to be delicate and complex. The adoption of measures
that could affect the necessary climate of trust for the
promotion of dialogue in order to guarantee peace and
stability in the region will not effectively contribute to
a sustainable, sound or genuinely democratic solution.
At the same time, efforts to politicize human rights
by singling out a particular country have shown
themselves to be ineffective, as they serve only to
fuel confrontation and undermine the express goals
of the Organization and of this organ, namely, to use
diplomacy to solve conflicts in a specific manner.
Such measures only divert us from the path to peace
and towards an artificial divide where there are good
countries and bad ones. That in no way contributes to a
climate of national harmony and dialogue in situations
of great fragility, such as that on the Korean peninsula.
Furthermore, we welcome the fact that, last August,
following intense negotiations, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea reached
an agreement aimed at easing tensions and resuming
dialogue. The putting in place of a plan to resume
negotiations between both countries in a sovereign and
independent manner and with the constructive support
of the international community is a positive indication
of the commitment of the parties to find a negotiated
political solution to the crisis, which we believe to be
the only desirable way of achieving a firm and lasting
peace. We therefore reiterate our appeal to Member
States to effectively promote a climate of trust that

S/PV.7575

helps overcome tensions in a peaceful and constructive
way and to embark upon a fruitful dialogue process.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that
the Security Council should strictly comply with
its responsibilities and focus on addressing matters
that have a direct bearing on international peace and
security. This debate is not being conducted in the
appropriate forum — the Human Rights Council, which
we support — and is outside the context of the situation
on the Korean peninsula. As is the intention today, this
meeting is being turned into a disruptive factor when
it comes to the overall goal of stabilizing the Korean
peninsula, reducing military tension and promoting and
supporting the initiatives under way to work towards
the priority goal of the denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula through diplomatic initiatives and political
negotiation. That is the path that we believe the parties
should embrace in order to arrive at a definitive solution
based on international law.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the Under-Secretary-General and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for their
respective briefings. The information they presented is
shocking and shows that the tragic situation of human
rights in North Korea has not changed. We are talking
about ongoing systematic violations and crimes of
another era — arbitrary detention, forced labour, human
trafficking and extrajudicial executions. While the
existence of labour camps for prisoners of conscience
is already in itself intolerable to the human conscience
itself, we learn that torture is practised systematically in
many of those camps. The mere exercise of the freedom
of opinion and expression can lead to death, including
for senior officials of a regime that is destroying itself.
According to a report published on 8 September by the
Special Rapporteur (see A/70/362), between 2010 and
2014, 1,382 people were executed publicly for the most
questionable reasons and without the slightest respect
for the most basic rules of due process.
As we celebrate Human Rights Day today, I am
mindful of the direct victims of those violations and of
their families — victims of forced disappearances, who
live in the uncertainty of the fate of their relatives. The
forced disappearances are innumerable in a territory
that does not allow them to be counted. The victims
also extend to citizens of other countries — dozens of
Japanese nationals who were abducted, perhaps more.
The North Korean authorities have acknowledged
their responsibility for a certain number of the forced

15-4163411/22

S/PV.7575

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

disappearances. They must respond to the concerns of
families and allow the return of the abducted persons.
France lends its full support to the strategy of the
Special Rapporteur and his international approach in
that regard. France has also historically supported the
initiative on the issue of forced disappearances. It is
one of the countries at the origin of the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance, and it commends the work
that has been done by the Working Group on Enforced
or Involuntary Disappearances on the issue of forced
disappearances that North Korea could be responsible
for.
The violations in North Korea affect all individuals,
first of all dissidents and human rights defenders, but
also women, children and vulnerable groups. All those
who have testified, in particular before the Human
Rights Council’s international commission of inquiry,
describe the same terror by a regime that commits
crimes as part of a State policy aimed at ensuring
limitless control over an enslaved population, “trapped
inside the country”, to echo one of the headings of the
report (see A/70/362).
As the you know, Mr. President, France is
particularly committed to the fight against impunity.
Beyond indignation, it is the only response that would
enable justice and the rule of law to be restored. Those
responsible for crimes committed in North Korea
will be held accountable before the law. Some crimes
committed and described by the commission of inquiry
could, owing to their scope and severity, constitute
crimes against humanity as defined by the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court. In that regard, the
recommendation by the international commission of
inquiry in its report to refer the situation to the Court
deserves the Council’s full attention.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
ratified several international instruments,including the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. It has accepted
almost half of the recommendations that were made
to it during the Universal Periodic Review to which it
was subjected in 2014 in Geneva at the Human Rights
Council. We must ensure that those commitments are
effectively implemented. Until then, we must continue
to document the violations and shed light on the
crimes. That is why France commends the work of the
commission of inquiry. By documenting the crimes, it
is preparing the work for justice. France also hopes that
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner

12/22

10/12/2015

for Human Rights in Seoul will play its full role. Any
threats against it or its staff are unacceptable.
France welcomes the fact that, since the holding of
the meeting on this subject under the Arria Formula and
the first meeting in the Security Council a year ago (see
S/PV.7353), the issue of human rights in North Korea
has come up regularly on the international agenda, not
only in the Human Rights Council and the General
Assembly, but also now in the Security Council. The
extent of the violations at the governmental scale, which
does not have any parallel in the contemporary world,
as the report says, is in itself a threat to international
peace and security. A regime that places itself in a
position of denial and entirely disregards the rule of
law, including on the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, and at the same time continues to
develop nuclear and missile programmes, in flagrant
violation of all our resolutions, must not be allowed to
continue to act ruthlessly with impunity.
That is why it is important that the Security Council,
seized with the situation, remain mobilized, so that that
regime hears the voice of the international community,
puts an end to its violations, releases its prisoners of
conscience and all those who have been abducted, and
makes a firm commitment to the path of openness and
respect for the rights of its people. We will make sure of
this, and we will not relent in our efforts.
Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jeffrey Feltman and United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein
for their contributions to this debate.
Serious and grave violations of human rights serve
as a warning sign of instability and conflict, especially
in the absence of accountability for such violations.
Human rights violations of the type and scale that we
are witnessing in North Korea have an impact well
beyond the country in which they are committed.
Lithuania therefore decided to be part of the group
of nine Security Council members that called for this
public meeting on the human rights situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The threat to international peace and security
posed by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has not been limited to its clandestine nuclear weapons
and ballistic missile programmes and proliferation
activities. The threat also stems from the massive and
atrocious violations of human rights of its own people.

15-41634

10/12/2015

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The scale and gravity of the human rights violations
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as
detailed in the 2014 report of the Human Rights
Council on human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea (S/2014/276, annex), gives no room
to argue with its judgement — the Government of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has manifestly
failed to comply with the responsibility to protect
its own people, and international action is required.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, a State
Member of the United Nations, has for decades pursued
policies involving crimes that shock the conscience of
humankind. The international community must accept
its responsibility to protect the people of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. To remain silent in the face
of gruesome crimes would amount to condoning them.
Those responsible for that nightmare must be brought to
justice for their actions. The situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea should be referred to the
International Criminal Court. We also believe that the
Security Council should consider imposing targeted
sanctions against those in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea who are responsible for crimes
against humanity.
The millions of people who suffer under the regime
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea deserve
to have their plight and their human rights violations
known. The United Nations and its partners should
ensure coherent and well-coordinated strategies to
address such violations. The Security Council should
consider the situation of human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea as a regular item on its
formal agenda. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in Seoul should
continue to collect information on the ongoing human
right violations.
We urge the authorities of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to engage without delay with the
United Nations representatives and international
interlocutors, the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Special Rapporteur. Such
engagement should be followed by concrete action,
including acknowledging the existence of human rights
violations, allowing unimpeded access to international
human rights and humanitarian organizations and
starting the implementation of the recommendations of
the commission of inquiry.
To conclude, let me reiterate the conclusion by
the commission of inquiry that the crimes against

S/PV.7575

humanity in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
will continue as long as the policies, institutions and
patterns of impunity that lie at their heart remain in
place. The Security Council should therefore demand
that the authorities of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea implement the recommendations by the
commission of inquiry without delay.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jeffrey Feltman and United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein
for their presence.
Nigeria attaches great importance to respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms everywhere.
We consider it an obligation for States to promote and
protect the rights of their citizens. Human rights are
essential in ensuring that all human beings live in
dignity.
We agree with the Under-Secretary-General that
there are different perspectives on the issue of human
rights and international peace and security. We believe
that independent and sovereign States must be engaged
with on all matters, including human rights, on the
basis of mutual respect and constructive dialogue. The
issue of human rights must also not be linked to the
issue of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and
the testing of missiles.
In the framework of one of its three main pillars,
the United Nations has established appropriate
mechanisms for promoting and protecting human
rights throughout the world. Those mechanisms,
which include the Human Rights Council, special
procedures, the Universal Periodic Review and treaty
bodies, have been shown to be relevant in dealing with
human rights issues, as they concern all United Nations
States Members. We note that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea participated in the first and second
cycles of the Universal Periodic Review. We also
note that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has ratified several key international human rights
treaties. Nigeria will therefore continue to encourage
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to maintain,
and indeed strengthen, its engagement with the Human
Rights Council and the treaty bodies, with a view to
promoting and protecting the rights of its citizens.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): As it did last year (see S/PV.7353), our
delegation voted against holding a meeting on the
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.

15-4163413/22

S/PV.7575

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

10/12/2015

We would like to note that the request (S/2015/931) to
convene this meeting was circulated to the Security
Council just two days after the adoption of the
programme of work of the Council for December. As
far as can be understood from the text of the request,
its authors did not link their request to any events that
taken place since the programme’s adoption. In other
words, this issue was intentionally left out of the joint
work to undertaken by the members of the Council
under the December programme. We believe that such
an approach does not contribute to enhancing the
transparency and openness of the work of the Security
Council, a subject about which we speak so often.

Korea to consider the conclusions and recommendations
of the commission of inquiry and to take the appropriate
measures to ensure accountability. The possibility of
referring the ongoing situation in that country to the
International Criminal Court should be considered. It
is important to note that there are issues, such as the
protection and promotion of human rights, which are
broadly cross-cutting in nature. Notwithstanding the
specific competencies of various organs, we cannot
avoid moving towards constructive and complementary
cooperation among the different bodies of the United
Nations system. That is what makes the United Nations
more effective and credible.

With regard to the substance of the issue, the position
that we took a year ago has not changed. We believe
that the issue of the human rights situation in any given
country does not fall within the mandate of the Security
Council and should be taken up in the specialized
bodies, above all in the Human Rights Council. The
Security Council should focus on discussing issues
related to threats to international peace and security,
which does not apply to the human rights situation in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Burdening
the agenda of the Security Council with matters that do
not fall within its purview will only lead to duplication
of effort, thereby dissipating the Council’s focus and
energy and consequently reducing the effectiveness of
its work.

There has been some progress since the meeting
held by the Council on 22 December 2014 (see
S/PV.7353), such as the establishment in Seoul of an
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the meeting that took place last
October of separated families living on both sides of
the border. Nevertheless, we remain concerned by
the serious human rights violations and the climate
of impunity described in the reports of the SecretaryGeneral and of the Special Rapporteur, both of whom
have pointed out that, regrettably, the human rights
situation has not improved and crimes against humanity,
as documented by the commission of inquiry, continue
to be perpetrated. It is urgent to put an end to summary
and extrajudicial executions, torture and arbitrary
detention. We must resolve the issues of abductions
and enforced disappearances of foreign nationals and
resume the dialogue on technical matters between
Pyongyang and the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights.

At this juncture, priority should be placed on the
resumption of the Six-Party Talks, in which framework
it would be possible to resolve a range of complex issues
related to the situation on the Korean peninsula. Today’s
meeting, unfortunately, only further distances us from
achieving that goal. As experience has taught us, in
particular in the context of the success achieved with
regard to the Iranian nuclear programme, collective
efforts, when based on good faith, facilitate solving the
most complex problems.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile): We thank the United
States presidency for having convened this meeting. We
also thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman and Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al
Hussein and their teams for their briefings today.
It is difficult for us to remain indifferent in the face
of human rights situations that demand coordinated
and specific actions on the part of the United Nations
system. We therefore appreciate the fact that the Council
is responding today to the call of the Third Committee
made through its draft resolution on the situation of
human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
14/22

It is imperative to protect the affected population
and to ensure their human rights through greater
involvement and dialogue with the authorities of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as well as
by promoting accountability and putting an end to
impunity. We urge the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to welcome the various recommendations,
especiall those made by the commission of inquiry and
the Special Rapporteur. They include: moving forward
on the dialogue with the entire United Nations system,
especially with regard to the technical talks with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and its Office in Seoul; facilitating
access to the Special Rapporteur to the country, in
accordance with the terms of reference of the United
Nations on special procedures; and cooperating

15-41634

10/12/2015

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

with Member States that are affected by the issue of
international abductions and enforced disappearances.
The continued refusal of the leadership of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to cooperate
constructively with the United Nations system does
not help to rectify the critical human rights and
humanitarian situation, which cannot be disentwined
from the nuclear programme. It is therefore imperative
that its authorities respond positively to calls on
behalf of the international community to cooperate
with the United Nations system. The agenda item on
nonproliferation and the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea proved to be insufficient in addressing this
very complex situation, and that is why we hope that
this initiative will be repeated if the situation, which is
having such an impact on the civilian population, does
not improve.
I thank you again, Madam President, for having
facilitated this meeting.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
As the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights just stated, any massive and systematic violation
of human rights constitutes a threat to international
peace and security. Spain energetically and unreservedly
supports the idea that such matters should be taken up
by the Security Council.
As many others before me have stated, we are
devoting today’s meeting to the human rights situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea precisely
because the reports of the commission of inquiry, the
Secretary-General and the Special Rapporteur have
documented chilling testimony pertaining to massive
human rights violations in that country that, in many
cases, constitute crimes against humanity. Moreover,
the dire situation with regard to human rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has affected
its neighbours and endangers regional stability. The
statements to be made by the representatives of Japan
and the Republic of Korea will be particularly useful
for the work of the Security Council.
The international community and the Council
cannot ignore what is happening in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. Its Government is the first
responsible for ensuring and protecting the human
rights of its own people. Faced by the unresponsiveness
of that Government, it falls to the international
community to assume that responsibility and take the
necessary measures to protect a population that has

S/PV.7575

suffered far too long. For too long, too, the Council
has been addressing this issue mainly from the
perspective of non-proliferation. Without abandoning
that approach, which Spain fully supports, the time
has come for the Security Council to also provide a
response to the systematic violations of human rights
that the people of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea are enduring.
That does not mean politicizing the issue.
Inaction would in fact be tantamount to taking sides
and turning our back on international law. The time
has come to see what the Security Council can do to
improve the situation. Without a doubt, it is necessary
to condemn human rights violations. Many members
of the Security Council share that view. However, it
is not enough. The international community and the
Council need to demonstrate that they are ready to
work in order to overcome the situation. By the same
token, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
needs to respond by acknowledging the concerns that
have been expressed and taking action to put an end
to those violations. The statements made today by
the Supreme Leader of that country certainly do not
contribute to peace and security in the region. In that
regard, Spain considers that the Security Council
should strongly support the strategy proposed by the
Special Rapporteur, to which the Ambassador of Chile
just referred.
The strategy proposes combining various elements
that are separate but complementary. First, conveying
a strong and unequivocal message to the authorities
in Pyongyang. That involves a clear commitment to
combating impunity, including, if there are no other
options, the referral of this matter to the International
Criminal Court. The second element consists of an offer
to cooperate and engage in dialogue on the topic of
human rights. And I would like to underscore the work
that can and should be carried out by the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights that was opened
in Seoul this year. For this, it is essential for the North
Korean Government to allow access to experts, to allow
progressive exchanges with individuals from the North
Korean regime and civil society and to cooperate with
a view to easing tensions and contributing to dialogue
in the Korean peninsula — cooperation that is key to
achieving a solution in the medium and long term.
Thirdly, regional forums, such as the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations and the European Union, can
play, and indeed are playing, a very important role in
the development of this dialogue.

15-4163415/22

S/PV.7575

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

In conclusion, I would like to say that Spain is in
favour of a progressive approach that takes advantage
of United Nations mechanisms in order to open
channels of communication with a view to improving
the humanitarian and human rights situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We support
the efforts of the Secretary-General, and, in that regard,
would like to thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing. At
the same time, we appeal to the Pyongyang regime to
cooperate and to establish a meaningful dialogue with
the High Commissioner for Human Rights and other
mechanisms in that area.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank both the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Prince Zeid Al Hussein, and Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey Feltman for their respective briefings, which
my delegation listened to intently. I also take this
opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (A/70/393) and to recognize the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006), concerning the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, and its Panel of Experts for the important
work that has provided us with insight for today’s
discussions.
My delegation assumed its seat on the Council
with the understanding that, as a member, we would
not shy away from difficult discussions on delicate
and complex situations. We have consistently held
the principled position that issues of concern should
be addressed through constructive dialogue and
consultations. In that regard, we have supported the
proposal for the Council to discuss the issue before us
today. At the same time, Malaysia reaffirms its position
on upholding the principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations, such as respect for sovereignty and
territorial integrity, and non-interference in the internal
affairs of a country.
Malaysia furthermore reaffirms the understanding
that the Council’s consideration of this situation is
without prejudice to the role of other bodies and
mechanisms, particularly the Human Rights Council
and the Universal Periodic Review process, which
have the primary mandate of promoting and protecting
human rights. In that regard, Malaysia welcomes the
recent announcements made by the Government of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of its
intention to engage in dialogue with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) on human rights issues. The upcoming visit

16/22

10/12/2015

of the High Commissioner to the country should be
seen as a positive step towards further constructive
engagement. That would allow OHCHR to have a more
objective and accurate assessment of the human rights
situation in the country. At the very least, it would
ensure that the views and positions of all parties could
be conveyed accurately.
We are also encouraged by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s continued participation in the
Universal Periodic Review process and welcome its
acceptance, last September, of 113 recommendations,
including on economic, social and cultural rights. We
believe that the full implementation of the accepted
recommendations will contribute positively to the
enjoyment of human rights and to the socioeconomic
development of the people and demonstrate the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s willingness to
subscribe to the United Nations human rights system.
At the same time, we encourage closer cooperation
between that Government and the relevant United
Nations bodies and agencies, as well as other potential
partners and donors, with a view to enhancing the wellbeing of its people.
Malaysia notes with concern that, on the political
security front, tensions remain high between the
Republic of Korea and the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. In that respect, we welcome the recent
engagement between the two countries. We continue
to emphasize the importance for both the Republic of
Korea and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to honour the terms of the 25 August 2015 agreement
in order to continue making progress in inter-Korean
relations, as well as to maintain peace and security
in the Korean peninsula. We note that the recently
held working-level meeting resulted in the proposed
vice-ministerial level talks at the Kaesong Industrial
Complex in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
on 11 December 2015. We urge both sides to make full
use of that meeting to resolve all pending issues, for the
betterment of inter-Korean relations.
My delegation is also encouraged by the October
2015 reunion of families separated by the Korean
War. That is a positive development that we hope will
contribute to further improving inter-Korean relations.
We continue to believe that the Six-Party Talks is
the best platform available to facilitate and consolidate
various efforts aimed at resolving the long outstanding
issues in an amicable manner. In that regard, we
call on all parties to return to negotiations without
15-41634

10/12/2015

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

preconditions. We welcome the commitment made by
China, the Republic of Korea and Japan during the
recent trilateral summit in Seoul to resume the Six-Party
Talks at an early date. We hope that the United States
and the Russian Federation will also work towards
that goal. Furthermore, we encourage the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to step up cooperation
and engagement with the Council, other partners and
stakeholders, including the 1718 Committee’s Panel of
Experts, with a view to addressing non-proliferation
concerns.
I wish to conclude my remarks by reiterating
Malaysia’s readiness to engage constructively with all
Council members, the United Nations, other partners
and stakeholders, as well as with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, not only on the human
rights pillar but also on the development and peace and
security pillars.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States of
America.
I thank United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein for his efforts
as well as for the efforts of his team to document
human rights violations in North Korea, and to make
such violations known. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jeffrey Feltman for briefing the Council today.
In addition, while they are not briefers here today, I
would also like to thank the brave individuals who,
after escaping from North Korea, have taken great
risks to share their testimonies. Were it not for their
determination to make their experiences known, much
of what we know today about the suffering of the North
Korean people would remain hidden.
Almost a year ago, on 22 December 2014, the
Security Council met for the first time ever to discuss
the human rights situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea (see S/PV.7353). The Council brought
up this issue for discussion because the widespread and
systematic human rights violations being committed by
the North Korean Government not only were deplorable
in their own right but posed a threat to international
peace and security. I would like to address those who
believe that what is happening in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is not a threat to peace and
security. I would like to ask whether those countries
think that systematic torture, forced starvation and
crimes against humanity are stabilizing or good for
international peace and security. I assume they do

S/PV.7575

not think that. Therefore, could that level of horror
be regarded as neutral, a level of horror unrivalled
elsewhere in the world? Is it neutral? Does it have no
effect at all on regional and international peace and
security? Is that really so? None? It stretches credulity,
and it sounds more like cynicism.
Those arguments, some of which we have heard
here today, will not go down well in history, particularly
when the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea opens
up. For those who have charged double standards,
where in the world are there conditions similar to those
behind the lines in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea? Where? This regime has no double. A
report of the Human Rights Council’s commission of
inquiry on human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea itself states that the human rights
situation in North Korea “does not have any parallel
in the contemporary world” (A/HRC/25/63, para. 80).
The comprehensive report produced by the commission
of inquiry was based on over 200 interviews with
victims, eyewitnesses and former Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea officials, whose testimony was
corroborated by other evidence, such as satellite
imagery. The commission concluded in February 2014
that “[s]ystematic, widespread and gross human rights
violations have been and are being committed by the
Democratic People’s Republic of North Korea” (ibid.).
The Commission also found evidence that provided
reasonable grounds to determine that in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea “crimes against humanity
have been committed ... pursuant to policies established
at the highest level of the State” (ibid., para. 75).
The Council is meeting again on this issue today,
Human Rights Day, for the first time since it was
formally added to the agenda last year, because the
North Korean people continue to endure a real-life
nightmare and because that nightmare is a threat to
peace and security. The reporting by the United Nations
is explicit. The report of the Secretary-General issued in
September found that, from September 2014 to August
2015, there were “no indications of improvements in the
exercise of freedom of expression”. That is in a country,
where, according to the commission of inquiry’s report,
the State
“operates an all-encompassing indoctrination
machine that takes root from childhood to
propagate an official personality cult and to
manufacture absolute obedience to the Supreme
Leader”(A/HRC/25/63, para. 27)

15-4163417/22

S/PV.7575

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

and where citizens “are punished for any ‘anti-State’
activities or expressions of dissent” (ibid., para. 28).
The Secretary-General’s report similarly found
that there were “no indications of changes in the use of
political prison camps” (A/70/393, para. 5) — political
prison camps in which, by United Nations estimates,
between 80,000 and 120,000 people are currently
being held and where, according to the commission of
inquiry’s report, tens of thousands of prisoners have for
generations been
“gradually eliminated through deliberate starvation,
forced labour, executions, torture, rape and the
denial of reproductive rights enforced through
punishment, forced abortion and infanticide” (ibid.,
para. 60).
It is not only the blanket denial of enjoyment of
freedom of expression and those infernal conditions
in the prisoner camps that persist, but all of the
grave human rights violations perpetrated by that
regime — the summary executions, the use of torture
and the decades of enforced disappearances with no
accountability, including of citizens from neighbouring
countries, whose families continue to suffer from not
knowing the fate of their loved ones. The list is long,
the abuse is vast and the anguish profound. Also
unchanged is the immeasurable suffering experienced
by many millions of North Koreans who continue to go
hungry as a result of the regime’s actions — causing
malnutrition that has repercussions for the rest of
victims’ lives and in countless instances leads to death.
According to the Secretary-General’s September 2015
report, one third of children in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea under the age of 5 and almost half of
children between 12 and 23 months are anaemic.
The systematic human rights violations persist for
a simple reason: the North Korean Government wants
them to. They continue because the State still seeks to
intentionally dehumanize, terrorize and abuse its own
people. The regime depends on that climate of fear and
violence to maintain its grip on power. When we speak
of the massive scale of the regime’s abuses, it can be
easy to lose sight of how they affect real people living
in North Korea, so let me briefly share the experiences
of just two individuals who are with us here today in
the Security Council. I would ask them to please stand
while I share just a small part of what they have endured.
Growing up in North Korea, Grace Jo witnessed
three generations of her family starve to death. Her

18/22

10/12/2015

grandmother starved to death after digging for grass
for the family to eat. Her father starved to death as he
was transferred between prison camps, where he had
been sent for leaving the country in search of food for
his family. Two of her brothers starved to death, and
Grace too nearly starved to death. It was hunger that
drove Grace and her surviving family members to try to
escape North Korea, but they were returned repeatedly
against their will. As punishment, Grace was sent to
an orphanage where she said children were forced to
work from 6 in the morning to 7 at night. She and her
remaining two family members finally managed to
escape in 2008, when they came to the United States of
America as refugees. I take this occasion to stress how
important the United States refugee programme is and
how essential it is at times of crisis like this one.
Jung Gwang Il served for a decade in the army, and
another nine years in the Workers’ Party, before going
to work for a trading company where he was detained
for doing business directly with South Koreans. That
was his crime. State security agents beat him viciously
with wooden clubs, breaking all of his teeth and leaving
scars that he still bears, pressuring him to confess to
being a spy. He refused. As punishment, Mr. Gwang
later later told the commission of inquiry that he was
subjected to what is known in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea as pigeon torture. As he described
it, “Your hands are handcuffed behind your back, then
they hang you so you will not be able to stand or sit.” He
was left in that position for days at a time. When, after
10 months of this and other forms of torture, he agreed
to confess. He was sent to Kwan-li-so No. 15, a labour
camp known as Yodok. He spent three harrowing years
there, witnessing, by his count, 26 people die, most of
them from malnutrition. Since escaping to South Korea
he has started a non-governmental organization that
recently released a report listing the names of more
than 180 fellow prisoners from his time in Yodok and
demanding information about their whereabouts.
Those are just two individuals of millions. Yet
their experiences are a powerful reminder of the
human impact of the regime’s horrors. I thank Grace
and Mr. Jung for being with us today and for bravely
sharing their stories.
No member of the Council or of the United Nations
can afford to ignore this situation. North Korea continues
to demonstrate that regimes that flagrantly violate
the human rights of their own people almost always
show similar disdain for the rules that help ensure

15-41634

10/12/2015

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

our shared security. We see that in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s flouting of prohibitions
imposed by the Security Council on its nuclear and
ballistic missile activities, including by undertaking
launches. We see it in the destabilizing rhetoric the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea routinely uses
to threaten the annihilation of its neighbours. And we
see it in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
aggressive response, as the High Commissioner has
mentioned, to the opening of an Office in Seoul by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR), an Office aimed at gathering
ongoing information on human rights conditions in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
In March, before the OHCHR Office opened, the
Pyongyang Committee for the Peaceful Reunification
of Korea, a Democratic People’s Republic of Koreasponsored group like every other group allowed to exist
in the country, said that,
“as soon as the nest for an anti-Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea smear campaign is in place in
the South, it will immediately become the first
target for our merciless punishment.”
In May, a Democratic People’s Republic of Koreacontrolled newspaper issued a near-identical threat.
And, in June, the regime issued a statement accusing
hostile forces of using the United Nations Office to
“make confrontation under the pretext of protecting
human rights”.
It is hard to imagine another State Member of the
United Nations making such threats against a United
Nations office or staff, and we as the Council cannot
take them lightly. That is part of a well-established
pattern of intimidation and escalation by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea in response to criticism of
its human rights record. Alarming and unacceptable as
that pattern may be, it shows that the regime is deeply
nervous about the growing international scrutiny of its
abusive practices. That is a good thing. It is another
reason we must ensure that the OHCHR Office
continues to document such abuses.
If we accept that the human rights situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is as abysmal as
ever, as United Nations reporting informs us it is, and
if North Korea continues to flout the rules that ensure
our shared security, as we have seen that it does, then
it is clear that we must continue to shine a light on the
human rights situation in North Korea, as we are doing

S/PV.7575

today. Furthermore, it is incumbent upon the Council
to ask what we can do, individually and collectively, to
change the situation.
We must continue to take steps that will one day help
us to hold accountable the individuals responsible for
such horrors as those experienced by our guests today.
We cannot let immediate obstacles to accountability
undermine our determination to document atrocities
and identify those who order and carry them out, so
that one day the perpetrators will be brought to justice.
That is why the comprehensive report compiled by the
commission of inquiry is so essential and why it is so
crucial that the new United Nations Office in Seoul
provide a place where individuals can continue to
recount their experiences and provide key information.
Of course, multilateral and human rights
organizations should continue to seek unconditional
access to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
We agree very much with the comments of other
Council members. It is access that the regime has too
long denied, no doubt because of what it would reveal.
But it would be a grave mistake to think that, in order
to obtain such access, any country or any body should
soften its criticism of what is, by every measure, the
most repressive regime on the planet. We must do
the exact opposite by speaking with objectivity and
firmness about the real conditions on the ground.
For the Security Council, it is critical not just
to discuss the situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, but to consider the commission’s
recommendation that the situation in North Korea be
referred to the International Criminal Court and that we
consider other appropriate action on accountability, as
112 Member States urged the Council to do, just a few
weeks ago.
Our continuing spotlight on the situation sends a
clear message that we hope will reach the North Korean
people, tight as the regime’s control over information
may be. We will not turn a blind eye to your suffering.
You, like all human beings, deserve to be treated with
dignity. We will continue to press for the nightmare
that you are living to end. To the regime, our message
is just as clear: we are documenting your crimes, and
one day you will be judged for them.
United Nations States Members, particularly
members of the Council, must stop sending people who
try to flee from the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea back to that country. We know the gruesome

15-4163419/22

S/PV.7575

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

punishments that await North Korean escapees who are
sent back against their will. Yet the practice continues.
A report published in September by the Committee for
Human Rights in North Korea reported that, according
to multiple interviews with former prisoners who had
escaped the country, approximately 800 of the 1,000
women held in one prison labour camp, known as Kyohwa-so No. 12, were people who had been forcibly
returned to the country. They had made it out. Instead
of returning people fleeing the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to gulags, countries should welcome
the North Korean refugees and asylum seekers who
reach their territory. The rest of us must do our part, in
terms of resettlements.
Let me conclude. In April, the United States
co-hosted an event here at the United Nations in which
three people who had escaped from the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea shared their experiences.
One of them was a young man named Joseph, who told
how he had been orphaned when he was 12 years old,
after his father starved to death and his mother was sent
to a prison camp for trying to cross the border. Joseph
said that he spent his days begging in the streets and
his nights sleeping beneath bridges, a life he described
as marked by loneliness and hunger. After three years,
Joseph managed to escape and eventually made his way
to the United States, where he now lives. Joseph told the
people at that meeting that while he was grateful to have
escaped, he felt an unshakeable burden, knowing that
millions of his fellow North Koreans were still trapped
in the conditions that he had managed to escape.
That is a burden that Joseph should not bear alone.
We in the Security Council, the United Nations and the
international community must all bear that burden with
him. That is why the Council must meet regularly to
discuss the human rights crisis in North Korea. It is
the reason that we must all bring greater urgency to not
only witnessing and documenting those horrors, but to
taking steps that will help to stop them and one day
bring to justice the perpetrators of those crimes.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to begin
by expressing my sincere appreciation for your
leadership, Madam, in convening the meeting on this
year’s Human Rights Day. I also thank the Security

20/22

10/12/2015

Council for its decision to take up the situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea for the second
time. The decision reflects the wish of the vast majority
of Member States who voted in favour of General
Assembly resolution 69/188, on the situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
My gratitude also goes to the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs and the High Commissioner for
Human Rights for their sobering briefings.
Japan has requested to participate in today’s
meeting out of concern for the persistent human
rights violations by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, not only upon its own citizens but also on
foreign nationals, including many Japanese.
The ground-breaking report of the commission of
inquiry on human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea (A/HRC/25/63), made public in
February 2014, shed light on the reality of the situation
on the ground from the perspective of the mistreated,
the powerless and the voiceless in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. Based on the report, the
Security Council discussed the situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea for
the first time in December last year (see S/PV.7353). It
was a historic step forward.
The international community has continued to
make the utmost efforts to improve the situation.
The Office of the High Commissioner opened a field
Office in Seoul, in June. I am very encouraged by the
statement by the High Commissioner for Human Rights
that the Seoul Office has begun collecting testimonies
and documenting developments in the human rights
situation. In November, the Third Committee adopted
yet another draft resolution calling for the improvement
of the human rights situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, with 112 Member States
voting in favour. The draft resolution will be adopted
in the plenary of the General Assembly next week.
Unfortunately, as the High Commissioner for Human
Rights mentioned in his briefing today, the human
rights situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea remains unchanged. We are deeply concerned
about that predicament.
Some delegations have argued that this issue has
no relevance to international peace and security. And,
on that point, the statement just made by the President
was very powerful and persuasive. Because we strongly
disagree with that argument, let me add some elements.

15-41634

10/12/2015

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

As Under-Secretary-General Feltman pointed out,
serious human rights violations serve as a warning sign
of instability and conflict. According to the commission
of inquiry report quoted by many previous speakers,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea “seeks
to dominate every aspect of its citizens’ lives and
terrorizes them from within.” (A/HRC/25/63, para. 80)
The authorities of that country force ordinary citizens
to suffer from fear and want, while diverting resources
to nuclear and missile programmes, in violation of
Security Council resolutions. The failure of any State to
abide by Security Council resolutions and the universal
principles of respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms should raise legitimate concerns on the part
of the Security Council. High Commissioner Zeid Al
Hussein clearly stated today that the human rights
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
poses a threat to international peace and security.
Human rights violations not only affect citizens
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The
commission of inquiry report states that hundreds of
nationals from the Republic of Korea, Japan and other
States have been abducted by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and denied the right to leave the
country.
I thank those speakers who expressed solidarity with
the families of the abductees. Japan had high hopes last
year when the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
promised to commence investigations into all Japanese
nationals in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
including abductees. However, almost 18 months have
passed since then. This issue must be resolved without
delay. Japan emphatically demands that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea return all abductees as soon
as possible through an expeditious investigation. It is
essential that the Security Council remain seized of the
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
We strongly urge the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to respond in good faith to the concerns raised by
the Council and to improve its human rights situation,
which, we believe, will lead to stability in the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would first like
to express appreciation to the presidency of the United
States for convening today’s meeting and to the Member
States of the Council for inviting the Republic of Korea
to participate. I would also like to thank Mr. Feltman
and Mr. Al Hussein for their briefings.

S/PV.7575

Last year, the commission of inquiry issued its
landmark report (A/HRC/25/63), which shed light on the
nature, gravity and scale of human rights violations in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The report
raised critical awareness of the need to strengthen our
collective efforts to improve the human rights situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Given
the growing concern of the international community,
the Security Council formally added the situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to its agenda
and held its first discussion on the issue in this very
Chamber on 22 December 2014 (see S/PV.7353). I was
here and spoke, as my country had a seat on the Council
at that time. I explained why North Korea’s human
rights issues were taken to heart in South Korea. One
year later, what has changed?
At the United Nations, we adopted more resolutions
in the Human Rights Council and the General Assembly.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights opened a field-based structure in
Seoul. There have been meetings, seminars and panel
discussions on the issue in different parts of the world.
On the Korean peninsula, a new round of reunions for
separated families living in the two Koreas took place
last October. However, we have not seen a meaningful
change in the human rights situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. As we heard in today’s
briefing, dire human rights violations persist and, in
some cases, are becoming worse. We still have a long
way to go.
My Government believes that addressing the
North Korean human rights issue is critical not only
to promoting human rights as a universal value, but
also to maintaining peace in the Korean peninsula. We
therefore urge the Security Council to keep playing an
active role in improving the situation. We also ask the
High Commissioner for Human Rights to pursue his
efforts to improve the human rights situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The Republic
of Korea will continue to engage with other Member
States to address and resolve this matter, while providing
humanitarian assistance to the North Korean people
in order to alleviate their plight. We hope that, with a
view to addressing the concerns of the international
community, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
will work with us to implement the relevant United
Nations resolutions. The Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea needs to engage and cooperate with United
Nations human rights mechanisms. We believe that

15-4163421/22

S/PV.7575

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

to do so will ultimately be in the best interests of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
This year marks 70 years of division of the Korean
nation. The issue of separated family members, whose
average age is around 80, remains the most urgent
humanitarian concern for the entire Korean people. We
expect the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
share with us a sense of urgency and join us in seeking
a fundamental and comprehensive resolution to the
issue, including by holding family reunions on a larger
scale and on a regular basis.
I would like to end my statement by quoting
Ms. Hyeon-seo Lee, a young North Korean woman who
escaped from North Korea as a teenager and devoted
the following 12 years of her life to rescuing her mother
and brother. In her book entitled The Girl with Seven
Names, she said,
“Leaving North Korea is not like leaving any other
country. It is more like leaving another universe. I
will never truly be free of its gravity, no matter how
far I journey.”

22/22

10/12/2015

What does she mean? Why was it so difficult for her
to leave a place others call a gulag? Why does she feel
the pull of its gravity even when she is physically so far
away from North Korea?
I can only imagine that perhaps she meant that she
could never escape the gravity of the pain and suffering
that her people were enduring. Maybe neither you nor
I, Madam President, nor anyone else in the Chamber
will ever understand her. We may never fully grasp the
onerousness of her burden, because we were not there
with her when she spent every day for 12 years, praying
for the safety and survival of her family and doing all
in her power to get them out before it was too late. Now
we have heard from her and many other defectors from
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. While we
continue to embrace North Koreans who leave their
home, the best thing we can do, Madam President, may
well be to help North Koreans realize their future in
safety and with dignity in their own country.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

15-41634
