UNITEO NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
.

OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES-VERBAUX·OFFICIElS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 74

, et 181emeseances
"
180eme
. 12 ao~t 1947

180th and 181st meetings
12 August~947
:Lake Success

New York

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Hundred and eightieth meeting

Cent-quaire-vingtieme seance
Page

Pages

290. Provisional agenda
1899
291. Adoption of the agenda
1899
292. Continuation. of the discussion on' the
report by the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the Securit-j Council
1899

290. Ol'dre due jour provisoire
1899
291. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
1899
292. Sui~ de la discussion sur 1e rapport
presetite au Conseil de securite par la
Commission d'enquete sur les incidents
1899
survenus a la frontiere grecque

Hundred and eighty-first meeting

Cent-quatre-vingt-unieme seance

293. Provisional agenda .. ~
"
1914
294. Adoption of the agenda
1914
295. Continuation of the discussion on the
Indonesian question
1914

293. Ordre gu jour provisoire
1914
294. Adoption de 1'0rdre du jour
1914
295. Suite de la discussion sur la question
indonesienne
1914

Documents

Documen!s

The following documents, relevant to the hundred
and eightieth and hundred and eighty-first
meetings appear as follows:

Les documents suivants, 'Se rapportant aux centquatre-vingtieme et ceIit-quatre-vingt-unieme
seances, figurent dans les publications suivantes:

.0 fficial Records of the Security Council:

Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite:
Premiere Annee, Deuxieme Serie, Supplement
No 10, Annexe 16
Lettre clu President par interim de la delegation
gr.ecque, et memorandum l'accompagnant

First Year, Second Series, SUp'plementNo. 10,
Annex 16
Letter from the Acting Chairman of the de1egationo£ Greece", dated 3 December 1946, and
enclosed memorandum
Second Year:
Supplement No. 16, Annex 40.
Letter dated 30 July 1947 'from the acting representative of A11stralia on the Security Council
, addressed to the Secretary-General (document
S}449)
Supplement No. 16, Annex 41Letter dated 30 July 1947 from the Permanent
Liaison Officer of India addressed to the
Presirlent of the Security Council (document
S/447)
Supplement .No, 17, Awnex 42
Letter dated 31.Jt1ly 1947 from the permanent
representative of Greece to the United Nations
addressed to the Acting Secretary-General, and
enclosed letter dated 31 July, 1947 from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Greece
(document S/451)
Special Supplement No. 2
Report of the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the
Security Council (documeIit S/360)

Deuxiemf? Annee:
Supplement No 16, Annexe 40
Lettre, en ~ ate du 30 juillet 1947, adressee au
Secretair general par le representant par
interim de l' Allstralie au Conseil de securite
(document .S/449)
Supplement No 16, Annexe 41
Lettre, en date du 30 juillet 1947, adressee au
President du Conseil de securite par l'agent de
liaison perman~nt de l'Inde (document S/447)
Supplement No 17, Annexe.42
Lettre, en date clu 31 juillet 1947, adressee au
Secretaire general par interim pat" le representant permanent de la Grece aupres de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies et lettre
jointe, en date du 31 juillet 1947, <iu Ministre
des Affaires etrangeres de Grece (document
S/451)
Supplement special No 2
Rapport pr-esente au Conseil de securite par la
Commission d'enquetesur les incidents survenus a la frontiere grecque (document S/360)

1914
corFespond~nt of the Daily Telegr.aph· at Sofia.'
They were published, on ,the fronfp::I,geof the
Bulgarian paper Rabotnitches.ko Dela, in the 11
JUly issue. They were reproduced' by the- paper
'\ .Politika, on 17 July; and were broadcast by the
Belgrade radio station on 17 July. 'It was only
today that we received some ,belated items of
information.
.

The meeting rose' at 12.55 p.m.

merit ete donnees au correspondant du Daily
Telegraph a Sofia. Elles ont ete publiees en pret:: ierepage du journal bulgar~ Rabotni-tchesko
Delo, dans le numero du Il juillet. Elles ont ete
reproduites 'par ie journal Politika a la date du
17 juillet,,~t elles ontete diffusees par la station'
radiophonique ,de Belgrade le 17 juillet. Ce n'est
qu'aujourd'hui que nous parviennent des elements tardifs.
La seance est lervee a12 h. SS.

HUNDRED ANDEIGHTY·FIRST
MEETING

CENT-QUATRE·VINGT.UNIEME
SEANCE

,Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Tuesday, i2 A:ugust 1947, at 3.QO p.m.
_ President: :M:r.':F. EL-KHOURI (Syria).
I'
Present: The representatives of the following
c~>untries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France" Poland, . Syria, Union of
Soviet. Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of. America.
.

T;nue a L,ake Success, New-York,.
le'mardi
12 aout 1947, a 15 heures.
-'
Pr-esident: M. F. E,L-KHOUR£ (Syrie).
Presents:Les, representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, 'Chine, ColOlilbie,
France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
.d'Amerique.

293. Provisional agenda

293. Ordre du jo~ provisoire
Adoption de l'ordre du jour.,
La question indonesienne:
a) Lettre, en date du 30 juillet 1947, adressee
au Secretaire general par ie representant
par interim de l'Australie au Conseil de
securite, (document S/449)1;
•
b) Lettre,en date du 30 juillet 1947, adressee
au President du Conseil de securite par
I'agent de liaison permanent de l'Inde
(document S/447)~.

,

1. A90ption of the agenda.1.
2.
2. The Indonesian questiofl:
(a) Letter dated 30 July 1947 from the
acting repreSientative of Australia on the
Security. Council addressed to the Secre- .
tary-Genera!l (document S/449);1
(b) Letter dated 30 July frbm the Permanent
Liaison Officer of India addressed to the
'President of the' Sectfrity ,Council
(document S/447).2

(

2940 Adoption of the agen~a
The. agenda was adopted.

294. Adoption de I' ordre du jour.'
L'ordre du jour est adopte.

295. Continuation' of the discU8sionon

295. SQite de la discussion sur.a

the Indonesian question

question indonesienne

At the invitation of the President, ¥r. Sen,
representative of' India, and Mr. van Kleffens,
representative of' the Netherlands, took their
places at the Council table.
The PRESIDENT: A letter dated 8 AugUst 1947,
addressed to the President of the' Security
Council, has just been received from qeneral
Romulo, representative of the Philippines,3 asking
that the Council, should give renewed considera~ion to the request which was previously
submitted at the hundred and seventy-eighth
meeting,'" namely, that he should be allowed to
" take part in the discussions on the Indonesiant
,question..- However, the letter cannqt be discussed or voted upon except at the request of a
member of the Council.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. Sen, representant de I'!nd'e, et M. vg,n Kleffens, representant'
des Pays~Bas, prennernt place a.la table d~t Conseil.

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second Year,
Supplement No. 16, Annex 40.
Ibid., SUPJllement No. 16, Annex 41.
• See OfficIal Records of the Security Council, Second Year,
No. 72.
• The following is the text of the letter and of'the memorandum
enclosed therein:
'
Document S/485
12 August 1947
[Original text:' English]
, In accordance witli instructions received from my Govern.
m.ent, I ,have the honour to request reconsideration by the
Security Council. of its decision of 7 August 1947 denying the
application of the Philippines to participate in the discussion
of the Indonesian CJ,uestion.
My Government IS taking this step in the belief that the vote
on that occasion, which stood at 6 in favour, none against,
with 5, abstentions, indicated the possibility that further con"

Le PRESIDENT (tradui-t· de ,I'anglais): Le Conseil de securite vient de recevoir une lettre, en
'date du 8 aoitt 1947, adressee au President par le
general Romulo, representant des Philippines3, et
demandant au Conseil d'examiner a nouveau la
requete qui avait deja etepresentee lors de la
cent soixante-dix-huitierne seance4 ,a savoir, d'etre
autorise a participer aux deliberations relatives a
la question indonesienne. Toutefois, nous ne pouvons discuter cette lettre, ni la mettre aux voix,
que si un membre du Conseil le demande.
1 Voir les Proces-'lIerblUlJ: officiels ~ Conseil de secUf'ite,
Deweieme Annee, Sup.p)ement N° 16, Annexe 40.
• Ibill., Supplc!ment N° 16, Annexe 41.
• Voir les Proces-'lIerbauJ: officiels du, Conseil de, securite, Deux.
ieme Annee, N° 72.
3 Void le, texte de cette leftre ,et du memorandum qui I'accom·
pagne:
12 aout 1947
[Texte original- e;: anglais]
Conformement awe instructions que ;'ai rec;ues de mon Gouvernement, j'ai l'honneur de demander au Conseil de
securite de revenir sur la decision gu'iI a prise le 7 aout 1947
de -ne pas accc!der a la demande des Phillppines de participer
a la discussion de la situation indonesienne.
Cette ,d"marche de mon Gouvernement procede de la convi.c·
tion que le vote qui a eu lieu ~ cette occasion avec '6 VD'"
pour, zero contre et 5 abstentions a donne I'imp,ression qu'un

'.

ps

1915
Colonei HODGSON (Australia); Do I understand the President to mean that we. shall not
consider the letter from the representative of the
philippines' at Jhis :stag~ unless it is supported
by some member of the Council?
The PRESIDENT: Yes, that is my view.

Le colonel HOOOSON (Australie) (tr,aduit de
l'anglais): Le President veut-il dire que nous
n'examinetons pas la lettre du representant des
Philippines, au stade actuel de la discussion, si
cette ~lettre Ii.'est pas appuyee par un membre du"
Conseil?
Le PRESIDENT (traduit
en effet mon opinion.

de l'anglais):

Telle est
.

Colonel HODGSON (Australia): I wish' to support the request of the representative of the
philippines.
.
.
.

l'ang~ais): ]'appuie la demande presentee par le

The PRESIDENT: The letter has only just been
received: It is not on the agenda for this meeting
but it has been circulate,d in order to give the
members an opportunity to read and study it.
It could be .discussed at a later meeting.

Le PUSIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Cette
lettre vient de parvenir au Conseil. Elle n'est pas
insdite
l'ordre du jour, mais elle a ete distribuee
aux membres pour leur permettre d'en prendre
connaissance et de l'etudier. Nous pourrions
exarninercette lettre lors d'une seance ulterieure.

sidcrationof ·the facts. of the case might result in a diffet'ent
. deCision. That 'beliefis suppor):ed by. the remarks of the honour.
able .represelltative of tjIe .Un~ted Kingdom, who<. stated that he
did not feel at the time that the text of my telegram, dated
1 August 1947 and addressed to the Secretary-General, had
suffiCiently established ~e P~i1ip~ines' claim to having a speCial
interest in the Indoneslan sltuation. Furthermore, the. honour.
·able representat~ve of Belgium properly p?inted out that the
Security Council should not tak~. a. declslon on. the request
until' it found out whether the. Phihppmes was speclally affected
by that question, in' accordance with Article 31. of the <;harter.
In the first place, my telegram was' not primarily intended'
to suppo.rt with arguments the Philippine claim that its interests
were specially affected. There was not space in a telegraphic
message to do that. The main purpose of my telegram was to
convey to. the Council the stanilo£ my Goverllment in favour
of intervention 'by the Security Cot!llcil in the Indonesian
question in the. interest of a pacific settlement. Illdeed, a careful
. reading of my telegram will show that the. two grounds which)
Sir Alexander Cadogall considered insufficient to warrant partiCipation by the.Philippines in the discussion, namely, its
interest, in the maintenance of peace and security and its·
humanitarian desire to .prevent further bloodshed, were cited
my telegram not ill. order to· .upport the claim that the
Philippines was specially interested in the matter, but rather
to explain the. Philippine stand ill favour of intervention by
the Security Council. My telegram was confined to a general
affirmation of speCial interest. I had assumed that 1 would be
given more ample opportunity than was affo!l'ded in a brief
telegram to explain why my Government considers itself spe·
Cially affected by. the Indonesian situation•. That opportunity
was not granted to 11 .e, and I am therefore submitting a memo
orandum on the subject for the C<lnsideration of the Security
. Council.
. •

nouvel examen des faits pourrait peut-etre entrainer une decision differente. Cettecvnviction de mon Gouvernement trouve
un appui dans les remarques du representant du Royaillne·Uni
qui ,a declare que le texte du teIegranune adresse par moi au
S,ecretaire .Ileneral le ler ~out )947 ,!e, I?i semblait pa~ .et~blir
d une mamere suffisante I'mteret pamcuher que les Phihppmes
revendiquent. d311S la question indonesienne. En outre, le
representant de la Belgique a signaIe que le Conseil de securite
ne devait. pas statuer sur la demande avant d'avoir etabli si,
d311S cette question, les interets des Philippines etaient particulierement affectes dans le sens de I'Article 31 de la Charte.
En premier liell,. mon telegranune n'avait )las essei:tti~.IeJ1!ent
pour Dut !le fourmr des arguments a.la these des Philippliles
selon laquelle ses int.el'ets sont particulierement affectes. II n'y
avait pas.suffisamment de place dans un message telegraphique
pour cela. Le but essentiel de mon telegramme etait de faire
connaitre au Conseil de securite que mon Gouvemement etait
f!lvorable a l'intet;'entio31 du Consei~ clans la, situation in<;lone.
sl~nne, . en vue d l1n reg!ement pacifique. En effet,' si on' lit
sOlgueusement mon telegramme, on y veri'a que les deux raisons
jugees i!'~uf!isantes par ~i,: AIC'!'ander ,cadog;an pour. l?ennettre
aux. P!'tl~ppmes de p~rtlclper a. la diSCUSSion (I'illteret· pris
au .ma.m~len ~e I!!: pSlX et de la securite, et le desir tout
!;um:tmtalre d empeclier de nouvelles effusions de sang) avaient
ete. mv?quees n0Il- ppur dem!,nt':~ que l~s rhilippin~s 'p~~ten­
. qale'!t a bo!, drOIt e!t'e pat;.tlcnlleremen~ mteressees a la question mdoneslenne, malS plutot pour exphquer J;lOur quelle 'raisoD
, les Philippines' etaient favorables a l'interventlOn du Conseil de
securite. Je me, suis borne dans mon, telegramme a declarer
d'un.e maniere generale, que les Philippines avaiefit un interet
partlcul~e!".d.ans, cett~ affaire; J'avais pense qu'on qie donncrait '
la posSlbillt~ d exphquer ml~ux qu'on ne peut le faire dans
~n ~ref telegramm~pourquo~ mo!' Gouverneme,!t s'es~e par•.
t~c?hereme':t affecte par la sltuation en Indonesle. Cette possi•
blhte ne m a pas ete accordee, et, en consequence, je soumets a
l'='!'en .du Consilii de securite un memol'311dum sur cette
question."
.'
Mon qouvern.emC?1~ tt;o!lve tout ·nameI que les me1l!Iires
du C;;onst:tl de,secW;lte deslrent montrer la plus gr311de cir.cons~ectl,!n, d~I1S ~ OCtrOI aux Etats non membres du privilege mentlQnne I' I Artlcle . 31 de la Charte. C'est' un pri.vilege dont,ili"ne
voudr~ent pas .qu'on abas.e. ;Mais ,il est· peut·etre juste de' dire
que, Sl ·ce s,:ntiment de clrconspection et oe desir de prevenir
tout abus exlstent parmi les. membres du Conseil, ils. sont_~par­
tages par .~o~ les autres.. Membres des NatioQs Unies. Nous
croyo~s qu auc~ Membre des Nations Unies qui respecte le
Conset!. d.e se<;urlt~ comme m~n Gouvernement le respecte, ne
voudral.t !ffiJ;lOser sa pres~nce a cette auguste assemblee s'il ne'
se conslderalt, en toute ralson et en toute ,bonne foi, particuliere.
ment affecte par une question en discussion dev311t le Conseil.

in

My Goverd';;~nt fully understands that it is natural fop the
honourable members of the Security Council to wish. to exercise
the .utmost circumspection in granting to non·member States
the privilege mentioned .inArticle 31 of the Charter. It is a
privilege that· they would not wish to see abused. But it is
, perhaps fair to say. that the sense of circumspection and the
desire to prevent. abuse are shared equally by. the members of
. the ; Gouncil and by all the other· Members of· the United
Nations•. We believe that no Member of the United Nations,
holding th!' Security Council in the utmoot respect, as. does my
Government, would wish to .intrude within the precincts of
!hat august body unless. it considered itself, in good sense 3lld
111' good faith, to. be specially affected by a question under
discussion by the' Council.
This is the first request of this nature which my Government
has. addressed to the Security Council. My Government has not
ab!!sed and it does not int~d to abuse the hospitality and
patience of the Council; I therefore reiterate the, r~uest of
my Gov~rnl!lent and beg ~ou to be kind el).ough t<>. brmg this
comm!lntcatlOn, together Wlth the attached memorandum to the
atlentlOn of the. Council at the earliest possible moment..

M~~randum to the Secu~ity Co~cil
On Friday, 1 August 1947, in'a telegram. addressed to the
~ec.retary~General of the United Nations L communicated the
es!re 'of ~y Governmel}t to participate,'!ls' a Member of the
Unlted 'Nations' .whose: 'mt~rests are speclally affe'cted by the
matter .under d!SCUSSlon, m any further discussion of the
~h4o.ne~tan ques~lo.h. Since that request was denied without the
. Ibpptl;tes recelv.mg 311 opportu~ity tOl explain why it conered Itself sJleclalIyaffected by the question under discussion
~ m\ll11orand'!m:'·is presented with the desire to rectify th~
Unlortunate omlSSlon.
'.

:ft4

There i,!l~ ,first of all, iIie factor of geographical proximity.
~o 0lther .M.Cl1!ber. of the United Natiollls,. unless it be Australia,
IS c oser to the ~eatre pf h!lstilities than the Philippines. The
me~~~rs of the Council wdl recall that during the special
sess!on qf ili.e General Assembly last May, when the United
~attons..Sp~clal Committee on Palestine was being constituted,
t !l Phihppmes elected," with ·the sanction of the First Commltt.ee, tOl b~long ~o t!te ~outhwest Pacific Area for the 'purposes
~;aI!l'eo'1tphlcal
dlstrlbution. That area roughly includes AusW thZealEand and the Philippines, together with the
isla l~.
cou~: 0
e
ast Indi311 archipelago. If, therefore, any
m . t y 1nay properly claim to have a special interest in the
amtenance of peace in that part of the world mainly on
gr~~~ds of geographical p;:oximlty, that' country i~ the Philip-

i

.,.

Ec~:t ~he claim is based on other equally valid' grounds

oml,cally, the Philippines is specially affected because of

Le colonel HODGSON

(Australie)

(traduit de

representant des :Philippines.

. .

a

<;'est la premiere demande de cette nature qU'adre~s~ mon
qouvc::rn~ment au Conse!l de securite..If. n'a jamais abus" de
I hospltal!te et ,de la patlen.ce. du Conseil et n'a nuIle intention
de le falre. C est pourquol Je renouvelle -la demande (le mon
Gou~.ern"me,nt et .vous prie de.. bien vouIoi. porter le plus tot
posslble a ! attentll!n. du Conset! la presente lettre et le memo•.
randum qUI y .est Jomt.
'
Memorandum adresse at Conseil de se~urite

. Le vendreC:i ler aout 1947, par un tel~gramme adresse au
S~cretair~ general ·de l'Organisation· des Nations Unies j'ai

falt saVQlr que mon GOlUvemement desirait participer en tant
ll.ue .Membre des Nations Unies dont les int6rets ~nt particu!terement affectes par la lJ.u~stion en discussion a toute
nO!Uv~lle discussion de la questlOn indonesienne au Conseil de
s~curlte. Cette dem311de aY311t ete reJ;<lussee sans que les PhiIin'
pmes aient ep la possibilite d'C'!'plil}.uer pour qUelles raisoDs
elles . se cQl1,slderent comme partlCl~1terement affectees par la
question a I examen nous soumettfJns le 'present memorandum
C!,1 exprimant le desir qu'i1 solt remedi6 a ~ette omissioll
facheuse.
. ,
'
En prem\er lieu, il y a la proximite geographique. AUCU1~
autre Membre de I'Organisation des Nations Untes, sauf I'Aus.
tralie, n'est plus proche du theatre des hostilites que les Philip.
l?ine.s. Les n;tembres ~u Conseil se rappelleront CJ.ue lars de. la
se~slon speclale de I AssembIee generale en mal dernier au
. cou,:s de lli!luelle fat constituee la Commission speciale' des
NatlOns Un1~S pour la Palestine, les Philippines ont decide,
pour des ralsons geographlques, et aVe(: I'approbation de la
pre!¥iere Comm.issiol}, de faire partie de la region .sud-ouest du "
Paclfique. Cette reglOn comprend en gros I'Australie la 'Nou.
velle-Zt!lande et les Philippines ainsi que °les iles de' I'aj'chipel
~es Indes orientales. Par consequent, si un pays neut a juste
titre pretendre avoir. un interet particulier au ma1ntien. de la
, palX daps. c.ette partle. du monde,. aV311t tout pour des raisons
de pr!lltlmlte geographlque, ce pays est bien les Philippines.
Mals notre deptande repose sur d'autres raisons egalement
valables. Du pomt de vue ecdnomique, les Philippines sont

"

1916
Colonel HODGSON (Australia):' That makes. it
quite clea.r.
'-

........","',,._-'"'"'Ill

..

Le colonel HODGSON(Australie) (traduit de
l'anglaisl: La question est maintenant tout·il fait
claite.
.
M. P ARODI (France): l.e document que nous
avons sous les yeux porte ~a date du 12 aout
c!e!lt-a.-dire d'aujourd'hui meme. Mais it n'est pa~
tres long, etjeregrette qu'it n'ait pas ete distribue
en fran~is en meme temps qu'en anglais. La
traduction en fran~is de ce 40cument doit prendre environ. d~x minutes a. un personnel· exerce.
11 faut peui-etre dix autres minutes pour le
dactylographieret dix minutes encore pour le
roneotyper. Cela fait donc en tout une demiheure, et, je doutefort qu'il y ait moin& d'une
demi-heure qu'ilait ete remis au Secretariat. Je
voudrais que 'le Secretariat fasse un effort. plus
grand pour respecter le reglement em ce qui concerne les langues.
. .
M. KERNO (Secl'etaite general adjolnt charge
des'questions juridiques) : Le Secretariat fait tout
ce qu'il peut pour se conformer strictement au
particulierement affectees Jlal la rupture de leurs relations
commerciales avec l'Indonesie. Avant la gnerre, la valeur de
nos intportations en provenance d'Indonesie, qui consistaient
principalement en huile minerale, se c1assait 'au troisieme rang
ae toutes n<iS importations en proyenance de l'etranier. Lea
Philippines ont ettS devasto!es par la gnerre, et leur reconstruc.
tion dans le domaine economique et social est en grande Partie
tributaire des importations de certliines matieres prell1i res
indispensab1es. qUi nous Tiennent d'Indonesie. Dans ces condi.
tions, foutes mesures susceptibles de retablir rapidement la paix
en lndonesie sont, pour les Philippines~ d'i'nteret vital.
Historiquement, 'Ies Philippines et l'.lndonesie sont etroite.
ment unies par les liens de la culture et de la tradi,tion qui
remontent a de nombreux ~iecJes en arriere, bien /4vant I'appa.
rition des premiers explorateurs euro~en$.
Revenans a I'¥icle. 31 ftc la ~am:e qui s!applique a .notre
demande de llart'C,lpat,on a la d,scuss'on. Cet Article d,spooe
que t~lIt Membre de l'Orsanisation des Nations Unies qui n'est
pas membrc du Conseit de securite peut parliciper 11 la discussion
de toutj!' question soumise al.l Cooseil, chaque fois que ce1ui.ci
estime ~ue les interets de ce Membre sont "partic:ulierell1enl

e

Histo~ical1y,the Philippines and Indonesia are closely related,
linked by.ties of culture and tradition that go back many centuries, long hefore the first European explorers ~ppeared on
theLet
scene.
'"
• • 0 f the Ch arter 11'h:ch
us return
to the relevant prOTIS,on'
,
covers our request for participation. Article' 31 provides that
any Member of the United Nations which' is' not a member of
. the Security Council may participate in the discus\ion of any
question brought1ietllre the Council whenever the latter con·
sidersthat thj!' interests of that Member are "spedal1y affected".

, The phrase lispecial1y affected" is Tape and though the
;Security Councillias, on at least one OCCasiO:il, tried to interpret
its meaning, it ill our understanding that the learned members
of this .body han so tar not' been able to agree on a precise
definition. .
.
..
Th~ recOlrd, however, yields one pertinent and significant
precedent. Last March, at, its hundred· and . eight~nth !Deetingl
lli~ security Counc,l consIdered the requests of New Zealana
and India' to be inTited to participate in the discussion of the
United States trUsteeship proposal for the former Jllpanese
mandated islands. India, which does not border on the Pacificl
merely cited Article 31 of'the Charter ..nd was not requirea
M the- Council tOl show proof of its special interest. New
Zealand, on the other hand, gave such proof and based its
'special interest on the consideration that the disposition of
those islands was an essential" part' of any' plan ft;Jr the control
of Japan.· and of the 'peace settlement w,th that cOlUntry. On
that jlrinc;!ple, New Zealand suggested that all the members of
• -the Far Eastern Commission should be invited to participate
.
also. if, they so deS~i-cd. .
Without ,.agreeing with that principle. the United Slates rep'resentative freely assented to the request of India and New
Z~and to·parti.cipate in the'disc1!ssion on the gro~ds:-:to qu~e
hIS own worlfs-:."that the subJect of trusteeshIp 's of the'
'highest ethical character"• and that "consequently, the pro·
; cedui-e ofth':' Securit)' Council leading up to agreement or
disagreement ought to be absOl1utely free from any unfair ad1'3ntage or even the shadow of a. rigid application of rules to
the situation".'
....
On the ,hasis of those 1<JnT considerations. therefore. the
Securitr Council decided to, mvite New Zealand and India
and. w,th them. Canada. the Netherlands and the Philippines,
being members of the' Fa:t. Eastern Cotpttlission :which are not
',members of the Security Council. It may be pertinent to point
'out ·that:th'~ Philip!'Jnes was _Invited by the Council at the
'stiggestiOI1 of -New Zealand evetithough, unlike New Zealand
. ,and India, i~ 'bad made no ;previo~s, request to be heard.
B. 'I, anal!llrY.·;the Indonesian question.should also be,regarded
':'a8 of 'the highest ethical character, involving as it does the
relatit;Jns between a metropolitan Power and a country to which
"it has' {lromis'ed independence, as well as the maintenance of
internattonal . peace and security. Indeed, if the Philippines
,''Was, 'invited' to take part in the diseussjon of the United States
trusteeship' proposal, which concerned the future' maintenance of
'.'pl!ad~ in ffie vast and remote reaches !If' the Pacific, it is difficult
"to Understand. why it mar not be invited to participate in the
. discussion of a matter 'lDvolvillfl the actual maintenance of
peace and security in its immediate vicinity. Hence we dare
to 'hope that the procedure of the Security COuncil, as on that
"earlier ocCasion upon a much less urgent- matter, will be free
from "even the shadow of a rigid application of rules to the
situation".
' .,
"Ij

"

. , For. the reasons her~ advancedl the' Philippines earnestly
'solicits 'the permission of the SecurIty Council to participate in
the, dis!:ussion of the Indonesian situation for as long' as that
question remains on tllli• agenda
of. ,the'
Security 1,.CoIIineiL • •
.'
.
~

~~.

'.

Les termes. "particuli~rl)me,nt affectes" so~t Tagnes et hien
que le Conse,l ae securlf'~ a't tente, au moms une lois d'en
interprc!ter la signifie~tion, nOllS croyons 113yoir que les aoctes
membres de c:ette AS5enlblei: n'ont pu, jusqu'ici, se mettre
'/
.
d'accord sur une definition precise.
11 existe, .cependant, un precedent lM;rtinent et sisnifieatif
en la matiere. Lors de sa cent·dix-hu,tieme seance, en mars
demier, le Conseil de securite a examine les demandes pre.
sentees par la Nouvelle-Zelande et l'Inde tendant a etre iitvitees
a 'participer a la discussion du llrojet d'accord lIe tutelle sur
les nes anterieureinent sous mandat japonais, presente par lee
Etats-Unis. L'Inde, qui ne horde pas le Paeilique, &'est con- •
tentee d'invoquer l'Article 31 de la Charte et it'a 'pas ete
~equise par le Conseil de prouver son interet particul,er daus
I'affaire. La Nouvelle·Zelande d'autre part, fOl/rnit la preuve
demandee, arguant que, I'interat particulier qu'etle avait daDs
I'affaire reposait sur la consideration que le sort final des lies
en question etait lie essentiellemcnt a tout plan de contrale du
Japon ainsi qu'lI la conclusiOjli du traite de paix ayec ce pays.
En partant ae ce principe; la Nouvelle·Zelande proposa que
tous les membres de la Commission de l'~tr~me-Orient fussent
egalement invJtes a partieiper, s'i1s le desiraient.
Sans admettre ce princ,pe, le representant des Etats-Unis
accepta volontiers de faire droit a la requete de l'Inde et de III
Nouvelle·Zelande de partici{ler a. la disc!!ssion parce que, aux
yeux des Etats·Unis, pour ctter ses propres paroles, "la question
de III tutelle revetait. • • tu1 caractere moral lies plus eleves"
et que "Le Conseil de securite; avant d'ahoutir a un accord
OU a un desaccord. deyrait donc eviter tout traitement de faveur
et meme tout ce qui pourrait evoquer une application trop
rigide des regles c!tablies en vue de la presente's,tuation", '
Ayant envisage! la question de ce point de vue eleve, le Conseil
de securite decida d'inviter la Nouvetle-Zelanr1e et I'Inde, et
avec etles, le Cbada, les Pays-Bas .et les Philippines qui,
membres de la' C\lmmlssion de l'Extreme.Orient, ne sont pas
membres du Cociseil ,de securite. 11 convi.mt peut.etre de
soutigner que le Conseil a invite les Philippines sur la projlOsi.·
tion de la Nouvelle·Zelande bien que, a la differenj:e de la
Nouvel1e·Zelande et de l'Inde, .elles n'aient pas anterieurement
demande a. etre entendlles.
Par analogie, .on 'doit egalement considc!rer la question, ¥tJ
donesienne cornme revetant un' caractere moral des ·plus eleves,
puisqu'etle parte sur les relatione entre une Puissance m,c!trd~'
potitaine et un pays auquel cette Puissance a promis I',n ,C·
.pendance, et qu'el1e interesse egalement le maintien de. la pa.x
et de la securite internationales. En verite, si les. Philippineds
ont ete invitee a prendre part 11 la discussion du projet d'acC!lr
de tutetle presente par lee Etats-Unis et il}teressant le maintien
futur de la paix dans·les vastes eSJlllces 1000ntains du Paeifique,
iI serait diff.cite de comprendre pourquoi etles ne seraient pas
invitees 11 participer a la discussion d'une question qui interesse
le maintien actuel de la paix et de la securite daus leur
.voisinage immCdiat. Par consequent, noUB oSllns esperer ,qude le
Conseil de securite, comme iI I'a deja fait en celte prc!ce ente
occasion au sujet d'un probleme beaucoup moins ,mpo<rtant,
vQudra eviter "tout ce qui paurrait evoquer une applicat,on trop
rigide des regles etablie!l en vue de Id presente situatian". I'
Pour toutes, ces raisons, les Philippines prient instamml)n~ e
Conseil de securite de leur acc:order 'la permissiOlD de part,c,pf
a la discussion sur la situation en Indonesil\ pendant tOlUt de
temps que c'ette question sera inscrite a I'ordre du jour u
Conselt de securite.
'

_

.... ....... --....

.

'

1917

I

conform, strictly to the rules which oblige us to reglement qui nous fait une obligation de distridistribute all documents in' the two working buer tous les documents dans les deux langues
languages, as far, as possible simultaneously: But 'de ti-avail, autant que possible simultanement.
I would ask -the ;representative of France to bear.,. Mais je prie le representant de la France de ptenin mind that the Secretariat translation services dre en consideration le fait que lIes, services de'
are literally swa~ped with. wor~. T~ere is the tradu~tion du S~cretariat ,sontlitte!al;ment ~ub­
Economic and SOCial Councd, wh1ch S1tS day and. merges de trava1l. Il yale Consed econo111lque
night, and its yarious ~ommittees; .there is the et s<;Jc!al, .qui siege jour.' et nu!t, e,t ,se~ diff.erents
Security yound; there 1S also, for ll,!-stance, ~e com1tes; 11 y.a le Consed de securlte; d y encore,
Council's annual report to the Assembly, wh1ch pour vous c1ter un exemple, le rapport' annue1
is in course' of preparation; that is a document ' du Conseil a l'Assemble~ qui est actuellement
of tW0 hundred pages which we have to translate. en preparation: c'est un document de dt:ux cents
That explains why the French translation is' a pCl;ges que nous dev0l;1s traduire,. C'est c~ qui exlittle late. We are very sorry and we hope that phque que la traductlOn fran<;a1se a sub1 un peu
this unusual situation will not recur.
de retard. Nous le regrettons profondement, et
nous esperons que cette situation exceptionnelle
n'e se renouyellera pas.
Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
Colonel HODGSON(Australia) : I'made a stat~
ment at th'e- hundred and seventy-eighth meeting l'anglais): Au cours de la cent-soixante-di'xon the question of Indon~sia, and indicated that J huitieme seance, j'ai fait tine declaration sur la
would submit a resolution covering the points question indonesienne, et j'ai indique que je
presenterais une resolution: relative aux points
I made.
que j'avais precises.
,
Pour me resur.aer briev~ment, j'ai faIt observer'
, Briefly, to rec;ipitulate, my point was that the
decision of the, Council was dated 1 August,! but quela decision du Conseil a ete pris~ le'ler aoutl ,
tnat; it~flPpeared to my Goyernment that there mais que,' de l'avis de- mon Gouvernenient, la
were.'sfgris.,qf ~ d~terioration in the position. The situation semble s'etre aggravee. Le <Zonseil s'esf
Council' was' and. still is confronted with con- trouve et se trOl1ve encore eq presence de rap, Hicting. rep(jits~'Jtb~' :w~~~ it is very difficult .()r ports c.ontradictoires .dans lesque1s il est tres
difficile, voii'e meme impossible, de discerner la
impossible'to discovef.~~e real truth.
verite.
Nous sommes done saisisd'un prob!erne"a
Thus 'we have before us a short..:termrroblem,
namely, to' see that the decision of the Council is courte e~heance, qui consiste a veiller a ce qu'on
fUlly put iilt6 effect, because it may be some time , donne pleinement .effet a la decision du Gonseil;
before definite arrangements are made f~r media- car it est possible qu'un certain temps s'ecowe
tion or arbitration 'or a long-term settlement' as avant que lesdispositions definitives soient prises
en '"\Tue d'une mediation, d'un arbitrage, ou' d'un
visualizea by' the Council in its d~cision.
reglement durable comme l'envisage la decision
duConseil. .
'
.
En cequi concerne ce reglement durable, le
. With regard to the long-term settlement, all
that has happened' is that the United States sew resulta:t acquis' est que les Etats-Unis ont
. Governmep.t has offered its good nffices, which offert leurs bons offices; qui ont ete acceptespar
have been accepted by the Governments of the le Gouverhement des Pays-Bas et le G<;mverne-N etheda~s and the Indonesian Republic. But ment de la Republique d'Indonesie. Mais it y a
there is a doubt as to the real meaning and scope des doutes quant a la veritable sigriification et
of these "good offices". The representative of the la ponee exacte de ces, "bons offices". Le repreUnited States niay be able to give us a clearer sentant des Etats-Unis est peut-etre eri mesure
indication of what is'me21lt by his Government's de nous preciser ce que son Gouvernement· a
offer.
voulu dire en faisant cette offre.
Ces bons offices, a notre avis, peuvent se re·· Such good •.offices, as we see it, may mean
simply asking the two parties to meet. My Gov- duire simplement a demander aux parties de' se
erfJment, wants more than that; it wants a just rencontrer., Man Gouvernenient veut davan,tage;
and lasting, settlement to be achieved.
il desire coqtribuer a amener un regl~ment juste
et durable.
A cette fin, nous avons offert de nous joindre
To that end, we have offered to join with the
United States as mediators and arbitrators in au Gouvernement des Etats-Unis en qualitede
t~isdispute.That'offer, my delegation nas b~en mediateurs et d'arbitres dans ce differend. On
gIven. ,t9 l1gcerstand, has been accepted by the' a donll(~ a' entendre a' ma delegation que cette
Government of the Indonesian Republic.
' . offre a ete acceptee p2.r le Gouvernement de la
Republique d'JIndonesie.
To clarify the position, my delegatipn has pJ;ePour preciser la position, nous avons prepare
pared a.uraft resolution. 2 We are careful in this un projet de resolution2• Dans ceprojet, nous
1 See Official'Records of the Security C~uncil, 8econd Year,
No. 68, 173rd meeting. For the text of the resolution, see ibid"
N0, 72, 178th meeting, document S/459.
• The following'is the text of the draft resolution:
Document 8/48B' .
.'
12 August 1947
[Original tl!<:t: English]
, th W~rehas the .Security Council, on 1 August 1947, caUed upon
. e ",et erlandsang' .t}te RepuDtic of Indonesia:
~a) To cease hostdities forthwith and
. b) J~ settle their disputes by a;.bitration or by other peace·
means, and to keep the 8ecurity Council infcmned
. about the progress of the settlement; ,

1 :Voir les Proces''lIerb(",,~ ofliciels &u COltSeil de securite,
Deuxleme Annee, N° 68, 173 eme seance. Pour ·Iexte· de la
resolution, Ibid., N° 72, 178eme, seance, dowment S/459.
, 2 Void le texte de: ce' projet de resolutiGn:
Document 8/488
12 aout 1947 ,
[Te~te-~ original en anl1lais]
Attendu que le Conseit de securlte a invite, le ler aout 1947
les Pays.Bas et la Re~blique d'Indonesie:,
•
a) A cesser immedlatement les hostilites, et
b) ... regler leurs differends en recourant it I'arbitrage ou a
toot autre moyen pacifique et it tenir le' Conseil de
securite au courant des resultats acquis en vue' de ce
reglement;
A-a. Whereas communications have been received from the .
Et alteniu que des communications ont et6 re~ues des Gou·

b

1918
,; draft not to detennine, at this stage at least. th~
membershi of· the commission; its members
would be appointed by the Council once negotiations between the parties had started. That, I
repeat. may take some time. because we can all
appreciate ,that any ~ffers of conciliation or
mediation must be acceptable to A;oth parties. It
would be wron~ in principle for the Council to
designate the members by name at this stage.
As regards the short-term probl~m, my delegation 'suggests that the members of this cOg!mi~sion
should go out as agents of the Council, to act as
observers; and until-negotiations are under way,
they could help to stabilize the general situation.
As, agents, they could report· directly to us. We
shaH thus know the true facts. We shall be in a
position to judge whethe:: further action by the
Council is desirable or necessary.
I

..

The Council will note that we do not suggest
the number of persons who shoulJ constitute that
commission. In /this draft resolution }Ve do not
specify the countries 'which would be represented
on the commission. We leave that to the good
sense of the members of the Council, - if the
general idea is acceptable to them.
I think that covers the main points which I
did not mention at the hundred and seventyeighth meeting. I do not desire to go over them
again. so J shall place the draft resolution before
the Council for its consideration.
, Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): At the hundred
and seventy-first meeting1 we disCUssed the· problem of inviting a representative of the Indonesian
Republic to participate in these deliberations.
I have received information that representatives
of the Govemment of'. the Indonesian Republic
are now - seated in' the section· of this room
reserved fOF the public.
I 'formally move that tP,e President should
invite the head of the Indi:>Iiesian delegatjon and
his staff to take their places at the Council table.
The PRESIDENT: Before deciding on this point,
some member of the Council should submit a
proposal to the effect that the question should be
put before the Council ior discussion. The ques, tion was discussed at a previous meeting, but no
decision was taken. Therefore this matter is not
, Gcvernments of the Netherlands and the Republic of Indonesia
advising that orders have been giv~n for the cessation of hostili.
ties,
.
. . - h Id
AmI fl,"n'eas it is desirable that negotiations s ou commence as soon as possible with a view to· a just and lasting
settlement, and that steps should be taken to avoid disputes
and friction relating 'to the observance of the· cease fire orders
and to create conditions which wiII facilitate agreement between
the parties,
The Security CfI""ncil
1. Notes with satisfactio1t' the ~teps taken by the parties to
~omply with the resolution of l' Au~st 1947;
2. Notes the action taken by the Government of the U .ited
. States in making available its good offices to the Gcvernments of the Netherlands and the Republic of Indonesia
and tile OOIer by the Government of Australia to act jointly
with the United States Gcvernment in the capacity of
• mediator and arbitrator;
3. 'Resolves to establish a commission consisting of representatives of
.
who· will report directly to the Security Council on the
situation in, the Republic of Indonesia following t'he resotion of the Council of 1 At gust 19.47.
t See Qificial Records of the Sewrity CoUncil, Secrmd Year,
No. 67.
.' ,.e,'

evitons soi~eusement de specifier, tout au moins
d:ms l'etat actuel' de la question, la composition.
de la' commission, dont le Conseil ne designerait
1es membres qu'apres que les negociations auraient commence entre les parties. Je repete que
cela peut prendre Uti certain temps; .en effet,
il n'echappe a personne que toute offre d~ CQ11~
ciliation ou de mediation doit paraitre acceptable
a la fois aux deux parties. En principc. l~ Conseil acrait tort de designer nommement les membres maintenant.
'
En ce qui 'conceme le probleme immediat,
ma 'delegation conseille que les membres de cette
commission soient cnvoyes sur les lieux en qualite d'agents du Conseil et d'observateurs'; en
attendant que. les negociations aient commence,
ils contribueraient egalement a stabiliser· la
situation generale: En leur qualite d'~gents, its
pourraient faire rapp'ort directement au Conseil.
Nous seions ainsi infonnes des fait~ exacts.
Nous serons alors en mesure de decider s'il est
souhaitable ou necessaire que le. Conseil prenne
de nouvel1es dispositions.
Le Conseil notera que nous ne faisons aucune
proposition quant au nombre de membres de
cette commission. Dans 'le projd de resolution,
nous ne specifions pas les pays qui seraiem representes a la commission. Nous nous en remettons,
sur ce point, a la sagesse des membres du Conseil, si l'idee generale leuT parait acceptable.
Je pense que j'ai indique les principaux points
dont je n'ai pas parte lors de la cent-soiXante~
dix-huitieme seance. Je ne desire pas lesexaminer
de nouveau; je soumets donc ce projet de resolution a fexamen du Conseil.
M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais): Au cours de la cent-soixante .et onzien;1e
seance!, nous avons discute la question de savoir
si un representant de 'la Republiq~e ~'Indonesie
pouvait etre ·invite a prendre part aux deliberations en cours. On m'a informe que les representants· du Gouvemement de la Republique d'Indonesie se trouvent actuellement dans' la partie
de 'la salle du Conseil reservee au public.
. Je propose formellement· que le -President
invite le chef de la delegation de la Repuplique
d'Indonesie et ses adjoints a prendre .place a
la table duo ConseiI.
.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Avant
qu'une decision ne soit prise sur ce point, it
faudrait qu'un membre du Conseil soumit une
proposition demandant que !}e Conseil soit saisi
de la question afin de l'examiner. Ceci a ete
discute au cours d'une seance precedente, mais
vernementa des Pays-Bas et de la Republique d,'Indonesie,
fai5ant saYOir que des ordres ont ete donnes en vue de la'
'.
-cessation des hostilites,
Et attend" 9-u'i1 est souhaitable que des nellOciations corn·
mencent aussitot qu'~ .possible en vue d'aboutir a un reglement
juste et durable; que des me~ures Scient p'rises pour eviter tout
differend et tout desaccord 11 propoo de I observation des ordres
de lles~er le feu et pour creer des conditions qui faciliteront
la conclusion d'un accord entre les parties,
Le Conseil de securite
.
1. Pri!1ld a,cte avec satisfaction des mesures prises par les
deux parties pour se conformer 11 la resolution du ler aoftt
1947;
,
'.
2. Prend acte de I'initiative prise par le Gouvernement des
Etats·Unis qui a offertses bons offices aID< Gcuverneinents
des Pays.Bas et de la Republique d'Indonesie, et de I'offre
du Gcuvemement de I'Australie de se joindre au 'Gouvemement des Etats-Unis en qualite de mediateur et
d'arbitre;
"
. ' ,"
3. D-ecide de creer une commission composee des represen·
tants de
;
,
qui feront directepJent rapport au Conseil de securite sur
.la situation existant dans la Republique d'Indonesie par
suite de la resolution du Conseil en date dti ler a06t 1947.
1 Voil' ~es Proces·verbrw; oificiels d1t Conseil' de 'secflrite,
Deuxieme Annee, N° 67.

IIJS a

1919

aucune decision n'a ete prise. En consequence,
cette question n'est pas inscritea l'ordredu jour
de I? presente seance. En.. outre, le, Secretaire
IT'a piS rec;u 'les pouvoirs des representants de
la Republique d'Indonesie,. ce qui serait m.ecessaire .t: '1r que ces derniers fussent recofu'US
comme representants acci-Mites et invites a
prendre place a la table du Consei1.
Un peu avant. de venir' a la presente seance,
Just before coming to this meeting, I made
a note of the fact that the question of invitations j'ai redige une note sur le fait que la question
to the representatives of the Indonesian Republic ,de l'invitatian a adresser aux representant!'! de
and the question of their credentials might con- la Republique d'Indonesie et la question des'
stitute a matter to be discussed at this meeting. pou7oirs de ces derniers pourraient etre disAs I have said, no decision has yet been taken on outees pendant notre seance. Comme je l'ai dit;
the matter of extending" invitations to those rep- aucune dtdsion n'a ete prise jusqu'ici sur laquesresentatives. If some member of the Council tion de savoir s'il faut ill,viterces representants.
were to submit a formal proposal which would Si un membre du Conseil veut bien soumettre une
" have to be voted upon, I should call for discussion proposition formelle ,exigeant un vote, j'ouvrirai
immediatement -la discussion de cette question.
on it at once.
I
J e donne maintenant la parole au representant
1 now recognize the representatIve of Belgium,
de la Belgique, qui desire presenter une motion
who wishes to raise a point of order.
d'ordre.
'
M;J NISOT (Belgique): J e voudrais prier le
Mr. NISOT (Belgium) (translated from
French) : I should like to ask the representative representant de l'Ausfralie' de vouloir bien me
of Australia for some clarification as to the' donner .un eclaircissement sui-;la portee de son
scope" of his draft resolution. On what Article of projet de resolution: selon lui, sur quel Article
the Charter does he think the Security Council de la Charte le Conseil de securite se fondrait-il
should hase itself in adopting the resolution he pour adopter la resolution qu'it propOSe? eet
has proposed? Such an explanation would make ecla!rCissemptt faciliterait la' comprehension du
.
.
proJet.
the draft easier to understand.
Le PRESIDENT (trad24.it de l'ang1ais): Il ne s'agit
The PRESIDENT: That is not a point of order.
.
pas 13. d'une'motion d'ordni.
M.
KATZ-SUCHY
(Pologne)
(tradwit
de
l'anMr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): I should like to
move formally that the Council should agree to glais): J e propose formellement que le, Consei~
invite the representative of the Gove1'Ill\lent of se mette d'accord pour inviter le representant
the Indonesian Republic to take part in fhe dis- q.e la Republique ,d'Indonesie a participer aux
cussion of the Indonesian problem. I ask the discussions relatives a la question indonesienne.
President to open discussion on my proposal 'and Je demande au President d'ouvrir 1a discussion
to take a"vote on it. I l;lOpe that the representative sur ma proposition et'de mettre celle-ci aux voix.
of China will not object to the fact that, his state- J'espere que- le representant de la Chine ne
m,ent will be delayed by tpe few minutes required verra pas d'hiconve:nient a ce que sa (feclaration
to take this vote.
'
.soit retardee des qtielques minutes necessaires
pour proceder au vote en 'question.
.
The PRESIDENT: I have before me a letter from
Le PRESIDENT (trqduit de l'anglais): J'ai sous
Mr. Soetan Sjahrir, the representative of the ·les yeux une lettre de M. Soetan Sjahrir; repreIndonesian Republic. It appears as docu....ent sentant de la Republique d'Indonesie, qui figure
S~487 and reads as follows:
. au document 5/487. Etle est ainsi con~ue:
"I have the honour to refer to the r~que!St made
"J'ai l'honneur de me re£erer' au radiogramme
by my Government by radio-telegram to, you, que vous a adresse mon Gouvernement, deman-'
asking 'that rept:esentatives of the Republic of dant que des representants de la Republique d'InIndonesia should be allowed to participate without donesie soient autorisesa participer, sans droit
vote in the discussion of the Security Council de vote, aux debats du Conseil de securite re1atifs
,
relating to the Indonesian question. '
a la question indonesienne.
.\ .
"In this connexion, I am authorized by my
HA ce propos, mon Gouvernement m'autorise
Government to advise that, if an invitation is a annoncer que, si elle est invitee a patticiper
extended to the >Republic of Indonesia to partici- aux debats,' la Republique d'Indonesie accepte
pate, the. Republic of Indonesia accepts in ad- par avance, pour ce qui concerne ce differend,
va~ce, .for ,the purposes of this, dispute, the
les obligations qui' incombent "aux Membres, de
oblIgations of a Member of the United Nations." 1'0rganisatien des Nations Unies."
M.r. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist ReM. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sociapU~hc~). (tranflated from Russian) : The question listes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): La question
oJ mVItmg the representatives of the'Indonesian de la participation aux debats de representants
Repu~lic was raised at a previous meeting of the de la Republique d'Indonesie a deja ete soulevee
Sec.uTlty CounciLl At that time we postponed a une seance anterieure du Conseil de securite1 .
takmg ~ decisio~ of any kind on that question, Nous avions remis notre decision' a plus tard,
but I thmk the tIme has now come to revert to it mais il me semble qu'il est temps de revenir a
and to take a definite decision.
'
. cette question et de la trancher.
.
The" representatives ef the' Government of the
Les representants du Gouvernement de la ,Reon the agenda of this meeting. Moreover, the
Secretary has not received th~ credentia~s of !he
representatives of the Indonesian Repubhc, whIch
would be necessary if ~her ~ere to be rec9gnized
"as representatives and mVIted to the Councd table.

#

----

1 See Off' . 1 R
No' 67 I7I1Clt a ,!cords of the Sectlrity COll1lcil, Second Year.
. "
s meetmg.

hnn__

~

"

1 Voir les Proces''IIerbOlU~ officlels du COIlSeil 0" secflriM,
Deuxieme Annee. N° 67, I71eme seance.

..
1920
Indonesian'Republic have an-ived inNew York, publique cj'Indonesiesont arrives a. New-York;
they'are here and are apparently prepared at 'any its 'sont presents id et. sont prets; semble-t-il
'time to., express th~ viewii'~! the Indonesian a. exposer 'a. n'importe quel momentl'attitude d~
Government on this question. We ,have no Gouverilement de l'Indopesie sur la question.
groUnds for postponing further the taking of a, Nous n'avons aucune raison de remettre encore
decision on this question'. I do not know what notre decision. Je ne suis pas au courant de la
the position is from the .procedural point of procedure en matiere de lettres de creances, etc.
view as regards credentials, etc., but ·it is, apparent mais, d'apres ta lettre qui vient d'c:tre lue pa;
from the letter read just noVo' by the President le President, on voit que les representants qui
that the representatives who are here have been se trouvent ici ont pouvoir 'd'exposer le point
empowered to' state the views of t4eir Govern,.- de vue de leur Gouvemement; nous sommes
ment. There is tlierefore every reason for us to done parfaitement ~ondes a. trancher la question.
take a definite decisiop. on ,tIiis question.
Of course the USSR delegation supports, as it ' Bien entendu, la delegation l'URSS soutient
did before, the proposal' to allow the representa- toujours.la proposition tendanf a. admettre les
tives of the Indonesian Government to participate representants duGouvemement de l'Indonesie
in the discussion of this question in the Security a. participer'aux debats du 'Consei1 desecurite. .
Council. To take a different decision would be Une autre solution serait injusfe, puisqu'une des
unjust, sinc~ the one side is represented during parties est representee\~ux debatsdu Conseil de
the discussion in, the Security Council' and the securite' albrs que l'autre ne l'est pas. Il faut
other is not represented. Itis .necessary that both que les deux parties soient representees.
sides should be represented.
The ,PRESIDENT: Bef()re giving the floor tp the
J;..e PRESIDENT (tradwit de l'ang1ais): Avant
, next speaker, "1 should remind the members, of de donner la parole a. l'orateur suivant, je rappelle
,,.the Council of the provisions of Article 32 of the aux membres du Conseil les dispositions de
Charter, which states : "Any Member of the l'Article 32: de. la Charte qui stipule : "Tout
United Nations which is not. a member of the Membre des Nations Unies qui n'est pas membre
Security Council or any State which is not a : du Conseil de securite ou tout Etat qui n'est pas
Member of the United Nations, if it is a party ; Membre des Nations Unies, s'it est partiea
to a dispute under consideration by the Security i un differend examine par le Conseil de securite,
CoUilcil, shall be invited to participate wJthout ) est convie ,a. participer sans droit de vote ..."
vote •• !'Rule 14 of the provisional rules of pro- ,L'article 14 du reglement interieur provisoire
cedtire of the Security Council' states: "The . du Conseil de secarit~ dispose que: ".... Les pouc.redentials ()f such a representative shall be : voirs de ce representant son communiques au
communicated to the Secretary-General not less ,,'Secretaire general vingt-quatre b,.eures au moins
than twenty-four hours before, the first meeting 'avant. hi premiere seance a. laquelle celui-ci doit
which he is invited to attend."
; assister."
' .
There is no n~ce~sity for a special application ; . n· n'est ,pas, necessaire que le pays qui n'~st~
to be made by the nation which is, not a ,Member pas Membre preseate une demande specia,le" si,
if it is a party to the dispute under consideration. ; ce pays est partie, au differend, en qt,1estion.' 14.
The ~erority Council is bound to invite such a ; Conseil de securite est oblige de cony.ier ~et·
State to participate, even if it does not apply for : Etat a. participer aux debats, meme s'ibne pre-.
participation, because the Article of the Charter . sente pas une· demande a. cet effet, pour la bonne
dealing with the matter does. not insist that such : raisonque' l'Article de la Charte qui traite de
'ar-equest shoulf,1 be made.
,
I
,.la question n'insiste pas sur la necessite ({'une
I
' teHp dp1na n d e . ,
"
It .is in the interests of the Security Council, ' ,Il est de l'intc~ret du Conseil de securite, s~il
for the solution of the proplem under discussion,' ,veut resoudre le probleme en question, d'inviter
that sqchi a State should be invited a,nd heard. : u1). tel Etat a. participer aux debats et a se faire
The reason for this discussion is that' at the entendre. Le motif de cette discussion est que,
hundred and seventy-first meeting, when this lorsque ce point a ete so~leve, au cours de la
matter was opehed,there was some question as cent-soix~nte et onzieme seance, on a manifeste
to whether Indonesia should be considered as a certains doutes sur ta question de savoir si l'In'State or not. Now the Security Council has to take. donesie. doit etre consideree ou non comme un
a decision on whether the Indonesian Republic . ' Etat.' Le Conseil de securite .doit maintenant
should be invited or not. The matter is under prendre une decision sur la 'question;:'de savoir
disJ,:Ussion and I shiJ.ll give the floor first to t1;le si la Republique d'Indonesie doit etre:jnvitee ou
representative of the Netherlands and then to the non a participer aux debats. Cette qu~stion fait
representative of the United Kingdom.
1'0bjet de la discussion, et je vais doimer la
parole. d'abord au repre.sentant des Pays-Bas,
et ensuite au representant du Royaume-Uni. '
Mr. VAN KLEFFENS (Netherlands): The
M.. VAN KLEFFENS (Pays-Bas)- (traduit de
language of the letter of the representative of' l'ang1ais): Le texte meme de la qettre du reprethe Repyblic of Indonesia shows very clearly that sentant de la Rep~blique d'Indonesie montre tres
he bases his request on Article 32 of the Charter. nettement que ce dernier fonde sa demande sur
It is on, that point that I now ask leave to speak. l'Article 32 de la Charte. C'est sur ce point que !
j e voudrais maintenant prendre la parole; •
,On 31 J111y, at the hundred and seventy-first
Le· 31 juillet, a. la cent-soixante et onzieme
meeting, I pointed. out to the' Security' Council seance; fai fait observer au' Conseil de securite
that ·only r~presentatives of sovereign and inde- que seuls les representants des Etats souverains

de

pendent States, generally recognized as 'such, may et independants, generalement reconnus comme
be asked .to participate in a discussiQn under tels, petivent etre convies a participer a une disArticle 32 of the Charter. In. view of the point cussion, en vertu des dispositions de l',Article 32
that has now been rai~ed! I submit again .that the de la Charte. Etant· donne le point qui vient
Republic of IndonesIa IS not a sovereign and d'etre squleve, je repete que la Republique d'In:'
independent State gen~~lly so re~{)gnized. The donesie n'est pas un Etat souver::lin et indeRepublic itself has exphcltly recognized that fact, , pendant generalement reconnu tel. La Republique
I have here before me the, text of a letter ad- elle-meme a admis expressement ce fait. J'ai sous
dr~ssed by the' President of that Republic, Mr. les veux le texte. d'une lettre adressee par'le
Soekamo himself, to the representatives of the President de cette Republique, M. Soekarno 1uiUnited States Government who had made some meme, aux representants du Gouvernement des
dated 10 Etats-Unis, qui lui avaient fait des representarepresentations to him: ':J;he letter
July of this year, an~ In It the,rresldent of !he tions. Dans cette lettre, datee du 10 juillet decette
Republic of Indo~esla says: . The Indon~s!an annee, le President de la Reputilique s'exprime
Govemmentrecognlzes that durmg the transition ainsi: "Le Gouvernement indonesien reconnait
period between now· and I, January- 1949, ~e que,' pendant la periode de transition, c'est-a':dire
(iovemment of t~e. N etherla~ds . IS to re!al~ jusqu'au ler janvier 1949; le Gouvernement des
Pays-Bas conservera la souverainete et Fautorite
sovereignty and ultimate authority In Indon~sta.
supreme en Indonesie".
.
I
. A mon sens, ce texte est tres pertinent, et
I submit that this is highly pertinent, and I
draw particular attention to the word "retain". j'attire tout' particulierement l'attention du ConOne cannot retain what one did not poss~ss pre- ,seil sur le terme "conservera". On ne peut con• viously. Even if-which is not quite clear-the server ce qu'on ne possedait pas auparavant.
Republic now repudiates the Linggadjati Agree- , l\[eme si - ce n'est pas tont a fait clair - la
ment/ which prQvides for that interim period to Republique repudie aujourd'hui l'Accord de
which Mr. Soekamo refers In the passage I Linggadjati1 qui prevoit cette periode transitoire
have Just qu~ted, then the Netherlands must be a \laquelle se'rHere M. Soekarrio dans le passage
deemed to ,have sovereignty and what. Mr. que je viens de citer, le Gouvernement desPays'Soekamo very rightly' calls "ultimate authority" Bas doit etre considere comme exerc;ant un droit
de souveraineteet, pour citer 'les termes tres
in the Republic.
justes qu'emploie M. Soekarno, "l'autorite supreme" sur le territoire de la Rep!lblique.
C'est precisement' en nous fondant sur cette
It is precisely on the basis of that sovereignty
and ultimate authority that. we have taken the souverainete et cette autorite supreme que nous
action which is retaining the attention of the avons' jpris les mesures auxquelle~ le Conseil.
Security Council at the present time. But let us del seeurite ,cons'acre son. attention a I'heure
suppose that' all that were not so; even, then it actuelk Mais supposons qu'il n'en sojt pas ainsi;
'seems to 'me indisputable that if the' Republic, meme dans ce cas, il me semble 1\ors de doute
repudiating the Linggadjati Agreement, claims que, si la Republique, repudiant l'Accord de
sovereignty, that sovereignty must find a' basis Linggadjati, pretend qu'el'1e est souvera,ine, cette
either 'in conditions prior tu the Agreement or in souverainete'doit se folider, soit sur des condiconditions obtainingsinc~ that Agreement. There tions qui existaient 'avant l'A,ccord de Linggadjati, soit sur des conditions nees apres' cet
is no other possibility.
I'
Accord. III n'y a pas d'autre possibilite.
\
Permettez-moi d'affirmerque, ill avant, ni apre:s
I beg to assert that neIther before nor after
the Linggadjati Agreement did the Republic fulfil l'Accord de Linggadjati, la Republique n'a rempli
the conditions which in international law must les conditions requises par le droit international
be fulfilled· if there is to be any question of pour qu'i'1 puisse etre question de souverainete:
sovereignty. Those conditions, as all members of Aucun des membres du Conseil n'ignore que ces
theCouncil know, include, first of all, real govern- conditions comprennent, en premier lieu, une
mental authority. This, ,as events have abundantly autorite gouvernementale reelle: I?,ans le cas ,de
shown, is singularly absent in the case of the la Republique, cette autorite~anque singuliereRepublic. It has become apparent time after time ment, comme 1'0nt prQuve les evenements. Nous
that because of lack of authority, the Republican . avons constate a maintc:s reprises quec'est la
Govemment was unable to carf1J out eng~gements , raison pour laquelle le Gouverneme!J.t rfpublicain
which it had contracted. I refer to the numerous n'a pas ete capable de s'acquitter des obligations
examples I gave at' the h.undred and seventy-first qu'il . a contractees. Ie songe auxnombreux
an~ at the hundred and seventy-eighth meetings,
exemples que j'ai cites alacent-soixanteet
whl.ch are to be found in the record. I shall not onzieme et a la cent-soixante-dix-huitieme seweary th~ Council with repetition.
c ance
et qu'on peut trouverdans les procesverbaux des deliberations 'du Conseil. J e n'imposerai pas au Conseil ,la rep~tition de· ces
exemples.
'
La
seconde
condition
de
la
souverainete
est
The second condition ~f sovereignty is a well
defined. territory in which authority is e?Cercised. un territoire bien defini sur lequcl' s'eXerce rau"
In ~art1cular, before the Linggadjati Agreement, torite en ,question. Plus particulieremeilt, ·.avant
!t~ere was no such well defined territory. At aU l'Accord de Linggadjati,· ce territoire hien defini
n'existait pas. La Republique n'a pas cesse de
tun~sthe Repu~lic has shown expansionist tendmanifester des tendances expansionnistes. Le
~ncles. The Republican Government has ~he

!s

,

Iis~~eeb Thth~ PNolitiCal E'lI~lts i,. th~ Republic of lndonlsio, pub1

e

etherlands; Information. ·~ureau. New.york.

',

1 Voir The Political E'Vellts in the RePublic of ind01I~s!a, publi.
cation du Bureau d'information des Pays·BIlS,· New·York.
.

"'.

1922

ambition to rule over the whole arChipelago,
inclp.ding large areas which refused to be dominated from Java. The very name of the Republic
bears witness to the fact; the name lCRepublic of
Indonesia" is a 'programme.

Gouvernement republicain a l'ambition de regner
sur tout .l'archipel, "y compris, de vastes regions
qui ont refuse d'etre soumises a la domination
de Java. Le, nom meme de la Republique porte
temoignage de ce fait; le titre "Republique d'Indonesie" est en soi tout un programme.
Moreover, even in certain areas which the . En outre, meme' dans certaines regions qui,
Republic alleged already belonged to it, the popu- d'apres la Republique, lui appal,"tenaient deja,
lation showed that it did not recOgnize that la' population a montre qu'elle ne reconnait pas
cette autorite. .
authority.
La troisieme condition est que la population
The third condition is that' there should be a
population, whose members are not at the same d'un Etat souverain se compose d'elements qui
time nationals of another State. It is a fact that ne sont pas en meme temps ressortissants d'un "
the vast majority of the inhabitants of the Repub- autre Etat: Or, la grande majorite des habitants
lic do' not consider that they are, wholly ~d de la Repuplique considerent qu'its ne sont pas
exclusively, citizens of the ,Republic. They know completement et exclusivement citoyens de la
very well that they also have ties with the King- Republique. Its sayent tres bien qu'ils ont egaledom of the Netherlands.
ment des liens avec le Royaume des Pays-Bas.
In the hope of strengthening the' Government
Dans 1'espoir de renforcer le Gbuvernement
of the Republic, we recognized it in the de la Republique, nous avons reconnu, dans
Linggadjati Agre~ment as exercising de facto l'Accord de Li~ggadjati, que ce Got,1vernem~t
. authority in Java and Sumatra, neither more nor exer<;ait une autorite de facto a Java et a Suma. less. It has not been recognized by us as a de jure tra, ni plus, ni moins. Nous ne l'avons pas
Government. Still less has the Republic, as con- reconnu comme un Gouvernem~nt de jure. On
trasted with the Government of the Republic, peut dire encore moins que la Republique, par
been recognized by us as a sovereign and opposition avec le Gouvernement de la Repuindependent Statj:!.
blique, ait ete reconnue par les Pays-Bas comme
un: Etat souverain et independant.
A 1a lumiere de ces faits, on ne peut s'etonner
Is it surprising, in the lighf of these facts, that
neither the Republic nor its Government has been que ni la Republique, ni son Gouvernement
recognited .as a sovereign and independent State n'aient ete reconnus en tant qu'Etat souverain
by any appreciable number, of other Govern- et independant par un nombre appreciable d'auments? It may have made conventions with a'few tres Gouvernements. La Republique peut avoir
countries such as India, Egypt or Syria; if so, . conclu des conventions avec quelques pays tels
and leaving aside for 'the ti~e being any discus- que l'Inde, l'Egypte, et la Syrie; dans ce cas,
sion as to the political motives of these few coun- et sf nous, laissons de cote,. pour' ie moment,
tries, I submit that !pis proves, very little. What toute discussion relative aux motifs politiques,
determines the situation is .the fact that the de ces quelques pays, je pretends que cela ne
Republic:: has not been reoognized by any appreci- prouve pas grand-chose. Ce qui determine la
able number of countries as a sovereign and situation, c'est que la Republique n'a pas ete
i~dependent State. In other worcls, it. has, not
reconnue par un nombre appreciable de pays .
found that g~p.~ral measure of, recognition w~ich~' comme un Etat souverain et independant. En
beyond a doubt, is required if a State is to be d'autres termes, on ne peut constater cette recontreated as a sovereign and independent State by nais!!ance generale qui, sans aucun 90ute, est
a 'body such as the r ~curity Council, which repre- indispensable pour qu'un Etat. soit traite comm,e
sents the generality of States:
un Etat souverain et independant par un organe
tel que lIe Conseil de securite, qui represente la
generalite des Etats du monde.
Comme vous le savez tous, les membres du
As all membe;~ know, the members of
Security Council do not sit here as the spokesmen Conseil de securite ne siegent pas au Conseil
only.of their own countries. The Charter provides en qualite de porte-parole de leur propre pays
that the Members of the Council act on behalf exclusivement. La Charte dispose que les memof all the Members of the United Nations, as is bres du, Conseil agissent ,au nom de tous les
expressly set out in Article 24; paragraph 1. Membres des Nations Unies, comme le declare
,Hence no member of the Security Council, not expressement le premier paragraphe de l'Articlt!
even one whose Government may have made some 24. Par consequent, aucun membre du Conseil
agreement with the Republic of Indonesia, has, the de securite, pas meme le representant d'un pays
right to disregard the fact that the vast majority dont le Gouvernement a conch.! un accord avec
of the Members of the United Nations have not la Republique d'Indonesie, n'a le droit.d'ignorer
que la grande majorite des Membres des Nations
reco~ized ,the Republic as a sovereign and
Unies n'ont pas reconnu la Republique comme
independent State.
un Etat souverain et independant.
Les dispositions de' la Charte s'appliquent .,
The Charter applied only to dealings between
GOvernments of sovereign States which ,have uniquement aux questions qui se posent entre
'been generally and fully recognized a~ such. If les GouvernePlents d'Etats souverains et rec('nnus
this rule is not adhered to, the door is open to tels sur le plan international. Si nous ne nous,
representatives of any usurper Government in any conformons pas a cette regle,nous ouvrirons
State, recognized or unrecognized. Surely that la porte aux representants de n'importe quel
never crossed the mind of anyone, at San Frat.1- Gouvernement usurpat~ur dans n'importe quel
cisco or elsewhere. So long as, first, the State in Etat, reconnu ou non. It est certain que personne,

the

~

pt

1923

a- San-Francisco ou ailleu;s, n'a envisage cette
eventualite, Tant que, d~abord, 1'Etat en qu~stion '
n'a pas ete reconnu de jure, et, ensuite, tant que
l'Etat reconnu,comme tel n'a pas un Gouvernement
de jure, il n'est pas, il ne saurait etre, _un, Etat
dans le sens propre du,' terme: l'ls'agit peut-'
etre d'tm Etat tout a- fait ,respectable, faisant
part~ d'une federation, comme c'est le cas pour
les Etats des Etats-Unis d'Ameriqr ~ ou du
Mexique, du Venezuela, du Bresil ou de l'Australie. Ce peut etre un Etat naissant; ce peut
etre aussi un Etat qui, en raison d'une faiblesse .
evidente, n'inspire pas, ou pas encore, cette confiance generale qui, seule, peut le faire reconnaitre sur le plan international comme un Etat
independant et. souverain ;mais ce n'est pas un
Etat dans le sens propre du teJ."me. .
C'est une qu€stion purement juridique, et je
This is a purely legal question and I apologize
if those who are more .impressed with the human ne voudrais pas que les membres du CQnseil
side of the question think that for once I have q~i sont frappes par l'aspect humain de' la quesdealt only with the legal side of the matter. Let tion, pensent que; pour, une fois, j'ai traite \
me assure them, I shall have plenty to say on the uniquement de l'aspect juridique de l'affaire. J e
puis leur assurer que j'aurai beaucoup a dire
human side later on.
plus tard sur son aspect humain.
r conclude. No representative of the Govern- En conclusion, j'estime qu'aucun representant
ment of the Republic of Indonesia can be ad- du Gouvernement de la Republique d'Indonesie
mitted to participate in this discussion under ne peut etre a.dmis a- participer aux debats en
Article 32 of the Charter, as the Republic is not vertu de l'Articl~ 32 ~e la Charte, la Republique
a sovereign and indepe.ndent State generally n'etant pas un Etat souverain et indCpendant,
reconnu comme tel sur le plan international:
recognized as such. .
Sir' Alexander 'CAOOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
Sir AlexanderCADoGAN (United Kingdom):
It seems t9 me that the language of Article 32 (traduit de l'anglais): Il me semble que le texte
admits of no doubt. It is that Article which is in de l'Article 32 ne laiss~ place a aucun doute.
C'est de cet Article qu'il s'agit dans la presente
que~tion here, and it is to that Article, as I understand it, that the representative of the Indonesian discussion, et je crois comprendre que c'est aRepublic has appealed. That Article says: "Any cet article que le. representant de la Republique
Member of the United Nations whiCh is not a d'Indonesie s'est repolte. Cet Article dispose:
member of the Security Council or any State "Tout Membre des Nations Unies qui n'est pas '
which is not a Member of the United Nations ... membre du Conseil ,de sectirit~ ou tout Etat qui
shaH be invited to participate ..."
n'est pas Membre, des Nations Unies . . . est
a participer ..."
convie
.
En ma qualite de representant d'un GouvemeAs representative of a Government which has
not recognized the Indonesian Republic, I can- ment qui n'a pas reconnu la Republique d'Indonot vote in favour of inviting it to 'participate. nesie, je ne puis vater en faveur de la participation 'de cette Republique aux debats ~u
in the proceedings of the Security Council.
Conseil de securite.
M. SEN (lnde) (traduit de l~anglais): Au
Mr. SEN (India): Throughout this debate the
representative of the Netherlands has taken the cours de nos debats, le representant des Paysposition that Indonesia is not a State from the Bas a adopte une position selon laquelle/du point
de vue du droit international, l'Indonesie n'est
point of view of international taw.
pas un Etat.
During the discussiQns of· the last two weeks, . Lors des deliberations des deux dernieres
the members 9f the Security Council have avoided semaines, les membres du Conseil de securite ont
facing this, question merely because they were evite d'examiner cette question uniqpement parce
anxious that some decision should be taken on qu'its etaiep.t tresdesireux de prendre une dethe urgent issue, namely, the cessation of hostili- cision s~~ le probleme le plus urgent, a savoir,
ties. It is time for, the members of the Security la cessation des hostilites. I1 est temps que les
Council to consider the merits of this particular membres du Conseil de securite examinent
,'"
point at issue.
maintenant au fond 1e point precis qui est en Jeu.
Le representant des Pays-Ba& a exposeses
The Netherlands representative has set out his
points in some detail, and I propose to take them arguments avec quelque detail, et je me propose de reprendre ces arguments l'un apres
up one by one..
l'autre.
,
Je mentionne tout d'abord la declaration faite
I shall refer here to the statement made by the
representative of the United Kingdom, to the par le representant du, Royaume-Uni, dans laextent ~at his Government did not iec<?gnize. queUe it a precis'e que ,son Gouvernement n'a pas
IndoneSIa as: a State. It seems desirable to me reconnu 1'Indonesie en tant qu'Etat. II me semble
,that the members of the Council should give some souqaitable que les 11lembres du Conseil donnent
:eason for taking' a certain view on the matter, les raisons pour lesquelles its adoptent une position de.terminee sur ia question, afin de permettre '
111 order that the Security, Council may come to

question has not been recognized de jure, and so
long as secondly, the State so recognized does not
have ade j1tre Government, it is not-it cannot be
~ State in the proper sense of the term. It may
be a most respectable State, forming part of a
confederation, such as any State of the United
States of America, or of Mexico, Vellezuela, Brazil or Australia. It may be a nascent State, aT it
may be a State which -because of patent and
obvious weaknesses does not, or does not yet,
inspire that general con.fidence which alone can
win it geI:J.eral recognition as an independent and
sovereign State, but it is not a State in the proper
sense of the term.
.

.

.

h_'--..-...

1924

.

«

an Conseil de securite de prendre la deCISIOn qui
convient. Si I'on se borne a. dire "oui" ou
"non", les deliberations n'en seront aucunement'
avancees. J'espere que,' au cours des debats, le
representant dp Royaume-Uni expliquera en
detail les raisons pour 'lesquelles sou Gouvernement estime que l'Indonesie ne doit pas etre
I
reconnue comme un Etat du point de vue du droit
international.
,
, It is true, as far as I can see, that tb,e invitation
En ce qui me concerne, il est exact que I'invi-.
to Indonesia should be made' under' Article 32. tation a adresser a -l'Indonesie doit etre faite
As I read the Charter, I find some distinction en vertu des disposi~ions de l'Article 32. En
between Article 32 and Artide 2. Article 32 says: lisant.1a Charte, je constate qu'it ya une certaine
"Any Member of the United' Nations which is distinction i faire entre l'Article 32 et I'Article 2.
not cl member of the Security Counc~l or any L' Artic.le 32 dispose: "Tout Membre des Nations
State which is not a Merrlber of the United Vnies qui n'est pas r.1embre du Conseil de seNations, if it is a partyrto a dispute under con- curite ou tout Etat qui n'est pas Membre des
sideration by the Security Councilo, shall be invited. Nations Vnies, s'it est partie a. un differend
to 'participate ..." And Article 2, paragraph 1 examine par le Conseilde securite, est convie
states: "The Organization is based on the prin- a participer.. ;', et le paragraphe premier de
cipleof the sovereign equality Of all its Members." l'Article. 2 dispose: "L'Organisation est fondee
\
sur le principe de l'egalite souveraine de tous
ses Membres".
The distinction that I make is that' there can
Je fais la distinction suivante: it peut y avoir
be States without full sovereignty which are des. Etatsqui ne sont pas pleinement souverains,
. States for the purposes of Chapter VII of the mais qui sont consideres comme des Etats en
Charter. It is not possible at this stage for me to vue' de l'application des dispositions du Chapi..
dl:> more than make this statem~nt.
tre VII de la Charte: Dans l'etat actuel de la
question, je dois me borner a. cette declaration.
The representative of. tile Netherlands has
Le representant des Pays':Bas a donne lecture
quoted a letter from Mr. Soekarno st~ting that d'un passage ~l'une lettre de M. SoekarnQ prethe Indonesian Republic recognizes the ultimate cisant que la Republique d'Indonesie reconnait
sovereignty of the Netherlands. Gove~ent la souverainete supreme du -Gouvernement des
during the interim period. I shOuld like 'the Pays-Bas pendant la periode de transition. Je
Security Council to read the Linggadjati Agree- voudrais que les membres du Conseil de securite
ment itself, an Agreement which has been entered lisent 'le texte meme de l'Accord de Linggainto solemnly by the two parties;'
djati - Accord qui a ete conclu solennellement
par les deux' parties.
The Agreement provides in article I .that the
Cet ~ccord dispose, a l'article premier, que
Netherlands Governinent recognires the Govern- le Gouvernement des. Pays-Bas reconnait que le
ment of the. Republic of Indonesia as exercising Gouvernement de la: Republique d'Indonesie
de facto authority over Java, Madura and exerce une autorite de facto sur Java, Madoura
Sumatra. This, I submit, is a very clear' state- et Sumatra. J' emets l'opinion que ce text consment of the attitude of the Netherlands in regard titue une declaration tres nette de l'attitude des
to' the status of Indonesia. It amounts to an Pays-Bas en ce qui concerne le statut de l'Inadmission that the Netherlandsrecognizes Indo- donesie. Cette declaration equivaut, pour le
nesia as having de fa~to authority over· the three Gouvernement des Pays-Bas, a admettre qu'il
isla~ds..
reconnait' que I'Indonesie exerce une autorite
de facto sur ces trois iles.
The fact that Mr. Soekarno says that during
Le fait que M. Soekarno declare que, pendant
the interim period the Netherlands Government is la periode de' transition, le Gouvernement des
to retain ultimateauthl:>rity,in' no wayaffeets Pays-Bas doit conserver l'alltorite' supreme,
the recognition of the de facto authority of. the n'atteint nullement la reconnaissance de l'autorite
Indonesian Government. Mt. van Kleffens quoted de facto- du Gouvernement indonesien. M. van
the words "is to retain sovereignty". I . have a Kleffens a cite les termes "conserver la soutranslation of the Linggadjati Agreement before verainete". Or, j'ai sous les yeux une traduction
me. In article II it says : "The- Netherlands de r Accord de Linggadjati. L'Article II dispose:
Government and the Government of the Republic "Le Gouvernementdes Pays-Bas et le Gouverneshall co-operate in the rapid' formation 'of a ment de la Republique travailleront en colla. sovereign democratic State on a federal 'basis ; .." b9ration a etablir, des que possible, un Etat de,It does, not use the word «reta.in"here.
mocratique souverain a. base federate . . _." Le
terme "conserver" ne parait pas dans ce texte.
I have seen the word "retain" used somewhere
J'ai constate que le terme "conserver" a ete
else in the course of the discussions between the emp'loye ailleurs au cours des discussions entre
two Governments. The Indonesian Government les deux Gouvernements. Le Gouvernement indoagreed that during the interim period, that is, the nesien est convenu que, pendaIit la periode d~
period between the present and the future con- transition, c'est-a-dire pendant, la periode qUI
stitution of the Netherlands-Indonesian -Union, s'ecoulera entre la presente constitution de
the ultimate sovereigt1.ty of the Netherlands Will I'Vnion .,Pa:y-s-Bas-Indonesie et sa constitution
be acknowledged. Now that we find' 'that this future, ·la souverainete supreme duGouvernement
a proper decision. Merely saying ,"yes" and "no"
is not going to help the deliberations. r hope that
in .the course of the debate the representative of
the United Kingdom will' explain in some detail
the reasons why his Government thinks that
Indonesia should not be reco~ized as a State
from the point of view of intern~tional law.

,

I

\

1925'

Agreement has not been put into e~ec~, has. been
repudiated, it follows tha~ that admIssIOn has no
binding force on IndonesIa.

neerlandais ser.a reconnue. Mais nous constato:ns
que eet Accord n'a pa.s ete mis en vigueur; il
a ete repudie;:it. :s'eps~it que l'acceptation du
fait dont je viens de parter ne lie pas l'Indonesie.
Le representant <tu Gouvernement des PaysThe representative of the N ~therlands Government \then describes the qualifications that a' State Bas a enumere ensuite les qualites que doit posshould have in' order to be recognized as a State seder un, Etat pour etre reconnu comme tet du
in international law. He says that a State must point de vue au droit international. I1. a Mdare
be able to carry out th~ obligations which it qu'un JUat doit etre en mesure de s'acquitter
assumes and that the Indone~i,!n ;Republic has not des ,obligations qu'il contra<;:te, et que la, Re";
been able to carry out ~e -e.ngagement whic~ it publique d'Indpnesie n'a. pas ~te capable
d'executer l'engagc:;ment qu'elle a. contracte vishad entered into with ,tAe Netherlands.
a-vis des Pays-Bas.
,
Cette question a fait l'objet de beaucoup de
There has been much 4ispute over t..ltis matter,
and I find from the exchange of memoranda controverses, et, je constate, d'apres les notes
,between the two Governments that the Indonesian eQIangees entre les deux Gouvernements. ,que
Republic has constantly challenged the. statement la Republique d'Indonesie a constammen('ton. of the'Netherlands Government to the'effect that teste l'affirmation dJ,1 Gouvernement des Paysit has' notbeen able to live up to its engagements. Bas selon'laquelle elle n'aurait pas ete en mestii-e
Here is a passage from the memorandum of de se conformer aux engagements qU'elle a con8 June 1947 from the delegation of the Indonesian tractes. Je VOl'S. donne mairitenant lecture d'un
Republic to the Commission-General. "In the passage extrait du t1,1emorandum en date du 8
memorandum of the Commission-General, it has juin 1947, adresse a la Commission generate
continuouslY been stressed th.a~ in th~ Republican par la Mlegation de la Republique d'Indonesie.
area there is no law and order, no rIghts and no "Le memorandum de la Commission gef;lefale
safety. ,The Indonesian' delegation takes cogniz- souligne constamment que, dans la zone republiance of these accusations with amazement, sinc"e caine, it n'y a ni. loi,ni ordre, ni droits, ni' sevisitors to the Republican area, who are not few curite. La delegation, de l'Indonesie .prend conin number, and among whom there are also naissance de ces accusations avec etoniiement:
Netherlanders, either in offiCial or ,non-official en effet, les personnes qui Qut visite la zone
capacity, have been able to convince themselves of republicaine - le. nombre n'en est pas neglipr-osperity and peacefulness in the Republican geable, et parmi dIes se trouvent egalement, a
area. On the other hand, there. are signs 'in the titre officie1 ou a titre prive, des. citoyens neerNetherlands-occupied territory which point to the landais - ont pu se convaincre d'e la prosperit~
insufficiency or even'to the absence of guarantees et de la paix qui regnent dans la zone republifor the development of truly democratic prin- caine. D'autre part,' on releve,~ dans le territoire
ciples; for example, the arrest of leaders, the occupe par les Pays-Bas, des indices de l'insufdetention of persons on insufficient grounds, the fisance, voire meme de l'absence de garantie
search of journalists, the prohibition of a display pour l'application de principes vraiment demoof the red";white flag and of the singing of t'he cratiques; par exemple, l'arrestationdechefs
official anthem, the continued enforcement of politiques, la.' detention de personnes pour des
, exorbitantrjghts' in accordance with articles 153 motifs insuffisants, les foumes operees sur des
to 161' of the Criminal Law 'Statutes of. the journalistes, l'interdiction de hisser le. drapeau
Netherlands Indies, which bear a colonial and blanc;: ,et rouge et de chanter l'hymne Qfficiel; ·le ,
anti-democratic character" a~d provoke in pro- maintien des droits exorbitants conferes par les
Republican rank~ the feeling of being threatened." articles 153 a 161 des lois penales des Irtdes
neerlandaises, lesquelles' ont un cara,etere colonial
et antidemocratique et creent dans les' rangs des
pro-republicains une impression de menace."
Finally, I wish to emphasize I that the accusaEnfin, je tiens' a souligner que l'accusation
tion that the Indonesians are not able to fulfil selon, laqueUe les Indonesiens ne peuvent remplir
their engagements is a purely one-sided statement. leuri5' engagements n'est que l'affirmatio1,1 partiale
The same accusation is being made by the Indo- d'une seule partie: Les Indonesiens ont dit' la
nesians against the NetheHands Government. I meme chose du Gouvernement des Pays-Bas',
noticed with some amusement that the Nether- J'ai entendu avec quelque amusement le repre..;
lands representative quoted last week the words senta~t des Pays-Bas citer, la semaine derniere,
of a missionary who had visited the area. I 'think une dec1ar;:l.tion emanant d'un missionnaire qui
that I should ask the members of the Security avait visite la zpne en' question. Je crois que
Council not to put their trust in missionaries who les mern.bres du" Conseilde securite ne dev'taient
cl.abble in politics. If the Netherlands repre~e!1ta­ pas ajouter foi aux di'res d'uD. missionnaire qui
hve. has more co~vincing arguments and better se mele de poI1tique. Si le representant des Pays~
teshmony, he should come' forward with it and Bas peut invoquer des arguments plus' convainnot quote some American missionary who hap- cants et des temoignages plus valides, it devrait
pened to visit Indonesia.
les exposer au lieu de 'citer les paroles d'un
missionnaire americain qui, par hasard, a visite
1'Indonesie.
. Another point that the Netherlands representaLe 1·eprese~timt des Pays-Bas a, invoque un'
hve mad~ Was that Indonesia did not have a well- autre argument, c'est-a-dire que l'Indonesie n'a
de!ined territory. In explaining his reasoning he pas un '. t~rritoire bien defini. En commentant
said. ~at. the Republic always exhibited: an/ cet .argument, it a deelare que la Republique a
expanSIOnIst tendency. If it can be argued that touJours manifeste ttne tendance a l'expansioll.

C'· ;

!IQ

1926

Si l'on peut dire que la Rep:t1blique'd'Indonesie
n:est pas un Etat pa.:ce qU'elle a des tendances
expansionnistes et si l'on appliquecet argument
aux Pays-Bas, ce' pays nepeut etre considere
comme un Etat parce qu'it manifeste des tendances expansionnistes encore, plus grandes.
L'autre argument qu'a invoque le representant
The other pOInt made by the Netherlands
r.::presentative was. that the vast majority of the des Pays-Bas est que la vaste majorite de la
population of Indonesia. does not owe ~egianc~ population de I'Indonesie ne deit pas fidelite et
, to the Indonesian. Republic.• That again is a one- obeissance a. la Republique indonesienne. Il
sided statement; it is the opinion of the N ether- s'agitencore, dans ~e cas, de 1'0pinien d'un seul
lands Government. It) does .not. necessarily reflect interess~, celle du Gouvernement des Pays-Bas.
Elle ne tient pas necessairement compte de tous
all the facts ofthe case.
les frits. .)
.
L'argument essentiel invoque par le repreThe .main _ argument put forward by. tl1e
Netherlands representative was that Indonesia sentant des Pays-Bas est que la Republique d'In- '\
had not been recognized. as a sovereign inde- donesie n'a pas ete reconnue comme un Etat soupendent State by a sufficiently large number 9f verain independant par un assez grand nombre
States. This question has been discussed before. d'Etats. Cette question a deja. ete discutee. Dans le
The Australian representative, in his opening discours qu'il a prononce en proposant sa premiere
s.peech, when he moved his original resolution, set resolution, le representant de l'Australie a expose
out certain facts regarding recognition of the . certains faitsconcernant la reconnaissance de la
Indonesian Republic by various countriet If one Republique d'Indonesie par divers pays. Si 1'0n
bears that in mind, and also reads the Linggadjati tient compte de cett~ declaration et si l'on prend
Agreement itself, I do not think there ~an be any connaissance du texte de l'Accord de Linggadjati
question but that the de facto au~onty of the lui-meme, je pense qu'ifest hors de doute que
Indonesian 'Republic over the three islands ha;s l'autorite de f(Uto de la Republique d'Indonesie '
been internationally. recognized.. As regards the sur les trois iles en question a ete reconnue sur
de- jure sovereignty, this matter is open toques:- le plan international. En ce qui concerne la
tion. Onec'ln argue legitimately that the de jure souverainete de jure, cette question reste indecise.
sovereignty of Indonesia has tlot been recognized. On peut legitimement pretendre que 'la souIn .fact, the statement made by the Indonesian verain~te de jure de l'Indonesie n'a pas 'ete
, Republic in the Agreement itself, to the effect reconnue. En ~ realite, la declaration faite par. la
.that during the intervening period the sover~ignty Republique d'Indonesie dans le texte meme de
of 1he' Netherlands. would be recognized, lends l'Accord, seton laqueUe la. souverainete des Pays-'
itself to that suggestion. I do not say it establishes Bas sera reCOJ;mue pendant la periode de transition, se prete it cette idee. Je ne dis pas qu'eUe
it; if lends itself to that suggestion.
l' etablit; eUe s'y prete.
.
Je vais maintenant citer' un auteur qui fait
1 shall quot~ an authority on intermltipnallaw.
This is not my own view. It is a passage from autorite en matiere de droit international. Ce
Loid Birkenhead's book on international law, n'est pas la. ma propre opinion. C'est uniquewhich I. quoted 'Some time' ago: •"This require- ment un passage de I'ouvrage de Lord Birkenment"-that i.s, the requirement that, in order to head sur le droit international, que j'ai cite il y
be regarded as a State within the meaning of a quelque temps: "Cette condition" - selon lainternational law, the society'must be a sovereign . queUe un groupe ethnique doit, pour etre conindependent State - "is, however, in no way sidere comme un Etat au sensdu droit interessential to the conception of jural relations national, coilstituer. un Etat souverain et
independant "n'est cependant pas indispensable
between States."
a. la conception de relations juridiques entre
Etats."
This is a staten:rent by an authority on int~rna­
It s'agit d'un avis exprime par un auteur qui
tionallaw. I should like anybody who challenges fait autorite en' matiere de droit international.
it to produce his arguments against its acceptance. J e voudrais que quiconque met cette declaration
en doute presente les arguments a. l'appui de son
opinion.
I shall not review, the other arguments at this
.Pour le moment, je n'exarhi~erai pas les 'autres
stage. I am merely replying to the leg~l argument arguments. Je reponds simplement a. l'argument
put forward by the Netherlands representative juridique invoque par le representant des Paygto the effect that the Indonesian Republic can- Bas, selon lequel la Repubijque d'Indonesie ne
not be regarded 'as a State for the purposes of peut etre consideree comme un Etat aU sens du
Chapter VII of the Charter. '
Chapitre VII de la Charte.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de i'anfjiais): Je donne
The PRESIDENT: I shall now recognize the
representative of Poland. Before doing so, how- la parole au representant de la Pologne. Touteever, ,I should like to' ask the members .of the fois, je voudrais auparavant demander aux memCouncil not to exhaust the entire time of this bres du Conseit de ne pas coilsacrer toute la
meeting on this point, but to speak as briefly as present~ seance a la discussion de ce 'point en
possible.
particulier et d'etre aussi brefs que possible.
M'. KATz-SUCHY(Pologne) (traduit de
Mr. F'..ATZ-SUCHY. (Poland) : I had .no intention of exhausting the time of this'meeting when i'anglais): Je n'avais aucunement I'intention 'd~
I raised this subject. In view of our previous consacrer toute' notre seance au point que j'at
the IndonesianRepublic is not a State. because it
-has expansionist 'tendencies, then, if this. argu- .
ment is applied to the Dutch, the Netherland.s also
should not be regarded as a State because It has
even greater expansionist tendencies.

•

rt'IIIII

p

1927

)

discussions, .I thought that the proble;n of ex- souleve. A la lumU:re de nos precedentes distending an invitati~n to the repres7l1tatlveof the cussions, je pensais que la question de savoii" s'it
Indonesian Republic would constltute merely. a convient d'adiesser une invitation au representant
point of order, and that a vot~ would be take!! de la Republique d'Indonesie constitu~rait simpleimmediately. U~fortunately~ however, we h~ve ment une. motion d'ordre et qu'il serait possible
entered into vanous legal dIsputes. I should like de proceder sans delai a un vote. Toutefois,
/ to make'a few CJmments in regard to those dis-- nousavons malheureusement abouti a diverses
argumentations juridiques. Je voudrais presenter
putes, and I hope to be brief.
:
'
,
quelques observations. en ce qui concern.e ces discussions; j'espere etre bref.
'
•
L'habilete avec, laqtie1le le representarit des
I was·very much impressed by tne able manner
in which the representative of the Netherlands Pays-Bas a presente ses 'arguments contre la
presented his arguments again~t the extending· C?f participation du representant de la Republique
an invitation to the representatIve of the Republic d'Indonesie ,m'a beaticoup frappe. Tbutefois, ces
of Indon'esia. His arguments, however, although arguments, bien que 'tres .juridiques, ne sont pas
very legal~ are .very, unconvincing. If his ar~­ convaincants. Si ces arguments etaient solides,
ments were vahd, there would be no IndoneSIan le Conseil· n'aurait pas ete saisi d'une question
indonesienne.
',
question b,efore the· Council.
debut
du
differend
qui nos occupe,
Tout
au
At the very beginning of this dispute, the representative of the Netherlands maintained that le representant ~sPays-Bas a soutenu que le
the war in Indonesia was not a problem within probleme de la gUerre en Indonesie lie relevait
the competence of the Security. Council. The pas 'de la competence du Conseil' de. securite.
Government of the Netherlands considered it to Le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas' considerait que'
be its own internal problem, a ·lllere police action. cette question cOJ.lstituait u,n probU:me interieur
The views of the Council were quite differ.ent. By relevant de sa propre competence et qu'il s'agisputting the question on its agenda under' Article sait de simples mesures de' police.L'opinion du
39 of the Charter, the Council recognized this as Conseil est tout afa.it differente. D.u fait meme
an international problem. Although certain reser- qu'il inscrivait la question' a son ordre· du' jour
vations were made by one of the members of the en se fondant sur les dispositions de l'.i\rticle 39
Council, the resolution adopted by the, Council de la Charte, le Conseil reconnaissait que cette
contained no such reservations. A resohttion question .constitue un "probleme international.
calling for the cessation of hostilities could. not Bien que l'un. des membres du Conseii ait, fait
have been adopted with any reservation as to the certaines reserves, la resolution adoptee' par le
recognition of the Republic of Indonesia as an Conseil nepren 1 pas· ces reserVes en consideraindependent and sovereign State.
tion. Une resolution demandant la cessation des,
hostilites n'aurait pu etre adoptee avec des reserves portant sur .la reconnaissance de' la Republique d'Indonesie a titre d'Etat independant
et s o u v e r a i n . , ·
'.,
I believe that fact solves the main difficulty
J e .crois que ce fait nous donne la solution
for us. The Council has taken a decision. The war de la principale difficuIte. Le Conseil a pri!'i uJ.le
in Indonesia is' an international problem. There decision. La guerre en Indonesie ,constitue un
exists a dispute between two States: ;the Netlier- problellle international. I1 y a conflit' entre, deux
lands and the Republic of Indonesia.
Etats: les. Pays.,Bas et la Republique d'Indonesie.
Furthermore, on 28 July the Economic and
En outre, le 28 juillet, un. autr~ organe des
Social Cot,tncil, another organ of the United Nations U nies, le Cqnseil economique et social,
Nations, adopted a resolution which permits the a adopte une resolution qui autorise la RepuRepublic of Indonesia to 'take part, as a non- blique d'Indonesie a participer en qualite d'Etat
member State, in the Conference on Trade and non--menibre del'Orgimisation, a la Conference
Employment at Havana. 1 This is another act of du corrirnerceet de l'emploi qui se reullira a la
the United Nations which recognizes the Republic La Havane1 • Viola un autre act~ 'pose par rOrga"'of Indonesia as a State) although not a Member nisation des Nations Unies qui implique la r~­
of the United Nations.
connaissance -de la Republique d'Indonesie .en
tant qu'Etat, bien qu'elle ne soit pas Mempre
It
des Nations U nies.
I
The Netherlands, by signing a bilateral agreeEn signant un accord bilateral avec la Rement with the Republic of Indonesia on the basis publique d'I~donesie, conclu d'egal a egal, les
of an equa~ deal.ing with an equal, recognized the Pays,-Bas qnt recopnu le statut de la Republique
status of .the Republic of Indonesia as a State, d'Indonesie en tant qu'Etat, biel}, qu'~l sbit'prec!He
although It was stated that its Government has dans l'accord que leGouverneJ;11~nt indonesiel'1
onlf de facto control of the Republic of Indo- n'exerce qu'une autorite de fotto sur la Repu··
nesIa; stIll, that was a't:ecognition. AmI. only two blique d'Indonesie; malgre tout; cet acte implique
months ago, all the Members of the United' reconnaissance. Il y a deux mois a peine, tous
Nations received copies of that Agreem,ent. .
les Membres des Nations· Unies ont re.;u une
,
.
,
copie de cet Accord.'
. In al,iicle XIII of the Linggadjati Agreement, .: Aux termes de l'article XIII 'de l' Accord de
t¥e Netherlands Government undertook an obliga- Linggadjati, le Gouvernement'des Pays':Bas s'est
hOIl to take' steps forthwith to propose the
engage a prendre immedia~ement les dispositions

...

dU~i~eegi~ef'f'thution3.adoPted b-~ the BeoMmie anct Social Council
seSSion, resolution 62 (V), p. 3.

-.-

1 Voir ,les Resolutiotu adoptee3 l>a,. le Conseil eeonomique et
social pendant sa cinquieme session, resolution 62 (V), page 3•

. ---.01IIIIIIII
1928
Republic"df:lndonesia: 'as: a Member Of the
United Nations.

qui conviennen.t pour' ptoposer l'admission. de la
Republique d'Indonesie a. l'Organisation" des
Nations Unies.
'
"
'.
1- do not think that the" Charter of the: United . Je ne crois' pas que la Chartedes Nations.'
Nattons provides as to the number of tecognitions Unies, precise le'nombre, de recOIinais~ances qui
which a country must have before' it can be sont necessaires pour qu'un pays puisse ,etre
generally recognized as a State. If we were to !'ec()nnu en tant qu'Etat sur le plan international.
. consider that a: State which has diplomatic reIa..;. , S'it fallait conside~er qu'un Etat qui entretient
tions with fifty-five nations is' a more sovereign des relations diplomatiques avec cinquante-cinq
State than one which.has diplomatic relations pays est plussouvjrain que celui .qui entretient
with\only two or, three ftations,.we should.not get des relations ·diplomatiques avec deux ou trois
'
very Ifar. That argument is very weak.
pays seulement, nous n'irions pas tres loin... Cet
argument e.st extremell:lent faible.
"::
I believe it would benefit the ,situation 'it1.
Je crois que ~nous ameliorerions plus sur.ement
Indonesia to drop -Ws legal argumenta~on, to la situation en Indonesie si, laissant de cote'tbus
pass to a, vote-or perhaps there would be no ces arguments juridiques, nous'procedions a' un
need for a'vote-and to hear the statement of the vot~peut-etre meme Ul'l vote ne serait.;.il'pas nerepresentative of' the Republic of Indonesia.
cessaire - et entendions la declaration du reprer
sentant- de la Republique d'Indonesie.
"
M.r. L6PEz (Colombia).: I srt@-u be very brieL
M. L6pEZ (Colombie) (traduit de l'a~glais):
I'regret that r shall have to, leave the meeting' Je serai tres bref. Je regrette d'etre ob.lige de
within a few minutes, and that is why I have 'quitter la seance d'ici quelques minutes, etc'est
requested the privilege of ~aking the floor before pourquoi j'ai demande le privi1ege de prendre
the, other speakers.
'
.
,. '
la parole avant les autres orateurs.
'Wewere discussing the draft res6lutiop of the
Nous etions en train de discuter le projet de
Aus~ralian delegation'concerning the Indonesian
resolution presente' par la' delegation de 'l'AusquesHon, when the representative of Poland sub- traliesur la question indonesienne, quand le
ntitted a proposal regarding theirivitation to the representant de la Pologne a soumis une proporepresentatives of Indonesia. As the discussion sit~on relative a l'invitation a. adresser aux repre~
has been proceeding, I have re-read- the Aus-' sentants, de l'Indonesie. Pendant que les debats
tralian draft and have felt a very pressing need se poursuivaient, fai reIu le projet de l'Australie
to request legal clarification as to how, in the et je me suis aperc;u qu'it me faUait demander
light of the present discussion, we should vote quelques eclaircis~ements d'ordre juridique sur
on'the resolution.'
la maniere dont nOllS devrions, a. la lumiere'des
deliberations en' cours, mettre aux voix cette
\
resolutioh..
The Australian. draft resolution begins as
Le projet de resolution de l'Australie commence comme suit:
'follows':
"Whereas the Security Council, on 1 ~ugust
"Considerant que le Conseil de securite a in,1947, called upon the Netherlands·and the Repub~ vite, le ler aout 1947, les Pays-Bas et la Republique d'Indonesie:
,
.
lic'of,Indonesia:
'.
(a) To cease hostiliti~s forthwith, a~d
.
"a} A cesser immediatement les hostilites, et
. (b) To settle their disputes by arbitration or
"b} A r~ler leur <:lifferend en recourartt it
by other peaceful means, and to keep the Security .l'arbitrage ou a. tout autre moyen pacifique et it
Council informed apout the progress of the tenir le Conseil de securite au courantl d.es resettlement '.' !'.
.'
sultats acquisen vue de ce reglement . . ."
"'When the first Australian resolution was being'
Au cours des debats relatifs. a. la premiere
discussed, the question of the competence of the resolution de l'Austra:lie, la questions'est posee
Council to pass such a resolution was raised, and de savoirsi le Conseil. etait competent pOUI'.
variousrcpresenta~ives made· reservations in that adopter une teUe resolution; ,divers representants
regard. I remember very well that I then sug- ont fait certainesreserves' a eet egard. Je me
gested that if we did not feel sure that the Council souviens tres bien d'avoir dit a ce moment que,
. was ,competent to. pass this resolution, we should si nous n'etions pas certains que le Conseil eut
~
not pass it. But we d i d . '
la competence voulue pour adopter cette resolution, nous ne devrions pas l'adopter. Cependant,
. nous l'avons adoptee.
_ Now I hear that· Indonesia' is not a State in
Or, on me dit que l'Indonesie n'est pas un
the sense of'the Charter, and that it is not a State Etaf au sens ou l'entend la Charte et, n'est pas
frol.n the pointQf view, of international law. un Etat du point de vue du droit international.
I should like to ask what it is in, the eyes of the Je voudrais savoir quel 'est le statut de la: Re- .
Council; what it is·in the light of the action. here- ptibliqued'Indonesie aux yeu~ du Conseil, quel
est·.. son statut eu egard au", mesures prises'
tofore taken by the Go~ncil.
jusqu'ici pTir k Consei!. I '
'
Nous nollS sommes adresses aux Pays-Bas et
We have addressed Qurselvesto the Netherlands and the, Republic of', Indonesia. We have a. la Republique d'Indonesie. Nous leur avons
asked them to cease hostilities and to settle their demande' de cesser les hostilites et de regler leur
. disputes by arbitration or by other, peaceful differend en recourant a. l'arbitrage ou a. tou~ ,
means,' and they have acted accordingly. They autre moyen ~pacifique; ees deux pays ont agl
have notified the Security Council that they have en consequence. Ils on~notifie au Conseil de
,.acted accptdingly, and the CounCil is now taking seci.trite qi!'ils onl' agi" en consequence,' et le

.~~

1929
\

.

'

further acti~non the basis of what has transpire.d •Conseil· V<i pr~ndre maintenant de nQuvelles dispositions en se fondant sur les renseignements
so far.
.
_
acquis.
Je crois qu'il s'agit la d'une affaire' que devront
I think' that we have here a case that needs
some clari~cation. by those w~o are n:'-0re .compe- .clarifier ceux qui, possedant une cOp:1peience plus
tent in.legal matters to ex~l::m the slt~atiOn a~d grande dans le domaine jtiridique, peuvent explito determine what the posltion really lS;' Is this quer la situation et determiner la 'position reelle.
an international affair or not? Is it.a domestic S'agit-il d'une affaire internationale ou non?
question, as the representative. of the N eth«:rlands S'agit-il d'une question interieure, comme l'a
originally .contended? If th~t lS s<?' I submlt that, pretendu a l'origine le representant des Paysaccording to my understandm~of ~e Ch~t.:t€r, yve Bas? Dans ce cas, je suis. d'avisque, au, sens
are not' very well warranted m takmg thlS action ou j'interprete la Charte, nous ne sommes Ireelleunless we are ready to agree thc;t we are thus ment fondes a prendre ces mesures que si nous
acting obligingly, so to speak. But "le have been sommes d~sposes a convenir que nous agissons,
,taking action on the Indonesian· question .as an en quelque sorte, par obligeance. Mais nousavons
international matter, and now, as I have sald, we pris des mesures sur la question. indonesienne
are contemplating further steps in. th,e same en la considerant comme un probleme intetn?-tiona.l et nous {lous' proposons maintenant,
directiop..
conime 'jel'ai dit, de continuer dans 'la meme.
voie.
'
' .
We are. being invited to approve a draft resoluNous sommes invites a approuver un projet
.
de resolutionredige comme suit:
.
tion reading as follows: .
"Le Conseil 'de securite,
•
,
. "The Security Council
.
"I: Notes with satisfaction the steps takel,1 by
"1. Prend acte avec satisfaction des mesures
the parties to comply with the resolution of 1 prises par les deux parties pour se conformer aAugust 1947;
.
r
' la resolution du 1er aotit 1947;
.
"2. Notes the action taken· by the Government
2. Prend acte'de l'initiative prise par le Gouof the United States in making available its good vernement des Etats-tJnis, qui a offert sea bons
offices to the Governments of the Netherlands and office~ aux Gouvernements des Pays-Bas et de
of the Republic of Indonesia, and the offer by the la Republique d'Indonesie, et de l'offre duo
Government of Australia to act jointly with. the Gouvernement des Etats-Unis ·en qualite de meUnited States Government in the capacity of difl.teur et d'arbitre ..."
mediator and arbitrator . . .".
.
Ce n'est pas un, mais deux Gouvernements
Not one, but two Governments have acted very
directly in the matter. The United.StatesGovern- qui sont inten'renus tres directement dans cette '
ment has already offered its good offices, and now question. Le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis a
the Australian Government is proposing that the .deja .offert ses bons offices; et le Gouvernement
two Governments 'should act jointly in the capac- laustralien propose maintenant que les deux
ity of mediators and arbitrators. At this moment Gouvernements agissent conjointement en quathe question that is' being raised is whether we lite de mediateurs et od'arbitres. La 1uestion qui
.should, or should not give the Indonesian repre- se pose en cemoment est celle de savoir si nOlls
sentatives an opportunity to speak in the Council devons, oui ou non, permettre aux representants
chamber in order to set forth the views and in~ de· l'Indonesie de se presenter devant le Conseil
formation of the Indonesian Republic.
afin de faire connaitre l'opinion de la Republique
d'Indonesie, ainsi que les renseignements dont eUe
di:spose.
Comme je l'ai dit auparavant, je voudrais avoir
As. I said before, I should like to have enlightenment on the subject. However, it does des eclairdssements sur la question. Toutefois,
seem to me that we should be' acting in a very il me semble que nOllS pr0ndrons des mesures
unilateral fashion if we continued to address tout a fait partiales si nous continuons a nous
ourselves to the Netherlands and the Rftpublic of adiesser aux Pays-Bas et a la Republique d'InIndonesia as the two parties to an interrtational dones'ie comme etant les deux parties a un diffedispute and yet, at the -same time, refused to 'one rend international, tout en refusant a l'une des
of the partie.s the right to express its views before parties le droit de se 'faire entend'te au tonseiI:
the. CO\.Ulcil.
'
., .
It may be, as so~e representatives may con, Ii est possible, certain& representant peuvent
tend, that we took action with a certain haste. le pretendre, que nous ayons agi avec urte cerThat opinion was expressed here before. I do not tainepredpitation,. Cette opinion a deja ete
~hare it, but if in 'the light of :later developments exprimee au Cotlseil. Jene la partage pas; mais
It becomes clear that we did not act within the si, a: 'la lumiere des evenements ulterieurs, i1
terms of the Charter, if we exceeded our powers apparait que nous n'avons pas agi conformement
.and are not justified in taking further action aux' dispositions de la Charte, que nous avons
along'the lines on which we began to act let us outrepass~ nos pouvoirs et que nous ne sommes
have a clear ~nd frank understanding about it. pa~ fondes a prendre de nouvelles mesures dans
That; .I submlt, would be the proper course to le sens ou nous avons d'abord agi, entendonsfollow. We should certainly not grant the right nous .nettement .et franchement. Je croisque ce
t~ speak to one of the parties to the dispute, and serait la la methodc;qu'il conviendrait de suivre.
gwe that party an. opportunity to argue its side N ous ne saurions, certes, accorder a l'une des
of t~e case, while deliberately' and persistently, parties au differend le droit se faire entendre et
refu~mg . to the other party. the opportunity to lui donner l'occasion d'exposer son opinion si,
do hkewlse.
de propos delibere, nous persistons arefuser la
meme occasion a l'autre ·partie.

h' ''r

1930

je

demande simplement des
I repeat' that I ~m merely asking for en- I, J e le repete,
lightenment as to how we should eventually vote eclaircissements sur la. far;on dont nous pourrions
,/ le cas ecMant, mett~e aux voix le projet de re~
on the Australian draft resolution.
solution de l'Australie.
The PRESIDENT: Before that draft resolution \ Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): Avant I
is put to the vote, the~stion of an invitation to de mettre aux voix ce projet de resolution, nous
voterons sur la question de savoir s'il convient
the Indonesian represeucative will be voted.
d'adresser une invitation aux representants de
'. .
I'Indonesie.
M. LOPEZ (Colombi~) (traduit de l'anglo-is);
Mr. LOPEZ (Colombia) :We are,now discus, :;Lng a point of order, 'namely, whe~er or not the Nous discutoris actuellement un point de pro.:.
right to appear before the Councl1, should, be ced~re, a savoir 'si' nous devons ou non' accorder
granted to the representatives of the povernment le droit de se faire entendre devant le Conseil
of the Republic of Indonesia, a Government aux repi'\~sentants du Gouvernement de I'lndowhose authority has received de fac.to rec~gnition nesie, dont l'autorite de facto a ete reconnue,"
from the United States Government, whIch has notamment par le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis.
already offered its good. offices. That is why I lequel a deja offert ses bons offices. J'estime
submit that it is relevant to the case that I should done que je ne m'eloigne pas du sujet en expriexpress my thoughts. I believe that the repre- mant mon avis. J~ crois que .les representants'
sentatives of Indonesia should be invited to appear de I'Indonesie doivent etre invites a se faire
entendre au Conseil.
before the Couhcil.
'Mr. NISOT EBelgium) (translated from
M. NISOT (Belgique) : La reconnaissance d'un .
French) : The recognition of a State ia a serious Etat est une question grave. J e ne crois pas'
matter; I do not think it is within the Security qu'il entre dans' la competence du Conseil de .
Council's competence indirectly to accord rec-' securite . ge proceder ,indirectement a une reognition to the Indonesian Republic by admitting connaissance en admettant la. Republique d'Indoit as a sovereign and independent StaLe when it is nesie a. titre d'Etat souverain et independant
not yet recognized, still less generally recognized, a1ors quo' eUe Po,est pas encore reconnue, ni surtout'
generalement reconnue, comme membre de la
as a member of the community of Sta:tes.
communaute des Etats.
It is even possible that some representatives
nest meme possible que pJusieurs des reprehere may not personally have the requisite. au- sentants ici presents n'aient pa~ individuellement
thority to participate on behalf. of their Govern- , les pOllvoirs necessaires pour participer, au nom
.ments in suc~ indirect recognition. I myself have de leur Gouvernement, a cette reconnaissance
no such powers, since Belgium has not recognized indirecte. En cequi me concerne personnellethe Indonesian Republic. In that respect I am ment, je ne dispose pas de te1s pouvoirs, la
therefore in the same position as my colleague, Be1gique n'ayant pas encore 'reconnu la Republique d'Indonesie. J e me trouve done a eet egard
the representative of the Unite":! Kingdom.
dans la meme position que 'ie representant du
. Royaume-Uni.
.
Le
colonel
HODGSON
'(Australie)
(traduit de
Colonel HODGSON (Australia): After hearing
that last observation, I was wondering whether l'anglais): Apres avoir entendu cette derni(~re
the representative of Belgium at the San Fran- observation, je me demande si le representant de
cisco Conference had full powers to recognize la Belgique a la Conference de San-'Francisco
the right of ~e Philippmes to participate in .the avait les pleins pouvoirs necessaires pour
discussions, since that Conff'rence was held from admettre la participation des Philippines aux deApril to June 1945, and the Ph~lippines was not bats; en effet, la Conferences'est reunie d'avril
granted independence until 4 July 1946. Yet it a juin 1945, et les Philhmines ne se sont vu
was one of tLe original s\gI1atories of the Charter. accorder l'indepeudance que le 4 juillet 1946.
Cependant, ce pays a ete l'un des premiers signataires de la Charte.
Nous' a~ons entendu'le representant des Pays~
We have heard the' representative of the
Netherlands reiter~te many times this afternoon Bas repeter a maintes reprises, cet apres-midi,
that the R,epublie of Indonesia is not a sovereign que la Republique d'Indonesie n'est pas un Etat
State and thereior~ cannot be invited to partici- souverain et ne peut done etre conviee a' partipate in this discussion. I have not heard one ciper aux debats. Je n'ai entendu aucun repre..:
representative on the Council claim that Indonesia sentant au Conseil pretendre que 1'Indonesie soit
-is sovereign, but it has been claimed that it is a un Etat souverain ;mais on a soutenu que l'InState recognized as such in intematiow I law ; a:....d donesie est un Etat, reconnu coinme' tel en droit
two of the States which have ;recognized it as -international; en outre, deux des Etats qui 1'0nt
such~ that is, as a de facto Government-are the
reconnu com'me tel - c'est-a-dire comme u~
.
United Kingdonr and the United States.
Gouvern~ment de fetc.to-sont le Royaume-Uni
. • et les Etats-Unis.
Furthermore, th~re' is no .provision· in the
De plus, il. n'y. a dans la Charte aucune dispo,
Charter stipulating that, in order to appear before sition stipul,ant qu~, pour se faire entendre ~evant
the Council or to' participate in its discussiorts, a le Conseil' ou participer' aux deliberations du
State must be sovereign; for the PUfpOSl::S of the Conseil; .un Etat doit etre'souverain; en ce qui
SecuritY Council the )Charter us~s the term . concerne le Conseil' d,e securite, la Charte dit :.
"State'?But Ido not wish to go into that, except "Etat": Mais je nc(;Iesire pas discuter ce point;
to mention my own 'COl1l1try'S. 'point 'of view on : Je precise simplement l' opitlion de monpropre
the;:lrgitments raised by ~e Netherlands repre- pays sur les arguments invoques par 1~ repre-

,.

J

rrtlll

=iwl_ _

p----~'

1~31

ys-Bas au sujet de la natiohalite
sentative with respect to nationality and a common I -.Clltar
et eu .. ,l.lV'eralll commun.
Crown.
.
Mon pays et la Nouvelle-Zelande, pa.1"' exemple,
My country a~d ~ew Zealand,_ for e.xample,
have the same nattonahty as the Untted Klllgdom. ont la meme nationalite que le' Royaume-Uni..
We have a common Crown. But our independl?nce Nous avons un sotlverain commun.' Mais notre
was recognized sufficiently for us to become independance a ete reconnue d'une maniere suffioriginal Met:!1bersof the League of' Nations and sante pour que nous soyons devenus Membres
originaires de la Societe des Nations et de
of the United Nations.
l'Organisationdes Nations Unies. '
1\ certains moments, le Conseil evite les disAt times the CQuncil avoids juridi~ argu• ments. For that reason we eliminated from the cussions d'ordre juridique; c'est pourquoi, dans
orjgmal draft of the resolution ~dopted 'on la resolution adoptee le ler aotit~ nous avons
1 August' all reference to Articles 39 and 40 of supprime toute mention des Articles 39 et 40 de la
the Charter. At times we circumvent the rules Charte qui figurait dans le texte initial. De temps
of procedu:e. But w.e ar,~ confident that, what~ver a autre, nous toumons le reglement interieur; mais
the Counctl' does, tt wtll always act conscten- 110US avons confiance que, quellesque soient .les
mesures que prenne le Conseil, il agira toujours
. tiously, with equity and justice.
en toute equite et en toute conscience. '
Le probleme que nous examinons actuellement
This is a case where we have to act with a sehse
fair play. We have heard one side; ·surely we beige des mest.1res inspirees pp,r un. sentiment
are entitled to hear the other. To our mind, the d'equite. ~ous avons entendu l'une des parties;
only problem at this moment is to decide on the nous avons certainement le droit d'entendre l'au,;,
conditions which the Council considers should tre. A notreavis, le seul point en jeu en ce moment
determine the participation of. the Republie of conceme les conditions que le Conseil juge bon
Indonesia. We sugg~st that the same rule should de mettre a la participation de la Republique
be applied as was applied in' the case of Albania, , d'Indonesie; nons proposons de suivre la regIe
qui aete etablie pour l'Albanie, a savoir que, en
namely~ that for the purposes of this·' dispute,
the State concerned should undertake the obliga- ce qui conceme ce differend, I'Etat interesse se
conforme aux obligations de la Charte.
tions of the Charter.
La lettre dont le President lui-meme adonne
The letter which the President himself read .
this afternoon indicates that the State concerned lecture cet apres-midi indique que l;Etat interesse
has already undertaken certain obligations; there- a deja contracte un obligation; par consequent,
fore, when I speak about circumventing the rules quand je parle de tourner le reglemen~ int~rieur,
of procedure, I refer to rule' 14 regarding je me re£ere a l'article 14, relatif aux pouvoirs.
the submission of credentials. I would point out Je fais observer que, dans le .differend qui ilous
that in this dispute, that rule was dispensed with occupe, nous n'avons, tenu compte de cet article,
in respect both of the Netherlands and of India; rii pour les Pays-Bas, ni pour l'Inde; cet article
it was waived. That is therefore a technicality. a .ete ecarte. Il s'agit donc ici d'une subtilite
,"
technique.
'I regret that this' question has delayed the con~
Je regrette que cette question ait r~tard'e
sideration of what we feel to be an urgent prob- , l'examen d'une affaire qui, a notre avis, cons.lem in view of the fact that hostilities are still titue un probleme urgeqt, etant donne que les r~
continuing in certain areas of IndoneSia. I do , hostilitc~s se. poursuivent encore dans ,certaine-o; i"
hope there will be a quick decision on this and regions de I'It;ldonesie. J'espere sincerement que
that we may then discuss the merits of the new nous aboutirons rapidementa une clecision 'a
At}stralian proposal.
cet egardet que nO'lS pourrons alors discuter la
nouvelle proposition de l'Australie.
Mr., JOH~;SON (United States of America):
M. JOHNSON '(Etats-Unis d'Amerique)' (trar
There is no' doubt that the te,rms of Article 32 duit de l'anglais): Il n'est pas douteux que les
of the Charter apply to Members of the United\ termes de l'Article 32 de'la Charte s'appliquent
Nations or "any State which is not a Memb.er., aux' Membres des Nations Unies ou a "tout
of the United Nations,i£ it is a party.to a dispute Etat qur n'est pas Membre des Nations Unies,
unlier consideration by the S,ecurity. Council ...". s'il est partie a un .differend examine par le
It seems to my delegation that, it is futile to have Conseil de ·securite. . .". Ma 'delegation estime •
an extended debate on the question as to whether qu'il . est inutile de se livrer a un long debat
or not t,h~ Republic of Indonesia is a State within sur 'le point de savoirsi, oui ou non, la Republique d'Indorresie est un Etat, aux termes de
the'meanmg of Article 32.
i
l'Article 32.
My ~vernment expressly takes no position on
Mon Gouvemement s'abstient expressement
that pOlllt, a;nd I do not agree with many of the de prendre position a ce sujet, et je ne suis P?§
remarks whtch have been made here this after- d'accord avet.: bon nombre de remarques qui ont
noon. in~icating that the .Council, by taking action, ete faites ici cet apres-midi, impli<L'Uant que le
ca~ l~dtrectly, make a State out of a country Conseil; en intervenant, peut transformer indiwhtcli may not be a State. It is not clear at all in rectement en Etat un pays qui poufrait ne pas
my mind that this Council is competent to decide etre un Etat. Je ne suis pas du tout convaincu
,that legal question. '
"
, que le Conseil de securite soit competent pour
resoudre ce probleme juridique.
" How~ver, I find no difficulty i.n ('o~ing to the
Toutefois,il me semble aise de conclure que
concluston that the representative: )f Indonesia ·les representants, de l'Indonesie doivent etre inshould be invited to the Council \... )le, hi spIte vites ' au Conseil, bien que mon Gouvernement
A

•

of

\

......

,

.

of the fact' that· my Goverriment reserves its' res,erve sa position quant a. la question technique
position on the technical qu.~stion as to whether or de savoir si, oui ou' non, la Republique, d~In~
not the Republic of Indonesia is as yet l:I. State ~onesie est, actuellement, un Etat au set;ls du
in internationM law.
droiUnternational..,' "
.
A delegation or an individual may have doubts
Une, delegation ou un par.ticulier peut mettre
as to wheth'er Indonesia is a State in international' en douk le fait que l'Indonesie soit. un Etat au
law; and at the same time not wis~ to see any sens dudroit international et{ en meme temps
injustice done..
ne pas desirer qu'uue ,injustice soit commise., '
The Polish representative and one or tWo
Le representant de la Pologne, ainsi qu'un
others 'invoked an4rgutn~nt which seems tome, ou deux:autres, ont invoq'Ue un argument qui
to be pertinent, and with which I agree, namely, • me septbleetre pertinent, et je m'y rallie: par
that the Council has already by its resolution of sa resol~tion du ler aout, le Conseil est intervenu'
1 August interviewed this case. It has made· a i d,ans•. cette ,affaire. I1 a pris une decision. I1
decision. It has invited the two belligerents to ': invite Jes deux. belligerants a cesser initnediatecease hostilities forthwith, and ,both of them' ment.1es hostilites, et tous deux ont fait connaitre
have indicated their·accept~lDce.
leur acceptation..
'
It. seems to me, therefore, to be contrary to • C'est pourquoi il me selT,lble, maintenant' que
reason, not to say to equity and justice, now that .. des, personnes sont arrivees ici pour repiesenter
persons have arrived liere representing the Re- ! la ~epublique d'indonesie, qu'il s,erait contraire
public of Indonesia, to tell them that they may a la raison,pour ne pas dire a'l'equite et a la
hot be heard. 1 think it is entirely within the ' justice, de leur declarer qu'elles ne peuvent ,etre
right of .the Council, however, to satisfy itself entendues. Je crois,. touteiois, que le Conseil de
that these persons do truly represent the Govern- ,securite a parfaitemeI\t le droit.de s'assurer que
ment of Indonesia. In that sense I think that the cespersonnes represerltent. dument le Gouvernequestion of credentials, in whatever form they' 'ment de l'Indonesie. Dans ce sens, j'estime que
may be presented, or in whatever way the proper: la question des pouvoirs queUe que soit la forme
assurance maybe given; is of prime importance. : sous laqueUe il sont ptesentes, ou quelle que soit
The question of credentials is not a trivial one.
la maniere dont les garanties appropriees sont
donnees, est d'une importance primordiale. La '
question des lettres de creance n'est pas. un element secondaire.
.
I think that the Council must be sure that : Je crois que le Coilseil doit s'assurer que quiwhoever comes and says he repre~ents so-and-so, • conque se presente en disant qu'il represente
does in fact represent· "so-and-so." I am casting: un tel, representeeffectivement "un tel". Je ne
no doubt or aspersions whatsoever on the creden- ' mets gullement en doute ni ne suspecte les pou~ials of these persons. I .am speaking from a
voirs de ces personnes. Je me place au point de
theoretical. point of. view. One cannot cursorily vue theorique. On ne peut pas avancer a la
dismiss, the matter of credentials by treating them l~gere que les lettres de creances ne constituent
as technicalities; they are much more than that. ' que des subtilites techniques. Elles representent
\lien davantage.
.
Article 32' refers to States, but the plain intent
. L'Article 32 Parled'Etats, mais cet Art,icle
.M that Article and of the authors of the Charter et les auteurs de la Charte avaient evidemment
was that justice should be done to both parties pour but de rendre justiceaux deux parties a
to a dispute by ensuring that, incases where more un differend et de faire en sorte que, dans res
than one State, or one group~ or one interest is cas, ou plus d'un Etat, d'un groupe OU d'un
jrtvolved, both parties to the .dispute, or' the intl~ret sont engages, les deux parties' ou les
several parties if there are more than two, should diverses parties au differend, si elles sont plus
have a chance to. present their views.
de deux, aient la possibilite de presenter leur
point de v u e . '
. ' .
It is therefore, in. my opinion, fully in ac- . C'est pourquoi",a inon avis, it est ab.solument
cordance with the spirit of Article 32, a~ the conforme a l'esprit. de l'Article 32, telque l'en~
authors of the Charter conceived it, as well as tendaient les auteurs de la Charte; ainsi' qu'a la
with ·the action which the Council has already mesure que le Conseil de securite a deja prise
~ken in this matter, to 'invite the representatives dans cette affaire, d'inviter les representants. de '
• ofthe Republic of Indonesia to the Council table.. la Republique d'In<;lonesie a la table du Conseil.
~n supporting such an invitation, the United En approuvant cette invitation, les Etats-Unis
States expressly reserves its position on the ques- s'abstiennent expressemp.nt de se pronoZ],cer sur,
tion of whether. or not the Republic of Indonesia la question 'de savoir si,oui ou non, la Republique
is a State in international law in the sense in d'Indonesie est un Etat de droit international,
which the lllatter has been discussed at this dans le sens qu'on a debatttt ici. Nous' nous
abstenons~galemetlt de prendre position sur l.e
t~ble. We shall alsc;> refrain'from taking a,ny positIon on the· quest10n as to whether, or not we point de savoir si nous reconnaissons au Consed
re~ognize the right of the Council' tQ dec~de that le d'roit de trancher cette question. Ce probleme
pomt.\ That is entirely open. Bufwe think the reste entier., Mais nous pensons que les reprerepresentatives of the Government of the Re- sentants du Gouvernement de la Republique
public of IndoneSIa $hould be invited here and, if d'Indonesie devraient etre invites id, et, si ceI:some members of the Council find' it difficult to tains. membres' du Conseil ont quelqtte diffieulte·
accept the application of Article 32, those' repre- a accepter l'application de· I!Article 32, ces representatives could be invited, in our opinion, under sentants pourraient, a notre avis, etre invites
rule 39 of the rules df procedure, if that rule en vertu de l'article 39 du reglement interieur,
were given. a generous' interpretation.
si l'on donne' a' celui-ci une large interpretation.

a

..-4

1933
En vertu de l'Article 40 de l~ Charte, toutes
les decisions sont prises sans prejudice des droits
juridiques de toute partie en cause. L'invitation
ne constituerait qu'un geste purement equitable,
conforme it l'esprit et au but de l'Article 32ainsi
que de toute notre Organisation, et it la decision
prise le ler aoiit. En decidant de lui adresser
une invitation, nous ne conferons it la Republique
d'Indonesie aucun statut ni aucune position sur
le plan international auxquels elle ne pourrait
normalement pretendre.
.
Quel que soit le resultat de la discussion, oil
Whatever the outcome of this discussion,
basically the Council has to take a decision some- est certain que, fondamentalement, le Conseil
what along the lines of the one 'propo~ by the devra se prononcer en suivant, en substance, les
representative of Poland. Whether it adopts this principes enonces par le representant de la
one or another, the fact is that the issue on which Pologne dans sa proposition. Qu'il adopte celIethe Council must decide is more or less the {ssue ci ou une autre, le fait est que la question au
exPressed in the Polish proposal. I suggest that sujet de laquelle le Conseil doit se decider est
we might more easily reach a decision if there plus ou moins celle qui fait l'objet de la propo'were inserted in that proposal a simple expression sition de la Pologne. J'estime que nous'pourrions
to the effect that the Council formally invites the plus facilement arriver it uIie decision si nous
representatives of the Government of Indonesia inserions dans cette proposition quelques mots
to take part in the Qiscussion of the Indonesian indiquant que le Conseil invite formellement les
problem under whatever conditions t.he Council representants duo Gouvernement de l'Indonesie
may prescribe, and without prejUdice to any legal it prendr~ part it la discussion du probleme indo;position on which the Council has not been in nesien, queUes que soient les conditions fiXees
agreement. That might make it easier, as I ha~e par le Conseil, et sans prejuger aucune situation
said, to reach a d'ecision; no one's position would jurdique au sujet de laquelle le Coriseil n'est pas
arrive a un accord. Comme je l'ai dit, cela pourbe prejudiced in any way.
rait faciliter une decision; il ne serait, en aucune
maniere, porte prejudice it la position adoptee
par qui que ce soit.
M. GRQMYKO (Union des Republiques so'Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian) : The po~i­ cialistes sovietiques) (traduit pu russe): La detion taken here by the representative of the legation de l'URSS ne peut se rallier a l'attitude .
Netherlands is unacceptable to the USSR delega- prise ici Jpar le representant des Pays-Bas, bien
tion, although it follows logically from the general . que celle-ci decoule logiquement de l'attitude geattitude which he has adopted from the outset of nerale qu'il a adoptee depuis le commencement
the discussion of this question in the Security ,de la discussion de cette' question au Conseil de
Council. The representative of the Netherlands securite. Le representant des Pays-Bas a essaye
has attempted to convince us that this question de nous convaincre que cette question ne doit
.sho~ld not be discussed at all, on the grounds . pas etre examinee du tout,parce qu'elle ne serait
.that it does not fall within the Security Council's pas de la competence du Conseil. Mais le simple
jurisdiction. But. tlle mere fact that the Security fait que le Conseil de securite ait accepte d'.:~xami­
Council took up the discussion of this question ner la question et ait meme pris, .le ler aoiit,une
and, furthermore, adopted an appropriate deCision decision appropriee it ce ,sujet, suffit it refuter
in that matt~r on 1 August, refutes the arguments. les arguments du representant des' Pays-Bas,
of the representative of the Netherlands; at least pour autant,du moins, qu'il s'agisse de la comin so far as the Security Council's jurisdiction petence du Conseil de securite.··
is ~oncerned.
"
.
I think that certain representatives were right . I1 me semble que c'est avec raison que certarns .
ih pointing out another· untenable argument put representants ont souligne ici le manque de bien- .
f~rwardby the Nethedands representative, who fonde ~d'un autre argument durepresentant des
tned topel'suade us that, since the Indonesian' Pays-Bas qui aessaye de. nous convaincre que
Republic had been recognized by few States, it la Republique d'Indonesie, ayant ete reconnye
could not be considered as a sovereign State. L par un petit nombre de pays seulement, ne pent
could ask the representatives of the Netherlands. etre consideree co~me un Etat souverain. Je
and the United Kingdom how many 'States have pourrais demanderaux representants des Paysr.ecogn!zed Liberia, for instance; how many. Bas et du Royaume-Uni combien. de pays ont
countr~es have recognized Yemen; and how many reconnu la Liberi~, par exemple,. ~u le Yemeri,
countnes have recognized the Philippines, which ou les Philippines, que l'on a ~entionnees ici?
has been mentioned here. \Probably only a few: . Peu de pays, sans doute.Et cependant, le Liberia
And yet Liberia isa Member of the United . est Membre de 1'0rganisa t :01l des Nations Unie.s,
~ation::;. and, we all seem to agree that Yemen tandis que le Yemen, de .~"is g,eneral du Con.:.
IS a sovereign State which should be admitted
seil, semble-t-il, est un Etat souverain qui doit
to the United Nations, since all the Governments etre adinis a I'Organisation des Nations Unies,
re]?resented .on the Council were in favour o£' .puisqtie tousles Gouyernements repres!i:ntes au
Xedm~n:~ application in the Committee .on the Conseil se sont exprimes favorablement au
mlSston of New MemberS". ' . .'
. ' . Comite d'admissiondes nouveaux Membres, sur'
,
la demanded'ad11lission decepays.
It is a debatable point ~hether the Indonesian . Op peut se demander si la: Republique d'Iil. Under Article 40 of the Charter, all. decisions
are without prejudice to the legal rights of any
of the parties concerned. The' invitation would
be merelyp act of simple justice, in conformity
both with the spirit and purpose of Article 32 and
of our whole Organization and with the decision
made on 1 August. By deciding to invite'it, the
Council would not be giving to the Republic of
Indonesia any international'status or position to
which it would n,ot otherwise be entitled.

..... _.
.

1934

Republic has complete sovereignty or. not and donesie joui~ oy,. non d'une souyerainete entiere
whether it is independent in the full sense of the si elle est pleinement independante ou non, mai~
word, but we must bear in mind the i.'11portant no,us d~vons t~ir co~pte du fait impo~tarit que la
circumstance that the Indonesian Republic and Repubhque d Indonesle et le peuple mdonesien
the Indonesian people, whether they have at thil' qu'ils l'aient deja entierement conquise ou non'
moment achieved full independence or not, have ont realise d'immense~ progres vers cette inde:
made immense progress in gaining'such indepep- . pendance: Ils rencontrent beaucoup d'obstacles' a
dence. They are meeting with great difficulties; tel point, qu'ils on meme ete recemment l'objet
.it has even gone so far that they have recently cl'une agression armee de la part des Pays-Bas'
been subjected to armed attacks by.the Nether- .mais le peuple. indonesien poursuit avec obstina:
lands; but the Indonesian people is stubbornly tion son' chemin vers l'independance complete.
making its way towards full independence. The La Republiqu.e d'Indonesie est souveraine et
Indonesian Republic is sufficiently sovereign and independante dans une mesure suffisante pour
sufficiently i~dependent to be allowed to express qu'il, lui. soit pen~is d'exprimer l'opinion, les
the opinions, thought and feelings of the pensees ,et les sentiments du peuple indonesien
Indonesian people on a question which affects its sur une question qui est pour lui d'un interet
vital.
vital interests.
.
]e crois qUe le Conseil de securite n'agirait
I think the Security Council would be acting
unjustly if it refused the legitimate request of pas equi~ablement s'il ne dOllnait pas satisfaction
the Government of the Indonesian Republic and a la demande legitime du Gouv€:rnement de la
if it did not allow the representatives of the Republique d'Indonesie et n~admettait pas les,
Government of that Republic to participate in representants de cette Republique a participer a'
. nos debats.
.
our discussion.
]e remarque avec satisfaction que le repreI am glad to see that at this rtteeting the United
States representative, too, has agreed that the sentant des Etats-Unis s'est egalement declare
representatives of the Indonesian· Government d'accord, a la presente seance, pour que l'on invite
should be invited, but I cannot agree that this les representants du Gouvernementde l'Indoinvitation should be bound up with certain reser- nesie, mais je ne puis admettre que cette invitation soit sujette a des reserves; en effet, ces
~tions which, in the first place, would diminish
the import of the Security Council's decision re- reserves reduiraient la portee de la decision du
garding the invitation and, in the second place, Conseil de securite au sujet de cette invitation
would cast a certain doubt on that decision in et, d'autre part, feraient planer un doute sur cette
respect of the rights and powers of the Council. decision, pour ce qui est des droits et pouvoirs
du Conseil. Puisque le Conseil a decide qu'i1
~'Since the. Council has decided that it has the
right and the power to consider this question, avait le droit et le pouvoir d'examiner cette ques~
which was raised by the represeI!tatives of India tion, qu'ont soulevee les rt.presentants de l'Inde
and Australia, it has every right to decide in et de l'Australie, it a parfaitement le droit de
favour of inviting the r~pres~ntatives of the, trancher dans un sens positif la. question de l'inGovernment of the Indonesian Republic without vitation desrepresentants de la Republique d'Inany reservations, even reservations of a legal donesie, et ceci sans aucune restriction, meme
de caractere juridique.
.
nature.
M.
VAN
KLEFFENS
(Pays-Bas)
(traduit
de
Mr. VAN KLEFFENS (Netherlands): It was.
with great interest that I heard the representative l'ooglais): J'ai entendu, avec grand interet, le
of the United States refer to rule 39 of the rules representant des Etats-Unis invoquer l'article 39
of procedure. ·1 wish I could give. my blessing du reglement interieur. ]e voudrais pouvoir
to. his 'suggestion because I am very anxious that approuver cette idee, parce que je desire viveparties should he heard. However, this should ment que les parties soient entendues. Toutefois,
not be done at the cost of contravening either the . on ne doit pas le faire au prix d'une violation
Chatter or the rules of procedure. What b9thers de la Charte ni du reglement ,interieur. Ce qui
me. in this matter, much as I should like to accept m'ennuieace sujet, que! que soit le desir que
these views, is that rule 39 refers to admitting j'eprotive d'accepter ce point de vue, c'est que
certain persons to supply the Council "with iJl- l'article 39 stipule que ,le Conseit invite certaines
formation or to give other assistance in examin- personnes a ltii fournir "des informations ou a.
lui donner leur assistance dans l'examen des
ing matters within its competence".
questions relevant da sa competence".
Je defends ici, d'une maniere generale, une
I am speaking here broadly in defence of a
correct application of the Charter and of the application 'correcte de la Char-re et du reglement
rules of procedure. If representatives' of any interieur. Si, en vertu de cet article du reglement,
c 't,,, ry are invited under this rule, theimplica- on invite des representants d'un pays quelconque,
tion' is· that the Sec.urity Council is competent in on declare implicitement que le C;onseil de sethis matter, has jurisdiction therein. I submit .curite est competent en la matiere, que sa juri·diction s'etend sur cette question. ]e pretends
that that is not the case.
que c'est impossible.
J'estime que le point en jeu depasse' de loin
I think that the point involved here goes far
le
cadre de ce probleme. Toute la question de
beyond the merits of this case. It raised the
whole issue of the correct application iof the' l'application correcte de la Charte et du regIeme~t
r
Chart~r and of the rules of procedure; the issue interieur se trouve soulevee, la question de saVOl •
apres
un
petit
salutdepure
si
le
Conseil;
of . whether this Council, with a formal little
bow - I trust the United States representative for~e - j'ai confiance que M. Johnson excusera
will excuse me when I use that word - to its I'expression - a sa competence extremement

........

..

1935

'extremely dQubtful jurisdiction, does just as it douteuse, peut fair,e exactement ce qui lui plait,
pleases, or whether the c;o~cil wish~s to rema~ 'ou bien si le Conseil desire demeurer toujours,
at all times-as I submit m truth It should m et je pretends en verite qu'il devrait le faire dans
this as in all other cases-within the boundaries ce cas 'comme dans tous les autres, dans les
limites definies par la Charte et le reglement
set by the Charter and the rules of procedure.
interieur.
'
Si ia majorite des membres' du Conse~l inIf the majority of the members of the Council
diquent qu'ils ont l'intention de faire ce qui leur
i~dicate that they intend to do as they please,
why have any Charter or any written rules at all? plait, pourquoi avoir une Charte ou un regleThe Charter~and I say this with great earnest- ment ecrit? La Charte, je le dis tres serieusement,
ness-should be for the protection of the Mem- devrait protegeI' les Membres des Nations Unies
bers of the United Nations against many evils contre beaucoup de maux et, en particulier, ce
and not least, against any tendency on the part of qui n'est pas le moindre, contre toute tendance
any organ of the United Nations to exceed the de la part de tout organe des Nations 'Unies a
limits of its jurisdiction as defined in the Charter. depasser les limites de sa competence, telle qu'elle
est definie dans la Charte.
M. TSIANG (Chine) (trOduit de i;anglais):
Mr. TSIANG (China): I shall confine my remarks at present to the proposal submitted by t:he Je limiterai' mes remarques, en ce moment, a
representative of Poland, reserving my right to la proposition du representant de la Pologne,
speak later on the Australian draft resolution. et me reserve le droit de parler. ulterieurement
du projet de resolution de l'Australie.
Des le debut de notre discussion sur la quesFrom the very beginning of our disc,ussion of
the Indonesian question, I have always urged tion indonesienne, j'ai toujours. et instamment
members of the Council to shun legal questions, prie les membres du Conseil de laisser de cote
partly because their discussion "would not be les questions juridiques, en partie parce que la
very helpful and partly, I confess, because I discussion n'eii serait pas tres utile et en partie
could never argue on points of law with such a parce que, je l'avoue, je ne pourrais jamais me
distinguished jurist as the representativ e of the mesurer, sur le terrain juridique, avec un juriste
Netherlands, mainly because I think there is a aussi distingue que le representant des Paysfundamental difference of opinion between us in Bas, etant donne surtout qu'il y a entre nous,
our conception of a State.
me semble-t··il" une' divergence d'opinion fo,ndamentale en ce qui concerne la .conception de
.
I'Etat.
If . I understood the representative of the
Si j'ai bien compris le representant des PaysNetherlands rightly, he conceives of a State in an Bas, il conc;oit I'Etat dans un sens absolu, monisabsolute, monistic sense-it is either a sovereign tique :.un Etat est souverain ou il n'est pas. It est
State or it is not a State at all. It is either black noir ou blanc; a son point de vue il n'existe pas
or white; in his view there are no greys. I believe de gris. J e crois que, pour repondre a certaines
that for modern needs we have to conceive M a necessites modernes, nous devons' concevoir l'Etat
State in a differ~nt way, a more elastic way; it d'une maniere .differente, d'une I}laniere plus
may qualify as a State in certain respects, but not souple; il petit avoir, sous certains aspects, les
in others. Whep. we invite the representative of qualites requises pour constituer un Etat et ne.
the Indonesian Republic to appear before the pas les posseder a d'autresegards. Si nous inCouncil, what are we really doing? We are vitons le representant de la Republique d'Indorecognizing that representative as the competent nesie a prendre part a la discussion au sein du'
Itopposite number" of the representative of the Conseil de securite, que faisons-nous en realite?
Netherlands. That is all we are doing.
N ous reconnaissons que ce representant est la
"contrepartie" qualifiee du representant des PaysBas. Voila tout.
. . In negotiating and stgningan agreement with
En negociant et en signant' un accord avec la
the Indonesian Republic, the Government of the Republique d'Indonesie, le Gouvernement des
NetherIands did that very thing. It recognized Pays-Bas a agi exactement ainsi. Il a reconnu
that in, the questions at issue, the Republic of que, pour les besoins de la cause, la Republique
Indonesia was compp.tent and was the proper d'Indonesie etait competente et constituait la...·'con.:'op,P0site number". I;t supporting the proposal to trepartie" appropriee.En acceptant que le reprel?Vlte the representative of the Indonesian Repub- sentant de la Republique d'Indonesie soit invite
hc to participate in this discussion, I imply that
participer a la discussion, j'impJique qu'il
he would be the proper "opposite number" of constituerait, dans ce differend, la' contrepartie
the i'epresent~tive of the Netherlands in this appropriee au representant des Pays-Bas. Je
dispute. I imply nothing else, I recognize nothing n'implique den d'autre, je ne reconnais rien
else.
d'autre.
.
Fr01~ a broad political point of view, I think
Du point de vue politique general, j'estime que
that !}us. Council ,:,ould increase its moral prestige le Conseil augmenterait son prestige moral et
and Its mfluence m that part of the 'world if the accroitrait sa propre influence dans cette partie
repre~entative of the Republic of Indonesia took
du monde, s; le representant de la Republique
• part 111 our discussions. If we reach con'€lusions d'Indonesie prenait part a nos discussions. Si
after hearing the representative of the' Nether- .nOllS arrivons a des conclusions, apres avoir enlands ~s. fully and as often as he wishes, but with- tendu le representant des Pays-Bas, aussi comout gmng the representative of Indonesia an pletement et aussi souvent qu'ille desire, sans que
opportunity to be heard, the discussions of the le representant de l'Indonesie ait eu l'occasion
Council will not carry nearly as much moral de se ·faire entendre,· les decisioris du Cons'eil de

1hz

.

a

'

1936
weight' in that part of the' WOl'lda:s" they would securIte n'auront, moralemcnt, pas autant de poids
if we had the representative of 'Indonesia sitting dans cette partie d.u mond~ que si le representant
with us.
"
'. ,,:,\
de l'Indonesie siegeait parmi nous.
I therefore urge members of the Council not to . , C'est pourquoi j'invite instamment les membres
be too afraid of creating a precedent from which du Conseil ne pas craindre d'instituer tm pre.it might, be inferred ~at we recogni2;ed Indonesia cedent qui constituerait, de notre part, la recon:
to be this or that. That would not be the case. We naissance de i'Io1ldonesie a tel ou tel titre. Je ne
are seeking pr-actica1 means to arrive at a sensible, crois pas que nous reconnaissions quoi que ce soit.
practiqu solution. When this proposal is put to Nous cherchons un moyen pratique d'arriver
the vote, I shall vote in favour of extending an une solution raisonnable et pratique. Lorsque cette
invitation to the representative of the IIldonesian resolution sera mise aux voix, 'je voterai en
faveur d'une invitation au representant de la
Republic to take part in our work.
Republique d'Indonesie a prendre part an6s
travaux.
. Mr.' PAROD! (France), (translated ,from , M. PARODI' (France): Je reviendrai tout
French) : I shall first revert to a 'point on which d'abord sur un point dont j'ai deja parle au
I haye already spo~en hi my prec-eding state- cours de mes interventions preceoentes. C'est
ments. It is sufficiently importan~ to be discussed un point d'une importance suffisante pour qu'on
y revienne.
anew.
L'autorite du Conseil de securite est liee a un
The Security Council's authority is' ,based on
a'document which we call the Charter and which texte qui s'appelle la Charte et dont le respect
should in the first place, of course, be respected . s'inipose d'abord, bien entendu, aux organismes
by organs of the United Nations. We should des Nations Unies. Nous devons donc etre extherefore be very carefUl to respect the document tremement attentifs a respecter le texte qui est
which constitutes our law, for apart from that notre loi, car" en dehors de ce texte, je ne vois
document I do not see what authority we would pas queUe autorite nous resterait.
have.
Nous avons pris l'autre jour une assez curieuse
The other d<;t.y we took a rather curious decision.. The Security O:mncil took cognizance of decision. Le Conseil de securite s'est saisi d'une
a question but reserved the point as to whether it question, en reservant le point de savoir s'it etait
had jurisdiction to deal. :with it. We thus took a competent pour en parler. Nous avons, fait ainsi
step which was certainly not' very satisfactory un pas qui n'etait certainement pas tres satisfrolIl the point of view of procedure and which ~aisant du point de vue des regles et qui nous·
places us now':'-as it was almost inevitably 'bound met aujourd'hui dans la situation ou it devait
presque fatalement nous mettre, a savoir une
to d~ina somewhat embarra:~sin~ position.
situation assez embarrassee.
Nous avons pris, le ler aout, une decision sur
'. On 1 August we took;i, decision on s~tim~ntal
and humanitarian grounds, while reserving com- le plan de la sentimentalite, de Vhumanite, en'
pletely the question of our jurisdic~6n.. In that reservant entierement la que~'tion c;le notre comconnexion I should like to reply iin!l1ediately to petence, et je voudrais ici repoadre tout de suite
up. argument dont s'est servi tout
I'heure
ail argument put forward just now by the repre, sentative of Poland. He told us that the Security le representant de la Pologne. Ilsnous a dit: la
Council's judsdiction in the'matter 'Yas implicit decision meme que 1'0n a prise l'autre jour im~
,in the decision which we took the other day. That plique la competence du Conseil de securite.
i~certainly not' the case. It is not the case because~ Certainement pas. Certainement pas, parce que
pn the ,contrary, we reserved' this question of nous avons, au contraire, forinellement et' de la
. Jurisdiction formally and. very' clearly. It is maniere la- plus c1aire, .reserve cette question
therefore somewhat strange to assert, .in virtue ' de competence. 11 n'est donc pas tres normal de
of the decision taken on 1 August~ that the ques:" se servir aujourd'hui' de.la decision prise le ler
tion' of jurisdiction has been settled. The question. a.out pour pretendre que la question de compeof' jurisdiction ha's not 'been settled and it is tence a ete tranchee. La question de competence
• extremely serious.
n'a pas ete tranchee, et elle presente un caractere
de tres grande gravite.
Certain remarks have been made today, in the
Dans la di!/cussion d'aujourd'hui, certaines obcourse of our discussions, regarding the question servations ont ete faites sur cette question de
of jurisdiction. I shall not ~yselfattempt to deal competence. Je ne pretends pas traiter completefully with this question. now, bUi I should like ment cette question moi-meme maintenant; mais
. to recall the' arguments which were put for- je .voudrais reprendre 'les arguments qui on ete
ward to prove ..that the Security' Council had avances pour etablir que le Conseil de securite
.
est competent.
'
jurisdiction.
It was said thafa' State need not ,be a sovereign
On a dit qu'ilne setait pas necessaire qu'un
State in 1>rder to appear before the Security Etat soit .un Etat souverain pour comparaitre
Council; it was simil;}r1y. claimed that an argu- devant le Conseil de securite, et on a, dans le
mentcould be adduced from a comparison be,;, meme sens, pretendu ,tirer un argument de la
tween Article 32 aIld Article, 2,. paragraph 1 of comparaiscin de l'Article· ~2 de la Charte et gu
.'
the Ch~rter. ,
para,graphe premier de l'Article 2.
•
If I understand these arguments correctly, I
Si j'ai bien compris ce qui a ete di}, il m~
think the reasoning is the following. An:ic1e 2, semble que le ra~sonnement est le ,sUll/ant: a
paragraph 1 reads ~ "The Organizatipn is' based l'Article 2,' paragraphe 'premier, il est dit:
ont'heprinciple ·of the soveFeignequality of all f~L'Organisation estfondee sur le principe de

a

a

a

a

j

• . .
.
~~_.

~"""."""'"'-

......

..•__·_ _

~
~

._~_.'~,~

•..

~_

.
..••__.._.c·....,.

J

d"""IIIII

ps

1937

\
l'egalite ,soilrveraine de ,tous ses Membres." A
I'Article 32, il est- dit: "Tout Membre desNa~
tions Uilies qui n'est pas membre du 'Conseil
de secuiite 'ou tout ,Etat qui n'est pas Membre
,
des Nations Unies ..."
I
Le raisofinement consiste a dire' que, puisqu'a
It is argued that, since in ArtiCle 32 the
sovereignty of ~on-member States is not men- l'Article 32. la souverainete des Etatsqui. ne sont
tioned, such States need not be sOvereign in pas Membres n4 est pas mentionnee, il en resulte'
order that questions affecting them should fall que ces Etats n'ont pas besoin d'etre souverains
pour que les questions les .concernant soient de
within the jurisdiction of the United Nations.!
la 'competence de I'Organisation' des Nations
Dnies.'
' ,
,
,"
A vrai dire, je ne pense pas que cette argu- .
Frankly, I do not think these arguments carry
much weight; and I apologize for saying so to mentation ait une bien grande portee, et je m'en
, my colleagues who advanced them. In referring excuse aupd~sde ceux de roes collegues'luj 1'ont
to the sovereign equality of Members, Article 2, pres'entee. Si· le' paragraphe 'premier de l'Artiparagraph 1 does not provide that Members of de 2 parle de l'egalite sourveraine des Membres,
the United Nations must be. sovereign; it estab- ce n'est' pas pour dir~ que les Membres des
lishes from the starf the principle underlying Nations' Uni'es:doivent etre souverains. ,C'est pour
their mutual relations.
'
formulerd'emblee le principe de leurs. rapports
en~eux. ' '
'Si;
dims
l'Arlicle
3,2,
on
n'a
pas
employe
Although the expression "sovereign State" is
not used in Article 32, this obviously does not l'expression "'Etat souverain", il n'en resuIte evimean that the word "State" should be understood deniment pas que le mot '~Etat" puisse etre pris
otherwise than in its meaning in international law. dans un a':ltre' sens que celui qu'il a en droit
international.'
'
On rendrait la discussion plus claire si 1'0n
The discussion would be clarified if the mean'"
ing of the expression "sovereign State" were precisait ce qu'on entend par "Etat souverain".
defined. The problem which we are discussing I1 's'agit, pour 'la discussion qui est' la notre 'autoday is not whether a State has all the charac- jourd'hui" de savoit; non pa& si un Etat a plein
teristics.of a State, but whether a sovereign State, caractere d'Etat' a taus les points de' vue; 'mais
or simply a State, may be considered as a State si' 1'0n pent considerer'comme Etat un Etat,
in international law. From that point of view souverainou ,un Etat tout 'court, du '~lOint de,
the meaning of Article 32 of the Charter seems vue du droit international. A cet egard, le sens
to me to' be indisputable. The United Nations de l'Article 32'de la: Charte me parait, ne pas
. is essentially an organization based on interna"'- pouvoir etre discute: Les·· Nations Unies sont
tionallaw. Reports and questions brought before essentiellement un organisme, de droit internait are essentially of an international character; tional. Les rapports et les questions' qui viennent
and When, the word "State" is used, when we devant 1"Organisation sont' essentielleme~t d'otdre
wish ~o find out whether a State is' sufficiently . internationaI,et, lorsque le mot "Etat'r est em:sovereIgn to appear here, we mean thereby a ploye, .' lorsque 'noris rechetchons si un Eta't est.
State in international law.
suffisaniment souverain potircomparaitre ic~notis
entendons par la' un Etat au 'sens dtidroit
international. \ ' "
We also discussed the meaning of the
Ona discutej'd'autre part; le sens del'Accord
Linggadjati Agreement. The arguments based on de! Lhiggadjati; 'et' les argumeJ;lts que l'ona
that doc!ffi1ent consisted-I must point opt that foodes sur ce texte' oni consiste - comme deja~
such was the case in the' original thesis of the je' ~ois le :dire; dans .1'argtimentation ii!itiale9-u
Aust.r~lian representative-in singling out certain representant de l'Australie -" a isolercertainell
provI~Ions of ,that Agreement and overlooking dispositions de' ,cet· Accord, ,en en ignorant
others. But the provisions of the.' Linggadjati d'autres. Mais les dispositionsquifigurent dans
Agreement are valid only in so far as they form I'Accord de Linggadjati n'ont de valeur que
part of that Agreement; they cannot be separated parce qU'elles se trouvent dans cet Accord, et
from one another. True, the Agreement states on nepeut ,p.as lesisoler,les unes ties autres. Il
that the Netherlands Government recognizes the est exact qu'il'estdit dans cet Accord que le
~.vernment of the Indonesian Republic as exer- Gouvernement des Pays-Bas reconnaft -le Gouclsmg de f(tcto authority over Java, Madura and vernement 'de la Republique d'Indonesie comme
S;umatr:,,-. That. is true. Brit it is said immediately exere;ant une' autorite, de 'fait. stir Java, Madbura
afterwards that the Netherlands Government and et Suinatra; Cela:estexact.Mais il est immediatethe Govefnr:1ent of the Indonesian Republic shall ment indique ensuite que l~' Gouvernement des
co-ope~ate In the prompt establishment of a
Pays-Bas 'et le Gouvernement de la Republique
SOvereIgn State.
,- ,
d'Indonesie coopereront a la formation rapide
d'un Etat souverain.
If we look at the other provisions of the s;me
Si 'l'on 'en vient aux' autres 'dispositions du
Agreement, and at those of article X in padicu- meme :Accord, notamment' celles de l'articIe X,
lar, we .shall see that, as ,'was pointed out here-:- " on constate que, comme cela a ete indique ici ~
and no .reply. was made to that point...:-theAgree- .et it n'a pas 'ete reporidu a ee point --- fintention
ment aimed at the gradual establishment of a de cet Accord etaitd'arriver progressivement a
S~tein intern~tional law which, consequently, la constitution ,d'un Etat ,de droit international
does not yet eXISt. I think there can be no doubt qui, par eonseque~t, n'existe pas encore' au~
on tha~ score;
, .
jourd'hui.. Je crois· qu'a cet egard il n'y a pa:5'
de daute. ':'.

its- Members.I','Artic1e 32 reads: "Any Member
of the United Nations which is not a member of
the Security Council, or any State which is not a
.
Member of the United Nations. : ." .

1INt_

i

a

,.~

1938

,Thl1s, if, we are to hear only those, States
Si donc nous !le devon,S avoir devant nous que
whicli have the Characteristics" of States in inter~ des Etats qui ont la qualite d'Etats de droit internationallaw..:..-and,that,-once more, is inherent in national'':'''-ce'qui,' encore une fois,' est conform:e
~ery nature of 9ur Organization and of the a la nature' meme .de notre institution' et des
situation with which we have to 'deal"':';"'and if rayports dont nous avons a nous occuper - et
the State of Indonesia is not a state in interna- si,l'Etat d'Indonesle n'est pas uti Etat de droit
tional 'law, I think,the Security' COu!J.cil' iscer,.. • international, it ine parait certain que le Conseil
tainly not competent to deal -with the matter of dt! securite n'est ,pas' competent pour traiter
which it has taken' cognizance.
.
l'affaire' dont it s'est saisi.

the

'.

" Hqwever, the step which we took the other . Or, it reste' que le pas que nous avons fait
dhy, whereby we overstepped the rules of law, l'autre jour, en nous plac;ant en dehors des regles
now' places us in a very difficult position, as was de droit, nous met aujour<;l'hui, comme it est
inevitable and as might have been expected. I normal et comme it etciit a. prevoir, en presence
agree, hbwever, that there is very great weight de tres grandes difficultes. Mais je reconnais.
in' the "fair-play'" argument which .has been qu'il y a une tres grande valeur dans l'argumenadvanced. Obviously if ·the Security Council, in tation, qu'on pourrait: appeler l'argumentation du
~iscussing a question, heats one of the' parties
fair play, que l'on. a' employee, Il est certain
concerned, it,is 'somewhat shocking that the other que, ,si le Conseil de securite, en traitant urie'
party should not be heard. That is the unfortu- question, entend l.lne des parties intl~ressees, il y
nate and awkward resUlt Of the contradiction into a quelque chose de choquant a ce que I'autre which we fell the other day when 'we discussed partie interessee ne soit pas entendue. CeIa est
~ question 'of 'such great impOJ!tance without set- 'la consequence' fflcheuse, difficile,de la contratling whether we were competent to deal with it. diction que nous avons admise_l'autre jour en
traitant une question 'de cette iinportance sans
nous preoccuper de savoir si. nOJIs etions competents pour la traiter.
We must now extricate ourselves from this
~l faut' maiJ;1terlant ,que 'nous soI'tions de cette,
predicament with as little damage 'as. possible. difficulte de la maniere qui fera le moins, de
The United States representative has suggested a. ' degflts. Le representant des Etats-Unis a suggere
solutioncwhich is merely an extension of the de- une' solution qui .est, en' somme, le prolongement
cision ~ken on 1 August. and which consists in de la decision prise le ler aotit et qui consiste
continuing to say that we' reserve the. question a continuer a dire que nous reservons la quesof jtirisdictioQ. This may be a lesser evil; it is tion de la competence. Ceci 'est perlt-etre uti
certaiIilynot fully satisfactory.
moindre mal: ,ce it'est certainement pas pleine:
. ment satisfaisant.
When I re-read the Australian draft resolution,
/' ' which is the text we are' discussing; I won<Iered
.whether the, need for hearing- both parties was as
cl~r as might at first sight appear, from the point
pj view of, equity. That dtaft-I anticipate
somewhat., the ~discussion which will take place
later-'-recalls, ·the previous decision, notes the
consequences of that decision and' concludes with
three paragraphs of which the first also notes
the measures taken, the second notes the offer of
. gdod offices by two Governments and the last
resOlves' to establish a commission.

Je me demandais, en relisa!1t le projet de reso- ,
lution de l'Australie, qui est .le texte. sur Ieqtiel,
nous discutons, si la necessite d'entendre les
deux parties est aussinette qu'it peut sembler
d'abord au point de vue de I'equite. Le projetj'anticipe un peu sur la discussion a laquelle
nous parviendrons ensuite - rappelle 1<. decision
qui a ete prise precMemment, puis pr CId a!=te
des consequences de cette decision, et contient,
enfin, trois paragraphes; dont I'un prend' acte
egalement des mesures prises, dont le deuxieme
prend acte de l'offre de bons/" offices de deux
Gouvemements, et dont. le deni.ier. decide de
creel," une commission.

I think the first two points can be discussed
without again raising the question of jurisdiction...
[have much greater doubts as to the third point.
But in any case; when discussing' a text of this
kind, in which the substance of the question is
not touched upon and in which-there is no dis.cussion of the merits of the case, I wonder
whether it is really necessary---o:r as necessary ~s
it might at first appear from the point of view of
equity.-.:.that the representatives .of Indonesia
should be heard. I wonder if we could. not adopt
another solution which wm,dd{ more adequately
safeguard the legal question, since we intend to
reserve,it, a solution whereby the ,representatives
of Indonesia, since they are in New York, could
state their observation~ in wrIting and communicate them to us individually or to the Secretariat,
which would forward them to us for our information. I think that in that way .ne legal question

Je crois que,. en ce qui' concerne les deux
premiers .points, nous pourrons les discuter sans
que se pose a nouveau la question de comp~t:~~t.
J'ai beaucoup plus ,de doutes sur l~ tr~ls1eme
point. Mais je me demartde, en tout cas; SI, pour
la discussion d'un te~te de cet ordre, dans lequel
on n'aborde pas le fond de la question, dans
lequel it n'y a pas de discussion de fond, it est
vraiment" necessaire, aussi necessaire qu'it peut
'le paraitre en equite au premier abord, que les
representants de l'Indon,esie soient en.tendus. Je
me demande si nous ne pourrions pa~, aIor~,
adopter une autre formule qui menageralt
davantage la question de droit, puisque l'intention est de la. reserver, et en vertu de laquelle
les representants de I'Indonesie, puisqu'ils sont
a New-York, transmettraient par ecdt les observations qu'ils ont a presenter, nous les. enverraient individuellement ou les adresseralent au

,4

...

1939
,

would be reserved; it would not be prejudged
at all.
I should like to repeat that this is an important
question' and it would be regrettable if we were
to deal .with such a serious problem or to appear
to decide it in any way in conncxion with a
purely procedural point, namely, whether we
should hold hearings. and how w~ should hold
them.
At the hundred and seventy-third meeting I
made reservations. concerning'the decision .which
was taken. I reiterate those reservations, while at
the same time, of course, taking note of the
decisio:l taken by the Colmcil at that same meeting. 'It is to ,help the 'Council out of the very real
difficulty. in which it has placed. itself that I submit to. it the suggestions which occur tp me; my
only, wish is to find a solution to a difficult
problem.
The PRESIDENT: The discussion is now over
and we must proceed to a vote on thisc point,
namely, - whether the representatives of the
Indonesian Republic should be invited to partici:pate in the discussion of the question now before
the Security Council. "
As td the' determination or definition of
sovereignty and· of, the degree of sovereignty
which the Indonesian Republic now possesses, I
think that is not for us to consider. We have
nothing. to do with that. We are not defining
sovereignties now. Sovereignty has several prerogatives; I think the Indonesian Republic may
be enfoying some ,of them and may not be enjoying others, However, the invitation to participate
in this .discussion and to study the problem now
presented t9 the. Security Council does not necessitate that this State should enjoy all the
prerogatives and exercise. all the functions of
sovereignty.. The word "State", which appears
in Article 32, does not -indicate' what type of State
is being referred to.·
..
There are the United States of America and
there is the State of Michigan. The latter has a
~ertai~ atlloUtit of sovereignty. It has sovereignty
In legislation; for instance, the State of Michigan
can make laws, levy-taxation and exercise other
sovereign rights. But in regard to currency Or
foreign representation; it does not have sovereign
rights.
.
. We de not ~ow what prerogi!tives of sovereignty are exerCised by, Indonesia. 'For that reason
I prefer not to go into details in this matter. We
are here t()· restore peace to a troubled area, and
we have started' restoring that peace by adopting,
at the. hund~ed and seventy-third meeting" the
resolutton which appears in document S/459. Now
we consider that the presence of representatives
from In~onesia would be necessary and helpful
for the Just solution of this problem: For that
reason.1 shall pu~ to.the vote only the question of
extenchng a~ mVltatton .to the representatives of
the I~doneslan. Repubhc to appear before the
Secunty CouncIl during the discussion of this

Secretariat qui nous les ferait parvenir 'a. titre
d'information. Je crois que, dans ces conditions,
la question de droit serait reservee; eUe ne serait
prejugee. d'aucune maniere.
Je voudrais revenir encore une .foig. sur
l'importance de cette question et sur ce qu'il y
aurait de facheux a, ce que nous abordions
vraiment une question aussi. grave, que nous
paraissions la trancher d'une maniere quelconque
a l'occasion d'un point qui ne, porte que sur la
procedure, c'est-a:-dire le point de savoir si nous
procederons a des auditions et comment nous y
procederons.
J'ai, au cours d~ la cent-soixante-treizieme
seance, fait des reserves sur la decision qui a
ete prise. Je renouvelle ces reserves, mais je
prends acte egalement, bien entendu, de la decision que le Conseil de securite a prise aucours
de cette meme seance, et c'est pour aider·. le
Conseil a se tirer de la difficulte tres certaiIie
dans laquelle il s'est place que je lui soumets
les suggestions qui me sont venues a l'esprit;
man seul souci est de trouver une porte de sortie
dans une situation difficile.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de· l'anglais):La dis,:
cussion est' terminee et nous devons proceder ~
un vote sur ce point; c'est-a;'dire sur la ques-'
tion de savoir si les representants _de la Re-,
publique d'lndonesie doivent etre invites 'a participer aux debats du Conseit de securite' relatifs
au probleme dont il est maintenant saisi.
Quant a la fac;on de determiner ~u de definir
la souverainete et le degre de souverainete aetuels
de la Republique d'Indonesie, j'es-time que nous
n'avons pas a considerer cette question. Elle
ne 'nous conceme pas. Nous n'avQns pas en Cc
moment a den.nir des souverainetes. La souverainete comprend diffez:entes prerogatives. Il
est ?Qssible que la Republique d'Indonesie jouisse
de certaines d'entre eUes, et soit privee de.certaines autres. Toutefois, l'invitation a participer
a la discussion et a etu<;lier le probleme 40nt le
Conseit de securite est saisi en ce moment n'exige
pas que cet Etat jouisse de toutes les prerogatives et exerce tous les privileges de la souverainete. Le mot "Etat" qui figure a l'Article 32
li'indique pas de quel type d'Etat il s'agit.
Il ya les Efats-Unis d',Amerique et il y a I'Etat
de Michigan. Ce demier possede une certaine
souverainete. Il possMe la souverainete legislative. Par exemple, I'Etat de Michigan promulgue
des lois, leve des impots' et possede d'autres
droits souverains. Mais, en ce qui conceme la
mot;ltlaie ou la representation diplomatique, il ne
possede auetm droit souverain.
Nous 'ignorons quel est le degre de sOl,1verainete
de l'Indonesie. Pour CC motif, je pre£ere ne
pas m'aventurer dans le detaitde cette question.
Nous sommes ici pour retablir la paix dans une
region ou eUe est troubIee, et nous aVOilS commence a retablir cette paix par la resolution
que, nous avons adoptee a la. cent-soixantetreizieme seance et qui figure au document
S./459. Nous considerons maintenant rlue la T:lre'sence de representants. de 'l'Indonesie' serai :i.lecessaire et utile, en -VUe d'Ul1e solution juste de
ce probleme. C'est pourquoi je vais mettre aux
voix uniquement la question de savoir s'il convient d'inviter les representantsde la R-epublique

Cl

aq

qy~t~qn; ~i~Qll.t qlty d~iti()ft 01' det~~inatiQt\ d'JmIQ~~:;ie i!- ~ticipJ~~ a la 4.~~~q~~pn. d~ <;~tt~

Q{ the !lP'ler~~'tJr. o~ th~t :Re.pq1;>1iQ.

l s~Q.tl-ld like tq a;~d. th~t ~p. inV'~t~~~QA to. the
repr~1l~n.t~tiv,es Qf tbe. ~Jl.dmle.sjan ~ePtl-blic tQ
paF1;icipa.te @. th~$, dis~ussioiJ, w<w.ld not hhld

:my Stflte to recogn.ize tl:w iJl.dep~d~l;I,l;;e ()r
S9,veJ;~gI1t.x Qf fu~" I~~n,e"!?Um :R~pt!bl~c, n~
~n..v~t~tio1l, WQl,l1d. be.. ~ep;de.Q; &~1l1P~ in t:;o~ion
witl,l, the work of the ~eG~ity" c;Qu1l,dJ.. Eve.Q".
State wQ,u,ld h~ve c;QIQ.p!e.te liber-ty e.ither 1;Q
recognize or not to recognize the sovereignty Q.!
independence of the Indonesian ~epublic. We
are. not now di~cussing" the admIssIon o£ the
Indonesian Republic .to membership· in the
United Nations i we are simply discussing an
invitation to- the Fepresenta:tives' of the Republic
to pam:cipate in the discussian of the. matter.
before the Council. We shall now vote on the
question of inviting the representaHves Q-T the
In,donesian Republic on the basis' which I have
indicated.

A vote was taken by show of hands. The propasal was ..ad(),p,ted' by. 8' VOte-of to 3.
Votes for: Australia, Brazil, China, Colombia,
Pola.nd;, Syria, Union of Soviet Socialist R.epub~
lies-, Ultlited States of America.
~Qtes agaitzst: Belgi1J1l1, France, United
Ningdom. .
"
The PREsIDENT'; I consider this to be a proaedtn"al p@int and I thcl'efo,1!€ declare the pJIoPQsal
adop.1!e-d.
"
.

.

'\

'- I shall now ask the Assistant: Secretary-Geneval
to read the credentials which have· been~submitted.

. lV,fr. ~~NQ (!\ssist~nt Secret!U'y-~eneral in
. charge; of; :J;.ega~ Affairs).: The $ecreb\riat ha:;
bee~ shown, flie ori~J o~ Cl dQcqr.nent signed by
1\411. $'oekarP9. Pi~sid~nt o{ the :Repulllic. o~
I"nqxlll.esia, appomting' Mr. Soe~n $jahrir Ambass~or-at-l~ige of t}1e R~pqblic of" Indonesia.
In aeear4an~e 'witb: ~e ruJ<es of procedure, th~
See-l'~~llY-Qe~eml will st$mi1ia: report OIl; these
credentials at the next meeting af' the Se~rity
Councit
Th~ P1Q!:SJP~NT: I hope that the Secretary~.et;llt wUl als\) e~te~ an. invitati(ln to. the
r~p.J1§~t3:t~v~; of tbe· Republic of Illdonesia to
l!P~~r·~t 1!JJe n~ UlQettng of· the SecU1'i~
G9qg.~U, whj~ will be held On Thursday" 104Augq&t, ~t- 3 p.w·
.
Mr. ~N Kr.E¥PENS (Nethelilands),: To lreep
the record quite 'Cle3lr. 1 want t@ pomt out that
l rl!~s~ ~Q. objec~Qp. at a;11. t9 1h.~ 4~,ci:;lon Which
hl!s J~$l beeJi tak.en by, th~ CautlC.lh smce the
PreEl~q~n1: M$ m.!!d~ it c;:lear th~t the decls.ion w~
talc~n. withQ~t prejqQ.j~~ of ~y$oct w.td ~t i~
w~s nQt Qa,$eq o~ Arti<;l~ 3~ of tbct Charte1," or
rule, 39 o~ t4e nt1es of. prQ~~dure. l do not. wish
to. W!g the. Repqplk of lnqQPesi~ or to prevtmt
it from givin.g illf.:qr~atiml. her~ amI. presentm,g.
its 1?owt of vi.ew. What ~h~ve h~en. concerned
with al.l al~ng is ~er6ly 1:he correGt appijcaJion of
the Cp::,l.Fte.r ~Q; ~e.n~rIilJ, ~4.~rticqll:\rly ID respect
of the Rept,tbh c of Ind.QAesIa..

question au sein du Conseil de securite, ~lilI1~
aucune definition ou qualification de la sou-ver<;linete de cette Republique.
Je vQ"dJ;aisajQ:~l;t~+ qtrtp;l.e ir,l:vit.a~ipn a,Q,resl>ee
<t,1,t).C; r~J?re!'len~l!At~ de la, R<fp"Q.Qliq.ue. d'IndQn.~$ie
i!. pa,rt;ic;iper l~ <Us~US,$~QIj n'oQli.geJ;a,it al,Wtm
Etq.t ~ ~e~(:mnaJtre l'in~peIl,4.an~e QU la S01,1v.~ra~~~~ <le. ~ ~~publiqp~ I fhlqQnesie. L'in,.,
VlW,tI011l s~nut lanGee {!\1 e~d un.,~qt,t~ment q,WC
travaux du €onseil de securite. Chaque Etat
serait completement libre de reconnaitre Oll '"d~
ne pas reconnaitre la souverainete 0:1 l'inde1?end~nce d~ la Republique 4'In.don,esi.e.. N ous
ne dIscutans pas en ce moment 1""ad!nIssI0n de la
Repqblique d:':Pndonesie a POrganisation ~es Natiens Uni:es; naus discutans simplement l~envqi
d'ltne invItation aux l'epi'esentants de la Republiq1:1e, en vue de leur participation a la di!?cussion
de la question au sein· du ConseU. N01:1s alIons
voter maintenant SUi' la question de }.linvitation
agressel.' au:~ represenmnt-s de la Republique
,d''Indonesie 8uivant les pvincipes que je viens
d'exposer.
11 est procede au vote a main levee. Par 8 vois
vQntre 3:, la-, pr,(J.po.~itiQn e-sfl adoPt-M.
Votent pour: Australie, Br-asH, Chine, Co.
lombic, Pologne, Syrie, Union d~s Repu1:)liqUllS
sociaHstes sovietiques, Etats-U1n~s' d~Amerique.
"'70tent coittre: Belgique, France, R:oyatJmeUni.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je con&idere· qU'll s'agit d!une qu.€j~~iQn 41:1 p~o.cedure,
et: j~ deela.1ie, en qons~qu~n~e" qu,e llil prQpos;itiQTh
est adopt-ee.
Ye prie maintenan~ Monsieur re Secretaire ge~er.al, adjoint de donner l'ectu~e des letWes de
creance pn!sentees.
M. KE.RNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge
des q\1estions Ju.ridiques}(trdduit' a.t' Panglais/:.
Le Secretariat a eiCahiine Itoriginal d~'lln" dbeument signe par M. $"oekarno, P1'esiqent de la
R~pub.lique (rrnd'Qne~ie, nQwmallt M. "Sbe~
Sj'ahrir AmbassiJ,d~ur e~traordi~aire de la Republique dJ Illdon.esie. Gonforme11,1cnt au reglem'ent interieur, le Secreta.i~e gen~rak presentera,
un rapport sur ces l'ettres de crl%nce a la prochaine seance du Conseil de securite.
Ir.e PJiEsl:DENI]' (1rad'Uit d~ I~'anglai$)': }'espere
que le Seclietaille generall inv:Itera. tlgatement les
repl'esentants de la R,epubliqu£ dllndonesie
assi:;ten a la p:t:ochaine schncedu Conseil de securiM, qui se t-iendra le jeudi t4: aoftt-li·l:S htlulles,

a

j

a.

a

M.VAN ·K!.EFFENs (Pays-Bas} (t-raduit d~
I'anglais): Afin que le proces-verbal soit e~act,
je dC$ire souligne,r qpe j(l n'61~v.e auct,tne objection <;ontJie la decisiQO, qu.i vitwt d'etre prise pal'
le Conseil, pt~i~que le P.r~sident a pr6ciseque
la decision etait prise sans a.ucun prejlHiice dtau,cune sorte, et qu'elle n'est' pas fondee sur
l' Article 32 de la Charte, ni sur Fax-ticle 39 du
reglement i~t~rieur. Je ne de$ire pa$ Millpnner
la Reptl-bHque d'lndonesie. ni .l'em:p(kher d~ no"s
donner des renseigrtements et de preflenter son
point de vue (' "\ui m'a preocc1,tpe tput au long
de la d j - ' · -, simplement Fapplication
"une Ir:\lilniere, g~oerale,
correcte
et en C~
Republique d'Indonesie
. en pantic

--4

1941
I have;:, only ot;l.~ reserva#QIJ, to ma.k,~, ap4 th?~
rese:t,"V::j.t~~n COI;tceqls the, fact, that lV,[J:. S J,ah.(~r
will be, acc~pteQ. her~ as Aml;>a,s~a,dol'. I ,do. not
thit;1k'that the Stat~ of Michi~an whiGh,. t1;le Pres~­
dent has, j,1,tst mentioned,. has arp.passaders, 0);" that
any StCJ.te' cQmpal,"abk wIth; the Rei?ubhc of IndQnesia hi).S: amp<1.ssadors. lA! tbat resp~et, th,eI:efqI:e,
I nW,st m,,*~ C). purely form,a.l, but exwess reser~q.,tiou..
I s1;IQuld' alsQ like to reserve for d~le~tion~
represl:l.nting the StaJes of E<1.st lndol;l~SI~t CJ.nd
Borneo tfie right, to, expres,s their vi.ews. :rh-ey are
QII; their way her~, and :( aro, very a~Q1,1S th;tt
they should be heard at the same" tt.n,e as ~~'
Tepre?,eij.tagves, o~ t):te ~e1?u91iq o! l1j1done~la.
I (io not w~}J.~ to See a SItuatIOn, anse 11]. ~hIch
the·Eoip.t Q~ 'View exPressed 1:lY th.e 4ele~(lt~QJ,1 of
t)I~' R.epubHc of In40uesia wouJ.4 not at 0Ilce
fi,1].~, its ,cQl1U!-e;:rp~t In staJeme,I;lts by the !el?resenta,tives. of Its SIster Stat<~s, East IndoneSIa Cl,n,d
B'~meo. 'The gentlemen representing the latter
two States are on their way, as I h::J.ve said; and
I have every hape that they wi1~ arrive in. New
Y'0rlo on Thursday or F~iday. I must very
earnestly urge that, for the sake of impartiality,
the Cmtncil sho1}lq. not take uP this, questio.n until
these t,wo. delegations have arrived, They q,:re
usi1:t~ e;:very pOss,i,bl~ di!!pa.tclt. l3ecause of the
ha,zards o£ ~ir tra.:vel, howe'Vel', I caunQt sgy
with certaiI;lty wh~ther th~y will be here on
Thu,rscday, 01' wi,U not a.n:ive Ul,1,til f:t:i:day.
The PRESIDENT;' Are there hostilities in
Borneo and East Indo,nesia, or is peace still
reigning there r

I

J,e',11-'a,i, .qU~une, r,esel'v"e

a,

,fo":rm1J.ler.,, et c"elbci,

~onc-tirn,fi': le fait qlJ~ M. S.jallI;\r ser:a a.Wni~ ic~

l;o1I1m~ .&l'1}ba~s..ac;leqr. le ne croj~ 1?a~ qUe rE41t
d~ ~ichJg,m~, dqnt le Presicle.nt vient de P¥t~r,
q~'a.?~u~, ~J~t c01lJ.1?~ra1:lle ~ la R~pu.Q),i9.ue

Q?

d l.nq(>U,esIe, po~~~dent 4es arnhass~deu;1's. qe;:st
pouXqllQi ie dojs; £oJ:1lil,uler a. ce 1?tJj~t d~s re,seJ;ves
de J?~r~ forme, [l1;;ti,s des, Fes,erv:es eX;J?xesses.

Je voudrais egalt1ment reserver aux deMgation~
repres,ent<U,lt les Etats de 1:'I'ndonesie orientale et
de Borneo le droi.t de presenter leuTs point~ de
vues. EUes sont en route en ce moment, et je
desire vivement qu'eUes soient entendues en
ltil~I]1,e ~~r.pps qqe l~s re.J?resent~n~s Q~ If!. ReI?ubUqu.~ d:In,QOI!~§i~. le. l,lC ~Qu{ixais, pa,s ~\1'~ !!1tt,t,atip~'J, se prese,nta,t 0\1 l~ poiJ1t <le' vue expd,t;I,J,e
P~t: I~. d~legaJiQh, d~, l~ :Re.P.1!Qliqq~ d~:{ndop.,e~*~
lJ,e troU;\7;et:~jt Pq,~ s~. con,trepa.rti.e;: 'daus. les d~,cJa,"
ratio,ns des representants des Etats frere(>J, l'lJ;1,donesie orientale et Borneo.' Les represetitants
de ces demx derni,eIls Etats sonl! en· route, camme
j~ Fai dit, et j'ai. tout lieu de <lroire· qu'ils ar-riveront New.-York jeudi om, vendredi. J'insiste particulieTement pour que, en toute itnpartialite, le
Cqn,s,eU t¥aporde p~s' c~tt-e questiq1]. axal}~ I:at;ri:vee
de eeS, de1l4 d#~ga,t~ons:. EUes, util~seIlt les, mOY-e11$
le.s plus rapides.' ~tl ra.isQn d~s ip.ce.rtitu{ie~ d.u
voyage ~eJ;i~Il;, j,e ne pills, toutefois affirmer si
eUes, pe.\l.Veij.t etre ic\ jeud\ ou si elIes ne ~uvent
arr~v~rax~nt VeJ;ld.l1ed,i.
Le PRESIDEN'T (tr,q4uit. de l.~nglaisJ: Des
h(i)stilites sont.,elles eilga:gees,
Borue.o. et ~n
Indonesie or.ientale, ou la paix l'egne+eUe encore
dans ces territoires?

a

a

Mr. VAN KLEFFENS (Netherlands): There are
no hostilities in those two States:. F-Iowevel1, ~ey
have word to say on this entire m.atter, he<;ause
it affeG~S them very, deeply.

M. VAN KLEFFENS (Pays-Bas) (traduit de
l'anglai:s): n n'y a pas c;L'hostilites dans ce& deux

Mr. G~OMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from R:l!ssian): Mr. van
Kleffens is. not ent,it'led to interpret the Security
Council's dedsions. Such interpretations may be
given by the Council itself and only by the Council. PersouaUy, I voted in favour of inviting the
representatives of the Government of the IndoI nesian Republic with Article' 32 of the Cha.rter
in mind. I was guided in that matter by no other
cQnsidel'ati9ns.
Mr. NISOT (Belgium)
(trans'ated from
French) : I do I;lot thirik tb,at the Security Council
can use two di~erent stan!1ards of judgment. If,
for reasons of equity, it has seen fit to invite
the representatives of the Indonesian Republic,
I do not think it can refuse to invite the representatives of East Indonesia and Borneo too.' l
therefore, propose that that should be done.

:M;. GROMYKO (Union d'es Republiques socialistes s.ovietiques) (trad.uit d.'l4 russe): It n'appartient
pas a, M. va,n Kle:ffen~ d'inte{preter les deci~ioIls
du Conseil de securite. Seulle Conseillui-meme
J?eut'les interJ?reter. En ce qui meconcert:te; \or~­
que j'ai vote en faveu:r de l'inyitation qes represep.tani.s <tu GOUYerneD,lent de IF!- ReJ?ublique d'Indonesie, je tenais compte de l'Arttcle 32 de la
Charte. Je ne m'inspirais d'aucune autre con!!id~ra#Oll.
.

.The PRESIDENT ~ The prOpOsal which was subml~te~ to'the Security CoUncil was adopteq. on the
prlll~lI!les which I have already stated. We ar-e
not gomg to give new explanations and interpretations of it.
.

Le, P~E~ID)i:~'.r (traduit de l"att,glais.J: L~ prOYosition sotiIllise a.u CQu,seU de s6cu,rite ;\ ~te ~4opt~e
suivant les p"inci?es que j'ai deja exposes. N ous
ne nous lancerons pas dans de nouvellts explicason propos.
tions et interpretations

Mr. R;AT~-SU(;:~Y (Poland): With re~d tQ
, the reservatIon whIch has been made by Mr. van
Kleffen.s~ I understa.nd it wa; ;;.. ,'eservation made
~>n Rehal~ of ~is delegation [.tJ.d that' it is not
the tnterpretatlOn o~ the Council. To make the
record clear, I W~l.Ut to pcir~ out that the Polish

M. ~TZ-SVCHY (Pologntl) (traduiit tie
l'anglaisJ: Au' sujet de la reser:ve f~ite P~L' M.

a

__-

IIII-.~

Etats. Toute£ois, its ont un. mot; a. dIre sur 1'00semble de oette question, parce qu'i1s y sont tr.es
s~rieusement interesses.

M. NISOT (Belgique): Je Gi.\Qj~ qq~ l~ Conseil
de secu,ritene pf;\.1tpa~ avc;>ir ctetlfC J?oid s et deux
mesures. Si, pOut Ms raispns d' equite, il a estime
devoir inviter les reJ;)f(~sent.ants de la Republique
d!Indonesie, il ne J?eut pas, mon sens, s'abstenir
d'inyiter egalernent les' rel?resentants de l'IncioIl~sie orieritale et de Borneo. Je propose donc
'..
qu'il en soit ainsi.

a

a

va~ :«le:ffeJ;1s, je conslqeJ;e qu'eUe a ete forrpulee

aLl nom de sa delcg'C!-tion (It qu,'il ne s'agit P,qs
d'une interpr~tatipn de let p<l-rt' du Cons.eil. POll1"
eviter to.it m~lentendu, je desire sOl,iligner qJ,1e

ac<:otdanc:942~.

po~nais. p,..;~teune:'Opo-'

dele'gaticin sn1fulitted a prdposal in
delegation
a.
with the .spirit and the letter of Article 32 of sltlOn conforme a ·l'espnt et a· la lettrede
the Chartet and no other Article. We cannot· l'Artkle 32 de la Charte, d'aucun autre Article.
issue invitations without the authority of an' Nous ne pouvons adresser de"S' invitations sans·
article., We have to base ourselves either on y etre autorises par un article. Nous devons nons
Article 32 of the Charter or on rule 39 of the fonder, soit surl'Article 32 de la Charte, soit
rules ofprocedur-e. The rules of procedure pro- sur l'article 39 du reglement interieur. Le reglevide that the SectU-ityCouncil may invite persons ment int~rieur stipule que le Conseil de securite
or members of the Secretariat. We did not invite peut inviter des personnes ou des membres du
persons; we invited the representatives. of a Secretariat. Nous n'avons invite aucune perGovernment, of a State. I am pointing this out sonne. Not~s avons invite les representants d'un
simply for the sakt: of the record.
Gouvernement, d'u-11 Etat. Si' je souligne ceci,
c'est uniquement .par soud de la redaction du
proces-verbal.
Le colonel HooosoN (Australie) (traduit de
Colonel HODGSON (Australia): I merely wish
to ask a question· of the President or; with his I'anglais): Je desire poser une slmpXe question
permission, of the' representative of the Nether- au President ou, s'i! le permet" poser cette ques_Jands. I am seeking some information, as we !!lay tion au representant des Pays-Bas. Je desire me
have a discussion on this question -at the next . renseigner, puisqu'il est possible que nous ayons
meeting.
.
une discussion a. ce sujet a. la pr-ochaine seance.
Voici la question: y a-t-il un Gouvernement
The question i~ this: Has any qove~ent in
the world recogtuzed de facto J de Jure or In any dans le monde qui ait· reCOlmu de facto, de jure
other way.· either of the two Governments re- ou d'une maniere quelcorique, l'un ou l'autre des
deux Gouvernements en question?
,ferred to?
.. Mr. VAN KLEFFn-s (Netherlands): My reply
M. VAN KLEFFENS (Pays-Bas) (traduit de
is that,so far asI k )w, these Governments have l'anglais): Je reponds que, autant que je sache,
\ been recognized by the Netherlands Government ces Gouvemements on ete reconnus par le Goufor what they are, namely, Governments which vernement des Pays-Bas pour ce qu'ils sont en
,are on eXactly the same level as the Republic of realite, c'est-a.-dire· des Gouvernements qui se
. Indonesia. If they have not been rec()gnized as trouvent exactement sur le meme pied que la
such by anyone else, that is only because no Republiq~e d'Indonesie. Si personne d'autre ne
opportunity has arisen as yet. However; that , les a reconnus pour tels, c'est uniquement parce
does not ·1.!rec1ude them from· being recognized que, jusqu'a present, 1'0ccasion ne s'en est pas·
, as such by anyone else.
presentee. Toutefois, cela ne les empeche pas
d'etre reconnus pour te1s par quitonque.
~ sub~it . that the' question . raised· by the
Je pretends que la question ,;oul~vee par le
Australian representative is completely beside the representant de i Australie s'ecartc complet~ment
point. What is at issue-and that is the position du sujet. ,Le fait est - et c'est ainsi que je c.omof the Council to my understanding~is that any- prends l'attitude du Conseil - que le Conseil
one will be heard by·the Council whose testimony entendra quiconqu~· est en mesure de produire
is of value to it in arrivmg at a conclusion. There un temoignage qui lui permettrait d'arriver a
is not the slightest doubt tlw.t tht:se States, which une conclusion. I1 n'y a pas lemoindre doute
are to be .associated with the Republic of I1.tdo- que ces Etats, qui seront associes a. la: Republique
nesia in what ultimately will be the United States d'Indonesie pour constituer ,finalement les Etatsof Indonesia, have a major interest in being· Unis d'Indonesie, ont un interet superieur.3.heard:md havejust·asmuch ~'ight to present thei~ faire entendre leut voixet ont le droit de prepoints of view as .has' the Republic of Indonesia. senter leur point de vue auss'i bien que la Republique d'Indonesie.
'
M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (tra-:Mr. JOHNSON' (United States oI' America) :
I think it is regrettable that this. discussion has duit de l' anglais): A mon sens, il est re.grettable
arisen at <ill.' While.•I do not pretend for. one que· cette discussion. ait surgi. Bien que je ne
moment to speak for the Council,. I consi4er that pretende pas. UT' seul ins~antpar1er at! riom du
each member of the COuncil· has the right to Conseil, j'estime que chaque· membre du Conseil
'express his views ; and that tho!>e views represent a le droit d'exprimer son point de vue et que·
the views of Ms Government unless they are re- ce point de vue constitue l'opinion de son Goupudiated by his Government. The President alone vernement, a moins qu'il ne soit desavoue par ce
can express the vkwsof the Council; and. his Gouvernement. Mais le President peut seul
statements repre~entthe views of the:. ,Council· exprimer le point de yue. <111 Oot1seil. Et ses deunless they are challenged by a member.. I think, clarations constituent l'opinion du Conseil, a.
th~refore" that we co~Id leave it at t!tat.
, moins qu'elles nesoient contestees pa.r un mem. bre. C'est PQurquoi j'estime que nous pouvons
7:',0118 (>,' tenir ~ ~ela.
.
.;c,.:L,~
quP.
le
representant
de
la
pologne,
I think that the. representative of Poland,
when he said he had Article· 32 of the Charter in lo:rsq::t'il .dit qu'il a en vue l'Article 32 de la
mind,. meant only that and nothing. else. That Charte, vent dire cela, et rien d'autre. Cela
did not bind anybody; it was merely an expres- , n'engage personne.•C'est simplement ,l'expression
sion of his view. The. President, 'in his .sum- de sapensee. ~Preside1.1t a exprime exactemarizatiQn,. accurately 'expressed the views of the' mt:nt i'opinion du, Conseil dans son· resume des '
Council. There arc grave; seriousa.n4 important dehats. 'L'affaire- a ·l'etude- pose- des·problemes '

J

!

...

1943 .
legal ql1estio~s involved- here. If one ;nember of

juridiques graves, seneux et importants. 'Si un
membre du Conseil declare' que ces problemes
juridiques n'ont pas d'importance ou ontete
indirectement resolus par le fait que nous avons
invite la' Republique d'Indonesie a envoyer des
representants id, cela ne signifie rien. d'autre
que l'expression de son point de vue personnel,
parce. qu'une reserve est une reserve; nous ne
prenons aucune decision- ,ma delegation ne
prend 'aucune decision - an sujet des prob~emes
juridiques. Nous voulons et:re equitables, sans
plus, vis-a.-vis des representants d'un pays de
l'Asie orientale ou se livrent des combats.
The PRESIDENT: The Belgian representative
Le P~SIDENT (traduit de I'anglai...,,): Le repreha~ asked that the suggestion of the representa-, sentant de la Belgique a ~emande que la propo~
tive of the 1'fetherlands shoul!! be a~cepted, that sition du representant d.es Pays-Bas soit acceptee,
i~ to say, that the representatives of "East Indoc'est-a-dire que les representants de I'Indonesie
nesia and Borneo should be invited to take part. orientale et de Borneo soient invites a participer
in our discussions. This is the matter that now a nos discussions. Viola la question que nous
remains for us to decide.. As the representative devons trancher maintenant. Pnisque .le repre"
of Belgium has made the request, we have to sentant de la Belgique a formule cettedemande,
discuss this matter. It comes under Article 32 of nous devons discuter la question. Elle tombe sous
the Charter, which states: "Any Member of the l'applicationde l'Article 32 de la Charte qui
United Nations which' is not a member of the stipule: "Tout Membre des Nations Unies qui
Security Council or any State ~hi'ch is not a n'est pas membre du Conseil de securite ou tout
Member of the United Nations, if it is a party Etat qui n'est pas Membre des Nations Unies,
to a dispute under consideration by the Security s'il est partiea un differelld examine par le
Council, shall be invited to participate without Conseil de securite, est convie a participer, ~sans
vote, in the discussion relating to the disputl!." droit de vote, aux discussions relatives a ce
differend".
I asked whether Eastern Indonesia and Borneo
J'ai demande si l'Indonesie orierltale et Bl)rneo
are parties to this dispute, and whether there is· sont parties a ce differends et si, oui ou nons, des
fighting· in Eastern Indonesia or not, in order combats se deroulent dans l'Indonesie orientale,
that we might be able to discuss this matter or de maniere que ,nous puissions examiner cette
at least to fonnulate some opinion about it. I question ou, au moins, emettre certains avis a
understand that no fighting is taking place there. son sujet. J e crois comprel1dre qu'il ne s'y livre
We were' involved in the Indonesian questif>n pas de combats. Nous nous occupons de la quesbecause of the actual fighting which was going tion indonesienne en "aison des hostilites qui se
on in Java and Sumatra.
, deroulent effectivement a Java et a Suniatra.
Mr. NISOT (Belgium) (translated from
M. NISOT (Belgique): Lor.sque nous avons
French): When we took our decision regarding pris notre decision en ce qui concerrte l'invitation
the lnvilation to be sent to the Indonesian Repub- a adresser a la Republique d'Indonesie, j'avais a
lic, I understood that this decision was not taken l'esprit que cette. decision n'etait pas prise sur
under Article 32 of the Charter. We therefore la base de I'Article 32 de la Charte. Nous avons
deliberately reserved the question.
donc expressement reserve la question.
I suggest that we invite the representatives of
Je suggere d'inviter les representants de I'InEast Indonesia and B.omeo on the very same donesie orientale et de Borneo exactement d'apres
grounds which served as a basis for the decision le meme principe qui a servi de, base ir la decisi?n
taken regarding .the Indonesian Republic.
prise rclativement a la Republique d'Indones1e.
The PRESIDENT: I shall put the question to a
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I' anglais): Je mets'
vote as the representative of Belgium has la question aux voix comme le representant de
suggested.
la Be1gique l'a demande.
Colonel HOD(iSON (Austrdia): 1 wish to speak
Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (tmduit de
on a point of order. There is aiready before the l'anglais) : Je desire presenter une motion •.
Council an application from, the Philippines to d'ordre. Le Conseil est deja saisi d'une demande
participate in the discussion of t.~e Indonesian des Philippines de participer a la discussion de
question; that issue was raised prior to this la question indonesienne; cette demande a. ete
matter. The Australian delegation feels that a soumise au Conseil avant que surgisse la question
vote should be taken on the application of the qui nous occupe. La delegation de l'Australie
Philippines before a vote is taken on the invita- estime que la demande des Philippines devrait
tion to East Indonesia and Borneo, or that con- etre mise aux voix avant l'invitation a adresser
sideration of the latter question should be a l'Indonesie orientale et a Borneo, ou que ce
deferred ~ince the result of the first vote would dernier 5ujet soit differe, parce que le resultat
certainly affect rr.y delegation's position.
du premier' scrutin aurait certainement une influ.e._ce sur la position.
. .!n the opinion of the Australian delegationLa delegation de l'Australie - c'est urie ques·,
1t 1S a question of degree-the Philippines have tion de, degre d'appreciation-estimf; que les Philalmost. as direct a concern in this dispute as 4as ippines ont presque autant d'intere,~s que Borneo
.Borneo. Therefore if the Council rejected t.":le dans ce differend. C'est pourquoi, si ·le Conseil

hr

the Councilsays that those legal questions do not
matter or have been solved indirectly 1:>Y the fa~t
that we have. il1vited the Republic of Indones1a
to send representa,tives here, that is no~ing, more
than an expression of his p~sonalviews. because
a reservation i~ a .reserva\ion~nd .we are !lot
taking any decis10ns-:-~y. delegatio~ 1S not takmg
any decisions--o.n Jund1cal ques1:lons: We. are
-trying to be fall'. to the repre~en~t1ve~ of a
country in east AS1a where fightmg 1S gomg on,
nothing more.

j

I

lljipl1catill. of -lh.

Phi1i >i>~. ilh<>uldllllV'~~'j.t\e t~
w.

dem:mde lk,

~i>i>irt.S'.OU'd"'~

!:pnsiqet 'otrf' ,attlt'Ud~. regarding .atl ~ii'vitati.on. to. a la lumiete #~ .cette decisibn,eXarr1in~r' quell~.'
East, Indonesia ahd Bb'r'i:ieo tu the light Of that ' ~ei'a 1lotte ~tti*de ente qui 'cbncethe l'invfiUt
de'dslon.·
tron d~ l'Itrdoiie-sle titietitille et 'de B'Orneo. 1
Th>e P~SIDEN'1': I under-starid that it is pr,?~
Le PR~SIDENT (triuJuit,de l'anglais): Jecrois
pased ~y the {'ep!"es~tative '~f Australia that, comprendre qu~ 'lerepresen~nt qe l'Austrilie '
the .request of t~e Philippines shoUld be 'voted oh propose que lademande des Philippif:1es soit mise
now. Does he ask that?
auoc vcnoc m9,intenant. C'est bien ce qu'il deniimde? .
COlbtrel Hooostl~ '(AustftMia): Nu, I thiflk i~
Le ~blG".el H~DGSON (Ati~tra1ie) (t1'oouit 'd~
'shoUld 'be tonsidf!ted :at, 'the n~xt meeting. I .t'llnllllii:r1: .N'O~. J-e crl:)i'S 9u'i1'·!audraite~fI1iner I
'theref.ate mG've nOW for the ~djou1"mn-ent of th-e cette questlOn a la prochame seance. C'est PO\1T"1
debate.
quoi je propose de lever la seance.
,The PMSID~N'r·: That is What Ipr<1lp'l1lse ta'do.
Le PirE-5IDENT (tt'oouit de l'ooglais): C'est ce
que le propose egalein'ent.
The meefing rose at 6:50 '{J.in.
La seance est iev4e a18 h. 50.

I

.. (

.t~ . ,

"

"

SALES AGENTS OF THE UNITED NATIONS' PUBLICATIONS
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES

I ARGENTINA-,-ARGENtINE
.

Editorial Sudamerlcana S.A.
AIsina 500

BUEN9SAmES

AUSTRALlA-AUSTRALIE
H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
SYDNEY, N. S. W.
BELGIUM-BELGIQU~

Agence et Messagerles de la
Presse, S. A. '
14·22 rue du Pelsi!
BRUXELLES

BOllVIA-BOllVIE
Libreria Cieutffica y Literaria
Avenida. 16 de JOOo,216
Casilla 972
LA PAZ

CANADA
The Ryersou Press
299 Queen Street West
TORONTO

CHILE-CHill
Edmundo Pizarro
Merced 846
SANTIAGO
'The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road
SHANGHAI

COLOMBIA-COlOMBIE
Lihrerin Latina Ltda.
Apartado Aereo 4011
.BOGOTA

COSTA RICA-COSTA-RICA
Trejos Hermanos
Apartado 1313
SAN JosE

":E;Ieftheroudakis"
Libtairie internationale
Place de la Constitution
ATHENES

GUATEMALA
Jose Goubaud
Gouhaud & Cia. Ltda.
Sucesor
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
GUATEMALA

HAITI
Max Bouchereau'
Librairie "A la Caravelle"
Boite postaIe 111-B
PORT-AU-PRINCE
BokaverzIun Sigfusar Eymundsonnar
Austurstreti 18
REYKJAVIK

INDiA-INDE
Oxford Book & StatioBery Company
Scindia House
NEwDELm

IRAN
Bongahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue
TEHERAN

LEBANON-LlBAN

CZECHOSLOVAKIATCHECOSLOVAQUIE
.

DENMARK-DANEMARK
Einar Munksgaard
N9$rregade 6
K,7JBENHAVN

DOMINICAN REPUBLICREPUBlIQUE DOMINICAINE
Lihreria Dominicllua
CsUe Mercedes No. 49
.
Apartado 656
CiUDAD TgY.JILLO

ECUADO~-EQUATEUR

Muiioz. HerDlanos y Cia.
Nueve de Octubre 703
Casilla 10·24
GUFIAQUIL

I:GYPT-EGYPTE
Librairie "La Renaissance d'Egypte"
9 Sh. AdIy Pasn2
CAffiO

ETHIOPIA-ETHIOPIE
Agence etliiopienne de publicite

P • ted in the U.s~

GREECE-GREeE

Mackenzie & Mackenzie .
the Bookshop
BAGHDAD

La Casa BeIga
Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
LA lIABANA

P.O. Box 8

Editions A. Pedone
13, rue SoufHot
PARIS, Ve

IRAQ-IRAK

CUBA

ADDIS·ABEBA

FRANCE

ICELAND-ISLANDE

CHINA-CHINE

F. Topic
Narodni Trlda 9
PRAHA1

FINLANn..-FlNL4NDE
Akateemmen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu
HELSINKI

Librairle universelle
BEYROUTH

LUXEMBOURG
Librairie J. Schummer
Place Guillallme
LUXEMBOURG
NETHERLANDS-PAYS~BAS

N. V. Marunus' Nijhoff
Lange Voorhout 9
'S·GRAVENHAGE

NEW ZEALAND.-NO.UV.ilLE-ZELANDE
Cordon & Gotch, Ltd.
Warlng Taylor Street
WELLINGTON
Unitt'd Nations Association of
NewZeaIand

P. O. 1.011, G.P.O.
WELLINGTON

NICARAGUA
Ramiro Ramirez V.
Agenda. de Publicl1ciones
MANAGUA, D. N.

NORWAY-NORVEGE
Johan Grundt Tanum Forlag
Kr. Augustgt. 7A
OSLO

Price in the U.S.A.: 50 cents

PERU-PEROU
Libreria internacional del Peru,
S.A.
Casilla 1417
LIMA

PHILIPPINES
D~ P. Perez Co.

132 Riverside
. ~AN JUAN, IbzAr.

POLAND-POLOGNE
Spotdzielna Wydawnicza
"Czytelnik"
38 Poznanska
WAIlSZAWA
"

SWEDEN-SUEDE
A;·B. C. E. Fritzes Kongl.
HofhokhandeI
Fredsgatan 2
STOCKHOLM

SWITZERLAND-SUISSE
Librairie Payot S; A.
LAUSANNE, GENEVE, VEVEY,
MONTREUX, NEUCHATEL,
BERNE, BASEL
Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 17
ZURICH I

SYRIA-SYRIE
Librairie universelle
DAMAS

TURKEv.-TURQUIE
Librairle 'Hachette
469 IstikIal Caddesi
BEYOGLU-IsTANBUL

UNION OF SOUTH AFRICAUINION SUD-AFRICAINE
Central News Agency
Commissioner & Rissik Sts.
JOHANNESBURG and at CAPE'fOWN
and DURBAN

UNITED KINGDOMROYAUME-UNI
H. M. Stationery Office
P. O. Box 569
LONDON, S.E. 1
.and at H.M.S.O. Shops in
LONDON, EDINBURGH, MANCHESTER.
CARDIFF, BELFAST, BIRMINGHAM
and BRISTOL
'

UNITED STATES OF AMERICAETATS·UNIS D'AMERIQUE
International Documents Service
Columbia University'Press
2960 Broadway
NEW YORK 27, N. Y.

URUGUAY
Oficina de Representaci6n de
Editorlales
Av. 18 de JuIio 1333 Esc. 1
MONTEVIDEO

VENEZUELA
Escritoria Perez Machado
Conde a Piiiango 11 '
CARACAS

YUGOSLAVIA-YOUGO$LAVIE
Drzavno Preduzece
Jugoslovenska Knjiga
Moskovska U1. 36
BEOGRAD

[49&1

March 1949-,30
