S/PV.7821

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7821st meeting

Wednesday, 30 November 2016, 9 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Seck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Senegal)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mrs. Carrión
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-40713 (E)
*1640713*

S/PV.7821

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2321 (2016).

The meeting was called to order at 9.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro, Morocco,
the Netherlands, Norway, Peru, the Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Sweden, the Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Turkey to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2016/999, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United States of America
and Uruguay.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
2/14

30/11/2016

I now give the floor to His Excellency the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: The Security Council has
today taken strong action on one of the most enduring
and pressing peace and security challenges of our
time — the nuclear and ballistic missile activities of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. I welcome
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2321 (2016).
Maintaining such unity is crucial to tackling security
challenges on the Korean peninsula and beyond.
The Council first adopted a resolution on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea nuclear issue
in 1993 (resolution 825 (1993)). Twenty-three years
and six sanctions resolutions later, the challenge
persists. This time, the Council has taken longer than
ever before — nearly three months — in responding
to a nuclear test by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, the fifth such act. The time taken to reach
agreement on the resolution vividly illustrates the
complex nature of the challenge.
This year, the Council has met on nine occasions
in emergency consultations in response to nuclear
tests and ballistic missile activities of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. This is an unprecedentedly
high number. Since January, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has conducted two nuclear tests and
at least 25 launches using ballistic missile technology,
including launches of a satellite, submarine-launched
ballistic missiles, and medium- and intermediate-range
ballistic missiles. We must assume that, with each
test or launch, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea continues to make technological advances
in its pursuit of a military nuclear capability. The
increase in and nature of these activities pose an ever
growing threat to regional security and the global
non-proliferation regime.
Today’s resolution includes the toughest and most
comprehensive sanctions regime ever imposed by the
Security Council. It sends an unequivocal message that
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must cease
further provocative actions and comply fully with its
international obligations. Targeted sanctions matter.
Security Council sanctions represent the clear and
unified will of the international community.
16-40713

30/11/2016

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Yet sanctions are only as effective as their
implementation. It is incumbent on all States Members
of the United Nations to make every effort to ensure
that these sanctions are fully implemented. Some
States may have difficulty translating sanctions into
their national regulatory regimes. Others may lack
the capacity to enforce them within their territories.
That is why we need international partnerships for
capacity-building. Sanctions should be anchored in a
comprehensive strategy for lasting peace and security.
We must remain committed to a peaceful,
diplomatic and political solution to this complex and
dangerous situation. As demonstrated by the agreement
on Iran’s nuclear programme, a diplomatic solution
can be achieved if there is the will. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea must reverse its course and
move onto the path of denuclearization through sincere
dialogue. I reiterate my call on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to take the steps necessary to reduce
tensions in the region.
It is important not to forget the country’s acute
humanitarian needs. The civilian population of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including
vulnerable groups such as the elderly and children,
are particularly exposed to hardships, which are
further aggravated by natural disasters. International
humanitarian assistance remains vital for safeguarding
the lives of millions in need. I also reiterate my call on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea authorities
to engage with the international community to address
the grave human rights situation and improve the living
conditions of the country’s people.
In addressing all these challenges, I would like to
conclude by reaffirming the readiness of the United
Nations to assist in any way possible.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
the Secretary-General for being here on such an
important occasion.
We are here because of dangerous choices made
by a State Member of the United Nations — the
Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea — including the choice to be the only country
in the twenty-first century to conduct a nuclear test;

S/PV.7821

the choice to defy the Council’s clear and consistent
requirements by testing nuclear devices twice this year
alone; the choice to continue producing fissile material
for its nuclear programme; the choice to accelerate
prohibited ballistic missile launches to an unprecedent
rate — more than two dozen since January, including
from new delivery systems such as submarines; the
choice to keep threatening neighbours and countries
continents away with nuclear annihilation.
These choices reflect a calculated strategy. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is determined
to refine its nuclear and ballistic missile technology
to pose an even more potent threat to United Nations
Member States and, more broadly, to international
peace and security. Let us consider what the leader of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Kim Jong
Un, said after testing an engine for a long-range missile
in April — that North Korea
“can tip new-type intercontinental ballistic rockets
with more powerful nuclear warheads and keep any
cesspool of evils in the Earth, including the United
States mainland, within our striking range”.
The United States recognizes China for working
closely with us in negotiating the extremely rigorous
and important resolution 2321 (2016). We are also
grateful for the critically important contributions made
by Japan and the Republic of Korea, which face a grave
threat that one Korean official likened to living with a
Cuban missile crisis every day.
Lately, the Council has been divided on many
issues, but the unanimous adoption of new sanctions
shows that, as long as the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea pursues this dangerous and destabilizing path,
the Council will impose ever harsher consequences
on those responsible. In March, the Council adopted
what were then the toughest sanctions to date on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, but that
country remained as determined as ever to continue
advancing its nuclear technology. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea found ways to continue
diverting revenue from exports to fund its research.
It tried to cover up its business dealings abroad, and
it looked for openings to smuggle illicit materials by
land, sea and air.
Today’s resolution systematically goes after each
of these illicit schemes. Let me highlight three ways in
which the resolution breaks new and important ground.

16-407133/14

S/PV.7821

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

First, the resolution imposes major new restrictions
on the sources of hard currency, in particular coal
exports, that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
is using to pay for its nuclear weapons and ballistic
missiles. Of course, resolution 2270 (2016) bans coal
exports not exclusively used for what the Council called
“livelihood purposes”, but the coal revenues of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea have remained
about high, accounting for about one-third of its entire
export revenue. Contrary to the letter and the spirit of
resolution 2270 (2016), that coal export revenue has
not been used to help the people of North Korea. It
has been used to further build up the regime’s illegal
weapons programmes.
So the resolution imposes a new, binding cap on how
much coal the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
can ship out of the country, cutting what the country
earns by approximately $700 million per year from its
2015 total, or more than 60 per cent of its coal export
revenue. Much of this coal trade involves Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea companies with links to the
regime and its prohibited nuclear and ballistic missile
programmes. In addition, the resolution imposes a
new ban on the export of copper, nickel, silver and
zinc, which will eliminate another $100 million or
more in annual hard-currency revenue for the regime.
In total, therefore, the resolution will slash by at least
$800 million per year, the hard currency that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has to fund its
prohibited weapons programmes, which constitutes a
full 25 per cent of its entire export revenues.
But we knew going into this negotiation that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has found
itself masterful at using non-traditional means to stash
currency, and the resolution goes after some of the less
obvious ways that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea makes money. We have banned the export
of monuments. The Council might ask why on earth
would we ban the export of monuments. It turns out that
exports such as a statue of Laurent Kabila, standing in
Kinshasa today, two statues for which Robert Mugabe
paid $5 million to be stood up in Zimbabwe upon his
passing, and countless others found around the world
generate tens of millions of dollars for the regime. We
have called out countries that host Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea labourers by urging those countries
to take steps to ensure that wages are not supporting
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea regime’s
prohibited programmes.
4/14

30/11/2016

Secondly, the resolution makes it much harder
for the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to use
diplomats to advance its prohibited programmes. In the
past, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
tried to enable nuclear and ballistic-missile officials
to travel by giving them phony diplomatic titles.
Meanwhile, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
officials posted in embassies abroad have spent their
time running businesses and brokering arms sales to
fund the regime’s military. But an arms dealer with a
diplomatic passport is still an arms dealer. So from now
on, States must restrict the travel of those affiliated with
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s nuclear
and ballistic-missile programmes or other prohibited
activities, diplomatic passports or not.
Thirdly, the resolution imposes unprecedented
measures to restrict the flow of illicit materials into
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. On land,
the resolution emphasizes that cargo heading into and
out of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea by
road or rail must be inspected. At sea, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea will no longer be allowed
to mask its ships and evade scrutiny by flying the
flags of other countries or controlling other vessels
with their crews. And by air, Member States should
inspect the baggage of anyone flying into and out of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. In the next
15 days, the Security Council’s Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea Sanctions Committee will make
another important determination, publishing for the
first time a list of conventional arms dual-use items
that will no longer be allowed to enter the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. They are commercially
available components that have civilian uses, such
as sophisticated electronic sensors, but that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea can use to build
advanced military equipment, including radar systems,
night vision and stealth technology.
I began by talking about the fact that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea made the choice to pursue
nuclear weapons, but, before closing, I would like to
discuss another choice that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea regime has made — the choice to
systematically violate the human rights of its people.
As the United Nations commission of inquiry on human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
found in its 2014 report (A/HRC/25/63), the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea arbitrarily detains between
80,000 and 120,000 political prisoners in its gulags,
16-40713

30/11/2016

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

where they are subjected to deliberate starvation, forced
labour, executions, torture and rape, among other
abuses. As the report notes, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea seeks nothing less than total control
of organized social life, through tactics ranging from
summary executions to forced indoctrinations to the
methodical repression of freedom of expression.
Even though we have heard it before — and many
of us have repeated it — it is worth underscoring the
commission’s finding that
“[t]he gravity, scale and nature of these violations
reveal a State that does not have any parallel in the
contemporary world.” (A/HRC/25/63, para. 80)
The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea reaffirms what we have said elsewhere — when
Governments flagrantly violate the human rights of
their own people, they almost always show similar
disdain for the international norms that help ensure
our shared security. For the first time, this resolution
enshrines that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea must respect the welfare and inherent dignity of
people in its territory. That includes the North Korean
people, of course, but also those of other nationalities
in its territory, including unjustly detained Americans
and those abducted from countries such as Japan and
the Republic of Korea, whose families, in some cases,
have endured decades of suffering from not knowing
the fates of their loved ones.
The defence of human dignity is a basic demand,
and it is long overdue coming from the Council. The
same clique of leaders responsible for the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s pursuit of nuclear weapons
is the one responsible for systematically abusing their
people at home. For the first time, today’s resolution also
recalls that, in keeping with Article 5 of the Charter of
the United Nations, if the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea continues on its current path, systematically
and flagrantly violating its Charter obligations, it could
see some or all of its rights and privileges here at the
United Nations suspended.
The United States is realistic about what today’s
resolution will achieve. No resolution in New York
will likely persuade Pyongyang to cease its relentless
pursuit of nuclear weapons tomorrow, but this resolution
imposes unprecedented costs on the regime of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea for defying
the Council’s demands. The door remains open for
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to choose

S/PV.7821

a different path — a path of negotiations towards
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization.
When the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
makes that choice, the United States — and I know the
Council — will be ready to engage, and with sustained
international pressure, it is possible to change the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s calculus.
To do that, the members of the Council and all States
Members of the United Nations must fully implement
the sanctions that we have adopted today. The strength
of this resolution and our ability to change the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s threatening,
belligerent behaviour depends on Member States
exercising maximum vigilance to enforce each and
every one of the provisions in today’s resolution. We
call on all Member States to remain united in imposing
consequences on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea for its many dangerous choices.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank the Secretary-General
for his presence here and for the very strong statement
that he made.
Japan welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2321 (2016). We would like to express our
sincere appreciation to the United States for taking
the lead, and our appreciation also goes to all other
members of the Security Council for their support.
Japan is pleased to have contributed throughout the
process. The fact that this robust resolution was passed
unanimously deserves attention. We have attained
a great number of sponsoring countries from outside
the Security Council as well. Now not only Council
members but all States Members of the United Nations
share a common responsibility to fully implement
the resolution.
Japan, together with the international community,
strongly condemns once again the repeated violations
of Security Council resolutions by North Korea. We
urge North Korea to fully comply with the relevant
resolutions, including today’s, and to abide by its other
international commitments and obligations. Today’s
resolution does not impose sanctions for the sake of
sanctions. It is a tool to correct North Korea’s course
of action. It is a sincere call from the international
community to North Korea, urging it to abandon its
nuclear ambitions and return to the negotiating table.
We are always ready to resume dialogue if North Korea
shows a sincere commitment and takes concrete steps
towards denuclearization. In order for North Korea

16-407135/14

S/PV.7821

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

to change its attitude, we have no other option but to
continue to increase pressure.
Resolution 2270 (2016), adopted in March, was
already very robust and comprehensive. However, some
of the livelihood exemptions for the people of North
Korea contained in the resolution have been misused.
The resolution adopted today closes such gaps and
introduces new additional measures. Drastic coal import
limitations, additional sectoral bans to cut revenues
and other measures should all have a significant impact
on North Korean nuclear and missile development
programmes. At the same time, I emphasize that
these sanctions are not meant to target ordinary North
Korean citizens. It should not be forgotten that North
Korea’s nuclear and missile development continues
at the expense of the welfare of the people of North
Korea. It is significant that heightened attention has
been paid in today’s resolution to the nexus between
people’s unmet needs and the continuation of nuclear
and missile development. We welcome the stronger
emphasis on the deplorable humanitarian conditions in
North Korea, including the abduction issue, to which
Japan attaches utmost importance.
Unfortunately, we have heard some sceptical voices
in the process of implementing resolution 2270 (2016),
suggesting that nuclear and missile development has
not stopped even after the adoption of that resolution,
and that resolution 2270 (2016) is not as effective as
it should be. I believe that this view confuses cause
and effect, and that the degree to which the measures
outlined in resolution 2270 (2016) were unsuccessful
was in fact the result of those sceptical voices. In
other words, international efforts have not kept pace
with North Korea’s capacity to evade sanctions or its
determination to continue nuclear development.
Now is precisely the time for the international
community to rigorously implement the resolution we
have just adoptedand send the strong, unified message
that North Korea cannot afford to continue its current
policy. Japan will continue to work very closely with
the members of the Council and all States Members of
the United Nations to reach a comprehensive solution to
the problems related to North Korea.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
strong statement and all the members of the Security
Council, particularly the delegations of the United
States and China, for their collaboration, which has
6/14

30/11/2016

enabled us to adopt resolution 2321 (2016), establishing
an unprecedented sanctions regime for the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
The two main reasons that Spain was a sponsor
of the resolution are, first, for the sake of consistency
and out of a sense of responsibility. It was also for
reasons of consistency that we supported resolution
2270 (2016), which responded to repeated violations
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Regrettably, however, those violations continued, and
on 9 September we witnessed a new nuclear test and
the launching of various ballistic missiles. Resolution
2270 (2016) was very clear in its intention to adopt
significant additional measures should the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea conduct a new nuclear test
or missile launch. That did indeed turn out to be the
case, and that is why we have been obliged to adopt
resolution 2321 (2016) today.
The second reason we sponsored the resolution is
our special sense of responsibility owing to the fact
that, as we know, Spain is Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006).
Because of that, it is our particular duty to ensure the
effectiveness, transparency and rigour of resolutions
having to do with the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. Since March, the Committee has worked
very hard to implement the sanctions while, I should
emphasize, striving not to worsen the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
but only to ensure that those who are responsible for
its nuclear programmes to bring them to a halt. I hope
that resolution 2321 (2016), which the United States
Ambassador has so clearly explained, achieves its aims.
Lastly, I would like to emphasize that Spain and the
Security Council have always affirmed the principle
that sanctions are not an end in themselves but rather
a means for achieving lasting peace and stability, as
the Ambassador of Japan made very clear. It is up to
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to respect
international law and work for its people’s prosperity,
which is the ultimate goal of today’s resolution. In the
few weeks remaining until the end of my mandate as
Chair of the 1718 Committee, nothing would give me
more satisfaction in what I hope is the near future than
to see the Committee disappear because the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has begun to comply with
its obligations under international law.
16-40713

30/11/2016

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation voted in favour
of today’s resolution 2321 (2016), which sanctions
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea for
conducting a fifth nuclear test. We should note that
while Pyongyang’s behaviour ignored the legitimate
requests of the international community and therefore
required us to adopt tough measures in the form of a
standard Council resolution, today’s resolution is in no
way designed to close off the possibility of reviving the
process of negotiations on the nuclear problem on the
Korean peninsula and seeking a political solution to the
outstanding issues in Asia’s North-East.
We want to particularly emphasize that the new
resolution should absolutely not be used to stifle
North Korea’s economy or to worsen the humanitarian
situation and the people’s circumstances. The situation
on the Korean peninsula should not be used as a
pretext for increasing the foreign military presence
in the region. We firmly condemn any buildup of
offensive weapons near the borders that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea shares with neighbours,
including the deployment of Terminal High Altitude
Area Defense anti-ballistic missile systems. A country
cannot possibly achieve lasting long-term security
if it tries to build it at the expense of the security of
other States. We urge all sides to show restraint, avoid
provocative rhetoric and aggravations of the situation
and act speedily in seeking a way out of the crisis. On
that basis, the Russian Federation is ready to cooperate
on the issue with its regional and international partners.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): On
9 September, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea conducted yet another nuclear test, in defiance of
the universal objections of the international community.
The Government of China is firmly opposed to such
acts. The Council’s adoption today of resolution 2321
(2016) reflects the international community’s united
position against the development of nuclear missile
programmes by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and in support of the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime. The resolution reaffirms the
importance of safeguarding peace and stability on the
Korean peninsula and in North-East Asia, commits
to seeking a solution to the issue through peaceful,
diplomatic and political means, supports the resumption
of the Six-Party Talks and the commitments made in
the joint statement of 19 September, and emphasizes

S/PV.7821

the importance of easing tensions on the peninsula for
all parties concerned.
As the resolution notes, the sanctions measures are
not aimed at worsening the humanitarian situation in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, harming its
people’s livelihoods or affecting normal economic and
trade activities. China urges the parties concerned to
work to effectively implement the resolution’s relevant
provisions in their entirety. Since the beginning of the
year, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
conducted two nuclear tests and multiple ballisticmissile launches. However, certain parties have
continued to strengthen their military deployments,
increase their military presence and scale up military
exercises, and the confrontation on the peninsula
has intensified into a vicious circle as a result. That
situation must change as soon as possible.
As a near neighbour of the Korean peninsula, China
has consistently insisted that it should be denuclearized
and its peace and stability upheld. We have always
called for the issue to be resolved through dialogue
and consultations and have fought against turmoil
and conflict. We are opposed to the deployment of the
Terminal High Altitude Area Defense anti-ballistic
missile system on the peninsula, as it seriously
undermines the strategic security interests of China and
other countries of the region and disturbs the regional
strategic balance. It is neither conducive to achieving
the goal of denuclearizing the Korean peninsula nor
helpful to the maintenance of peace and stability there.
China urges the parties concerned to stop forthwith
the related deployment process. The current situation
on the Korean peninsula is sensitive, complex and dire.
All parties must look at the big picture, meet each other
halfway and avoid any rhetoric or action that might
exacerbate tension. The top priority for the parties
concerned is to resume dialogue and negotiations and
relaunch the Six-Party Talks as soon as possible in
order to work together in a genuine effort to advance
the denuclearization process and achieve peace and
stability on the Korean peninsula.
China urges the parties concerned to push forward
in parallel the negotiations on denuclearization, on one
hand, and the replacement of armistice with a peace
treaty, on the other. China will persist in advancing
dialogue and consultations with a view to solving the
problems related to the Korean peninsula within the
framework of the Six-Party Talks, thereby playing a

16-407137/14

S/PV.7821

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

positive and constructive role in achieving enduring
peace and stability on the Korean peninsula at an early
date.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank the
Secretary-General for his strong statement today.
New Zealand welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2321 (2016), which strengthens and expands
the sanctions in place against the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. This year has seen the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s defiance of the international
community and its flouting of international norms reach
new heights. As the Secretary-General reminded us, the
Council has met many times this year to discuss North
Korea’s succession of nuclear and ballistic missile tests.
These events and the overall trajectory of the situation
on the Korean peninsula are sources of great concern
and frustration for New Zealand. Given the seriousness
of those developments, it is entirely appropriate that the
resolution provides for some of the strongest sanctions
ever imposed by the Security Council.
New Zealand has co-sponsored the resolution for a
number of reasons. Not least of those is our concern at
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s dangerous
and provocative behaviour and its ongoing defiance of
the Council and of its own international obligations.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s continued
provocations pose arguably the most significant threat
to the security of New Zealand’s region, the AsiaPacific. New Zealand’s support also reflects our
commitment to the nuclear non-proliferation regime, to
which the actions of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea — the only country to have tested nuclear
weapons this century — pose a grave challenge.
We commend the United States and China for their
leadership and cooperation in preparing the measures
set out in today’s resolution. It is now the responsibility
of the international community to ensure that the
measures in the resolution are fully implemented and
effectively enforced. Coordinated and comprehensive
implementation by Member States is one of the
strongest signals the international community can send
to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that its
continued proliferation activities and disregard for
international obligations will not be tolerated, and that
a change of course is urgently needed.
Ultimately, sanctions are a means, not an end, for
effecting change on the Korean peninsula. The resolution
sends a further signal to North Korea’s leadership
8/14

30/11/2016

that their current path of isolation and defiance of
international norms is wrong-headed and that a return in
good faith to negotiations on denuclearization provides
the best prospects for the security and prosperity of
their country and their people. We hope that today’s
resolution and the strengthened measures that it puts in
place can help set us back on the path towards a return
to negotiations and ultimately the resolution of this
long-standing security challenge.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his presence and for his strong position on
the issue at hand.
Ukraine welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2321 (2016) and commends the efforts of
those delegations that were involved in drafting and
submitting the text. We consider the resolution to be a
comprehensive and balanced document that, on the one
hand, strengthens the existing regime and reinforces it
with additional sectoral and targeted sanctions, and, on
the other, confirms the Council’s openness to dialogue
on a peaceful and diplomatic solution to the situation
on the Korean peninsula and its intention to avoid
affecting the North Korean population.
I would like to stress that the resolution was adopted
in response to the fifth and largest nuclear explosive
test conducted by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea on 9 September, which constituted a blatant
violation of its international obligations, including
under relevant Security Council resolutions. Ukraine
has always been committed to effective multilateral
action against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. Our collective decision today represents
a historic step that clearly demonstrates the Council’s
consolidated and firm stance to respond decisively to an
existing threat to the global non-proliferation regime.
Ukraine is honoured to co-sponsor the resolution, which
we all hope will contribute to the denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula.
Mrs. Carrión (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the presence of the Secretary-General and
appreciate his strong statement.
Uruguay voted in favour of and co-sponsored
resolution 2321 (2016). We welcome its unanimous
adoption, as we believe that it will be a very useful tool
of deterrence in the current situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. In that context, Uruguay
reiterates its firm condemnation of the nuclear tests,
the launch of missiles and the continued provocation of
16-40713

30/11/2016

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV.7821

the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which only
escalate tension on the Korean peninsula, constitute a
clear violation of international law and relevant Security
Council resolutions, and represent a very serious threat
to international peace and security.

We would like to point out that Uruguay supports
the resolution in the conviction that the implementation
of these new sanctions will not directly harm the civilian
population, whose human rights and humanitarian
concerns are critical.

Uruguay is committed to nuclear disarmament
and the non-proliferation regime and reiterates its
commitment to and support for the strengthening of
multilateralism, universal and complete disarmament
and the strengthening of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as a cornerstone
of the disarmament and non-proliferation regime.
In that framework, Uruguay urges the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to completely, verifiably and
irreversibly abandon its existing nuclear programme
and to put an end to related activities, including launches
of ballistic missiles and other activities that can only
be seen as acts of provocation. Similarly, we urge the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to return to the
Non-Proliferation Treaty and to the safeguards regime
of the International Atomic Energy Agency.

Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the
presence of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-Moon.

Despite the measures taken in March by the
Security Council with the adoption of 2270 (2016),
which imposed new, more severe sanctions against
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, we meet
today to adopt new, significant measures due to the fact
that the regime of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea continues to defy and ignore all of the positions
of this Council by pursuing its nuclear and ballistic
missile programme with actions that constitute clear
violations of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
In that respect, we reiterate that Uruguay considers the
implementation of sanctions to be a tool of the Council
that can be used to achieve a specific end. They should
be used not to punish a State, but rather to achieve a
political objective.
Uruguay stresses the urgent need to continue to work
towards a peaceful, diplomatic and political solution
for the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. Our
country continues to support all initiatives aimed at
dialogue, which is why we believe that we must step
up our efforts to revive the Six-Party Talks for the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. Failing that,
the Security Council would find itself in the position of
having to continue adopting resolutions and imposing
sanctions. We also stress the need for all States to
resolutely honour their obligations under the resolution
adopted today, as the Security Council’s actions cannot
be effective in any other way.

Firmly committed to nuclear disarmament and
the elimination of weapons of mass destruction, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela voted in favour
of resolution 2321 (2016) in response to the nuclear
test undertaken on 9 September by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, as we believe that it affects
international peace and security, particularly on the
Korean peninsula and enhances the risk of possible
confrontation. That country’s other nuclear tests this
year and launch of ballistic missiles violate Security
Council resolutions on the issue and the nuclear
non-proliferation regime. The resolution adopted today
is part of the global focus on mechanisms and formulas
to build a sustainable environment conducive to forginh
a path towards a political and sustainable solution to the
nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula.
We call on the Security Council to step up its efforts
in promoting dialogue and negotiations between the
parties in order to contribute to a negotiated solution
of the issue. The sanctions regime applied to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea should be seen
as a means and not an end in itself. Its ultimate goal
should be aimed at denuclearization, peace and stability
in the region through a negotiated political solution.
Furthermore, we urge the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to meet its obligations under the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, and we appeal to
all parties to act cautiously so as to avoid heightening
tensions that could lead to an armed conflict.
We reiterate that the measures contained in
the resolutions adopted on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea should be applied in full respect for
the principles of international law, with specific goals,
in a responsible, transparent manner and with clear
criteria for ending them if the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea ends its nuclear programme. At the
same time, we must ensure that the measures contained
in the resolution do not have a negative humanitarian
impact on the civilian population. We are concerned

16-407139/14

S/PV.7821

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

that the restrictions imposed on the export of primary
goods could affect its population.
We also believe that those controls should not serve
as a precedent for limiting the rights of States to manage
their own natural resources in a sovereign manner to
meet their socioeconomic goals, in line with General
Assembly resolution 1803 (XVII). The implementation
of the measures contained in resolutions 2321 (2016) and
2270 (2016) should in no way impede the coordination
of international organizations providing technical and
humanitarian assistance to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Those organizations should continue
to cooperate in the development of projects and the
establishment of conditions conducive to the stability
and well-being of the North Korean people.
In conclusion, we reiterate our appeal to Member
States with influence on the issue to demonstrate the
political will to find a mutually acceptable solution for
all parties and to make the necessary efforts to establish
a climate of trust that would help to resolve in a peaceful
and constructive way the relaunching of the Six-Party
Talks, such as the important and unique mechanism to
peacefully resolve the intentions and differences on the
Korean peninsula.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom strongly supports the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2321 (2016). We welcome the leading role
played by the United States and China, as well as the
statement made this morning by the Secretary-General.
In 2016, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has conducted an unprecedented number of
provocations, including two nuclear tests. Today, we
have shown that the international community will
simply not stand for it. We have sent a clear signal to
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that the
Security Council steadfastly opposes the reckless
pursuit of nuclear weapons. Today, we redouble our
efforts to bring the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea back into the fold of law-abiding States. Until we
see genuine commitments and actual steps to change
course, United Nations sanctions will remain.
We must continue with renewed vigour to limit the
activities of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
entities involved in the nuclear programme, deter the
involvement of any external actors tempted to facilitate
such activity, and constrain the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s ability to raise illicit funds. We are
acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
10/14

30/11/2016

Nations for the second time this year with regard to
North Korea. That is far from standard practice, but
this unique threat deserves nothing less.
Resolution 2270 (2016), adopted in March, marked
a substantive increase in pressure on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. Since then, ships have
been impounded, cargo has been intercepted and bank
accounts have been closed. If implemented fully by
all Member States in the long term, resolution 2270
(2016) can and will greatly reduce the ability of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to evade
sanctions and raise funds. But in the face of Council
action, Pyongyang chose to continue on its course of
confrontation. As a result, we have taken direct action
to build on those landmark sanctions of resolution
2270 (2016). Three concrete steps in the new resolution
illustrate our resolve.
First, the mechanism agreed to cap coal exports
will directly target a sector used by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to raise foreign currency.
Put simply, we have just denied nearly one-quarter of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s foreign
income. That is roughly $700 million that from now
on cannot be put forward towards the next nuclear test
or the next missile launch. This is a powerful message
that will be heard loud and clear in Pyongyang.
There are direct financial consequences to continued
nuclear provocations.
Secondly, the resolution clarifies and further
enhances controls agreed in resolution 2270 (2016),
including on technology imports, shipping, banking
and the abuse by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea of its privileges abroad. Every avenue of illicit
activity must be shut down.
Thirdly, the text makes an explicit political
statement condemning the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s proliferation choices at the expense
of the welfare of its people. Every dollar spent on North
Korea’s nuclear weapons programme is a dollar that
could have been spent on improving the lives of its own
citizens, roughly half of whom live in extreme poverty.
The resolution also breaks new ground by calling
for an awareness abroad of Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea labourers being exploited. Sadly, this
is a textbook example of modern slavery — something
that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
employs both inside and beyond its borders. When
implemented fully, these further measures will create
16-40713

30/11/2016

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV.7821

robust new constraints on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s activity. As with all Security
Council actions, the resolution is not intended to have
adverse humanitarian consequences for the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s civilian population, or to
affect negatively the work of international organizations
or non-governmental organizations carrying out
assistance and relief activities in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.

We do not seek to impose sanctions on the people of
North Korea or to deprive them of the humanitarian
assistance and development projects carried out in
their country by the United Nations and its specialized
agencies and other donors. Furthermore, the sanctions
should not have an adverse effect on the work of
embassies in Pyongyang, in accordance with the Vienna
Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961 and the
Vienna Convention on Consular Relations of 1963.

The United Kingdom has diplomatic relations
with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and
will continue to work towards dialogue and a peaceful
resolution of this crisis. Diplomacy must continue and
be part of the solution. We note that the resolution’s
provisions, including the provisions on cargo, are
consistent with the obligations set out in the Vienna
Conventions on diplomatic relations.

Today, Egypt believes that resolution 2321 (2016)
represents a step forward on a path that will not
undermine the non-proliferation regime based on the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT). Egypt has always warned against double
standards and double criteria when it comes to nuclear
non-proliferation and denuclearization in our region. A
single country in the Middle East has not yet become
a member of the NPT. This is an issue that Egypt and
other countries of the Middle East have not accepted
and are never going to accept. Today’s adoption of
resolution 2321 (2016) represents an opportunity to
remind the international community and members of
the Security Council of that reality, and we urge the
Council to shoulder its responsibilities in this regard.

Finally, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has a clear choice to make. It can either continue its
destabilizing and dangerous behaviour or follow clear
steps to begin to rebuild a future for its people. Today,
we are united in support for a meaningful change
of course.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to express our gratitude to the United
States for its efforts in preparing resolution 2321 (2016),
adopted today. We thank China for its diplomatic
and political efforts aimed at restoring stability and
ensuring security on the Korean peninsula, and for its
support for the resolution.
The unanimous adoption of resolution 2321 (2016)
sends a very strong and firm signal from all members
of the Security Council that we will not accept the
latest measures adopted by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, especially following its fifth nuclear
test on 9 September, which represents a violation of the
country’s commitments under the relevant Security
Council resolutions and resolutions of international
legality. The test also undermines the non-proliferation
regime as a whole.
Resolution 2321 (2016) strengthens sanctions
against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
We welcome the balanced drafting of the resolution,
which takes into account the political process and the
importance of resuming the Six-Party Talks aimed at
denuclearizing the Korean peninsula. The resolution
also seeks to avoid exacerbating the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.

In conclusion, we reaffirm the prominent role
played by the Security Council and the importance
of its unity and of working constructively within the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) and its Group of Experts in order to implement
the resolutions of the Security Council and to preserve
international legality and the Council’s authority.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): We join other Council
members in expressing appreciation to the delegations
of China and the United States as well as to all those
involved in the work that led to the adoption of resolution
2321 (2016) today. Malaysia welcomes the unanimous
adoption of this very important text, in the light of our
belief that the illicit development and procurement of
weapons of mass destruction and related technologies
and capabilities by any State are unacceptable and
cannot be tolerated by the international community.
Such activities undermine the work and commitment
of all Member States to peaceful relations with each
other and to the peaceful resolution of conflict. It is for
this reason that Malaysia voted in favour of resolution
2321 (2016).
Malaysia remains convinced that a comprehensive
solution, which would take into account the interests

16-4071311/14

S/PV.7821

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, the
grave hardship its people are facing as well as their
humanitarian needs, is indispensable. We call upon
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to return
to the negotiating table and resume peaceful dialogue
and negotiations within the framework of the SixParty Talks. The language in the text that safeguards
humanitarian exemptions is a crucial element. It is
designed to prevent the effects of possible unintended
consequences against legitimate interests, particularly
those related to the livelihoods and the humanitarian
situation of the people of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. We fully support that aspect of
the resolution.
As we did upon the adoption of resolution 2270
(2016) in March, Malaysia wishes to re-emphasize that
interpretation of relevant provisions in the resolution
must not be a pretext for disrupting diplomatic access
or further impede the conduct of legitimate diplomatic
and humanitarian activities in the country, as
stipulated under the Vienna and Geneva Conventions,
respectively. At the twenty-third regional forum in
July, sponsored by the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, Malaysia called on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to abide by all relevant Security
Council resolutions, dismantle its nuclear programme
in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner, and
refrain from conducting any provocative acts, in order
to maintain peace and stability in the region.
Our aspiration is to see the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula. We also wish to see the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea returning to the negotiating
table and embracing change that builds trust so that
shared security and prosperity might be pursued
through international cooperation.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary General for his presence today and for his
powerful statement. I also thank the United States for
submitting resolution 2321 (2016), which we have just
adopted unanimously and which France co-sponsored.
After the January nuclear test, the launch of a
long-range missile using ballistic technology, and the
various ballistic-missile tests conducted this year,
North Korea’s fifth nuclear test in September served
only to strengthen our deep concern over that country’s
destabilizing provocations. The test demonstrates
Pyongyang’s stubbornness and represents an
irresponsible decision to forge ahead. Let there be no
12/14

30/11/2016

mistake — the determined, methodical and systematic
effort of North Korea to develop nuclear and ballistic
capabilities is today one of the main threats to regional
and international peace and security and an attack on the
international non-proliferation regime, making it one of
the most important challenges the Security Council has
to face and therefore one of its highest priorities.
In that context, France welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2321 (2016). The resolution marks
a necessary and decisive step in strengthening sanctions
against North Korea and allows us to send a clear and
unambiguous message on the unity and determination
of the international community to sanction any
unacceptable challenge to the non-proliferation regime.
Its goal is therefore to lead to a radical policy change
in Pyongyang.
The unanimity that the Security Council has shown
today is a fine example of its capacity to come together
when the essential is at stake. I hope that this unity will
be renewed every time issues related to the proliferation
or use of weapons of mass destruction should arise.
Resolution 2270 (2016), adopted in March, represented
a very significant evolution in the sanctions regime. In
that same vein, resolution 2321 (2016) allows us now
to move one step further in several respects. First, it
identifies, clarifies and provides a stricter framework
for some of the provisions contained in resolution 2270
(2016). That is the case particularly with regard to the
export of coal, the inclusion of new designations and
the banning of the transfer of new goods.
The resolution also diversifies the means of action
that we have available to us by identifying new tools that
allow us to prevent the development of North Korea’s
nuclear and ballistic missile programmes, including,
for example, new banking and financial measures, new
limits on transport modes that the regime is using, and
enhanced constraints on the diplomatic means being
used by North Korea.
Resolution 2321 (2016) also enables us to enhance
our capacity to prevent Pyongyang from funding
its nuclear programmes. The extension of sectoral
measures, which are synonymous with additional
constraints on the regime, illustrates that fact. Through
the new resolution, we also condemn the logic being
followed by the regime, which involves diverting
existing resources to fuel its illegitimate programmes
to the detriment of the North Korean people.
16-40713

30/11/2016

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Finally, the resolution strengthens the strong
message of dissuasion sent to Pyongyang by clearly
recalling not only our determination to take additional
measures in the event of further provocations, but also
that the rights and privileges of membership of a State
subject to sanctions do not emerge out of nowhere. The
resolution does not close the door to dialogue, because
the imposition of sanctions is not our final objective.
And yet, as long as those provocations continue, we will
have no choice but to enhance them. The determination
of France in that regard is adamant. It is now up to North
Korea to concretely show, by abandoning its nuclear
and ballistic missile programmes, that it is ready to
fully respect its international obligations.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We express appreciation for
the efforts of China and the United States in drafting
resolution 2321 (2016), which we have just adopted.
Angola joined the consensus of the Security Council
by voting in favour of resolution 2321 (2016). The text
of the resolution is self-explanatory, and the statements
by Security Council members have expressed our
collective concern about the threat that the nuclear
programme of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea poses to international peace and security.
We can only appeal to North Korea to abide by
the international community’s decisions related to its
nuclear and ballistic missile programmes by negotiating
the end of those programmes under the agreed
framework, concentrating its resources on the social
development of its people, meaningfully contributing
to the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, and
thereby to international peace and security, as well as
avoiding becoming an international pariah — a type
of development that may become extremely detrimental
to the people of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and an additional danger to peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Senegal.
In voting unanimously in favour of resolution
2321 (2016), thereby strengthening and expanding the
sanctions imposed on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, our Council has shown strong unity in its will
to urge the North Korean authorities to give up their
nuclear and military programme, which violates the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, as well as
the non-proliferation regime.

S/PV.7821

That very strong and unanimous message was
possible thanks to the United States delegation, our
facilitator, which cooperated closely with the Chinese
delegation. We hope that the additional measures
of resolution 2321 (2016) will lead the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to fully cooperate with the
Security Council, and thereby allow for the resumption
of negotiations within the framework of the SixParty Talks, so as to denuclearize and stabilize the
Korean peninsula.
We have said on many occasions that sanctions are
a means and not an end. With the objective of paving
the way for a political process, the humanitarian aspect
of the new measures is quite telling. The complexity
and scope of the measures specified in the resolution
will require, as was indicated by the Secretary-General,
technical assistance, as well as capacity-building, in
order to make it possible for Member States of the United
Nations, and the international community as a whole,
to implement them effectively. It will also be a test of
the determination and will of the Security Council.
As we are talking about non-proliferation, my
delegation would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate Senegal’s commitment to full respect by all
for the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty. Echoing the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Egypt, I call for the establishment
of nuclear-weapon-free zones throughout the world,
including in the Middle East. To conclude, Senegal
calls for total nuclear disarmament.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Republic
of Korea.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would first
like to express my appreciation to you, Mr. President,
and the Senegalese presidency for convening today’s
meeting, and for inviting my delegation to participate
in this meeting.
The Republic of Korea welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2321 (2016). I thank Ambassador
Samantha Power and the United States delegation for
taking the initiative for the resolution, as well as other
members of the Council for supporting it.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
nuclear-weapons programme, with its latest nuclear

16-4071313/14

S/PV.7821

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

test — its fifth — has become the most serious
threat to the global non-proliferation regime. It poses
unprecedented challenges to the authority of the
Security Council. The programme seems to be nearing
the final stage of weaponization, and Pyongyang makes
no secret of its intention to acquire and use a nuclear
arsenal. That is totally outrageous.
By adopting the resolution today, the international
community has once again made it clear that we will never
tolerate the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
pursuit of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs). My
delegation supports the new resolution’s introduction
of robust measures that complement and reinforce the
existing sanctions regime. When implemented, they
will significantly restrain the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s ability to carry on with its WMD
programmes by targeting the flow of hard currency,
materials, equipment and technology that they require.
This year alone, it is estimated that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has spent more than
$200 million on nuclear tests and missile launches. It is
also estimated that the total cost so far for their nuclear
programme must have surpassed $1 billion. That
money could have been used to buy one year’s worth
of food for the entire North Korean population. People
need to eat food, not weapons. For reasons defying any
common sense, Pyongyang is paying a heavy price
to gain a nuclear arsenal, at the expense of its own
people. If it had used those resources to benefit people’s
livelihoods, the North Korean population’s hardship
would have been much relieved.
In that vein, my delegation welcomes the fact the
resolution 2321 (2016) takes a more holistic approach
by addressing the North Korean people’s welfare and
dignity, as shown in paragraph 45, which has been
included in a sanctions resolution on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea for the first time. We hope
that the resolution and the continuing discussion on
human rights will contribute to helping our brothers
and sisters in the north in their quest for a better life
and human dignity.
For me personally, this is my last time participating
in a United Nations meeting, as I have completed my
term here and am flying out tonight. I am relieved

14/14

30/11/2016

because the resolution has been adopted before my
departure, but I am also sorry that I am leaving without
seeing the issue being resolved. The North Korean
nuclear issue is multifaceted. It is an issue of nuclear
non-proliferation that poses the question of whether
or not we will be able to maintain the global nuclear
non-proliferation regime that we have had for the past
half century. We will have to consider whether we will
be able to stand up to the challenge posed to the regime
or whether we will be able to stop it or let it go. We have
a very serious question before us.
It is also an issue of international security. In our
region, when North Korea acquired nuclear capabilities,
it had the effect of breaking the status quo in terms of
our strategy balance. Thus, the other countries of the
region have to consider how to restore the balance. It
is a serious question to be considered whether other
countries should try to match the capabilities or come
up with other ways to restore the strategy balance
in the region. For South Koreans, it is a question of
soul-searching as well — soul-searching about our
national identity, national division and national desire
for unification. Korea’s national division should not
become a national curse. When we watch North Korea’s
missile launches on television, we feel as if a brother
in the family is wielding a gun and shooting in the air
while his children are screaming out of hunger and fear.
All in all, I believe that what we are doing
here — applying pressure on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea through non-military sanctions
measures — is the right thing to do, and I believe and
I hope that those measures will eventually work. They
will work for the non-proliferation regime, international
security and the two Koreas so that we can eventually get
over the issue and go back to dialogue and cooperation.
I would like to thank you, Sir. all the members
of the Security Council and the Secretariat for the
cooperation and assistance rendered to me during the
past three years.
The President (spoke in French): I wish the
representative of the Republic of Korea a safe return to
his country.
The meeting rose at 10.25 a.m.

16-40713
