UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-F0

COUNCIL
RECORDS

URTH

YEAR

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/21 34) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 23 February 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/131 15) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*...*.....

1
1

1

S/PV.2134

NOTE
-

Symbolsof United Nations documentsare composedof capital letttis combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/...j are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Recordsof the Securfty Council. The date of the
document indicatesthe supplementin which it appearsor in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordancewith a system
adopted in 1964,are published in yearly volumes of Resolutfonsand De&tons of the
Securfty Councfl. The new system,which hasbeenapplied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965,becamefully operative on that,date. ....
“..

:

2134th MEETING
Held in New York on Thqsda~~~2
President:

Mr. Leslie 0. HARRIMAN

(Nigeria).

Socialist Republic), Mr. Ha Van Lau (Viet Nam),
Mr. Al-Had&d (Yemen) and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

Present The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain at&Northern
Ireland, United States
of America, Zambia.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I wish to inform members of the
Council that I have received a letter from the representative
of Saudi Arabia, in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item. In accordance with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite him to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

Provisional agenda (WAgendaL2134)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2.

March 1979, at ,330 p.m.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 23 February 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13115)

At the invitation of fie President, Mr. Allagany (Saudi
Arabia) took the place reserved for him at the side of the
Councii chamber.

The meeting was called to order at 4.15 p.m.

3. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council have before them the text of a revised draft resolution[S/13171/
Rev.4 sponsored by Bangladesh, Kuwait, Nigeria and
Zambia.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted

4. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): The marathon is coming to
an end, and I should like at this stage to make a few
remarks.

The situation in tbe occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 23 Febnury 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan,,to tbe United Nations addressed
to the President bf the Security Council (S/13115)

5. In his lengthy statement on Monday, 19 March 1979
[213Zst meeting], the representative of Israel made a few
remarks about my country and my delegation. He accused
us of partisanship and, therefore, in his view, we are disqualified from participating in the proceedings. He accused
us of manipulating the Council.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at previous meetings, I invite the representatives of
Democratic Kampuchea, Egypt, the German Democratic
Republic, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel,
Jordan, Lebanon, Mauritania, Pakistan, Qatar, Romania,
Senegal, Somalia, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Tunisia, Turkey, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Viet Nam, Yemen and Yugoslavia, as well as the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization, to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote.

6. I have listened to the Israeli representative making his
numerous statements with, I would say, uncharacteristic
patience, simply because there were many speakers and the
rights of reply were too long. This is the right time to tell him
the following-and I shall indeed give him what he expects
me to offer.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan),
Mr. BIum (Israel), and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation
Organization) took places at the Council table ‘and
Mr. ‘l’hiounn Prasith (Democratic Kampuchea), Mr. Abdel
Meguid (Egypt), Mr. FIorin (German Democratic Republic),
Mr. Hollai fHungary), Mr. Jaipal (India), Mr. Suwondo
(Indonesia), Mr. Shemirani (Iran), Mr. Baf (Irirq). Mr. Tueni
(Lebanon), Mr. Kane (Mauritania), Mr. Naik (Pakistan)
Mr. Jamal (Qatar), Mr. Marinescu (Romania), Mr. FaB
(Senesar). Mr. Hussen (Somalia), Mr. Sahloul (Sudan),
Mr. El-Chouji (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Mestiri (Tunisia),
Mr. Eralp (Turkey), Mr. Martynenko (Ukrainian Soviet

7. First of all, we are partisans of peace based on genuine
self-determination for the people of Palestine. We are partisans of the Charter, of United Nations resolutions. In this
respect we are not alone; we are in the good company of no
fewer than 40 representatives who have spoken to emphasize three points: the right of the people of Palestine to
self-determination in accordance with the Charter, the occupation by brute force of the West Bank, Gaza and other
Arab territories, contrary to international law and in contravention of the Charter; and .the applicability of the
1

1
:

~~~,ev‘~~.“~o~~~niibn:;eiative..to:

th;

&+ge&jbn’

of

Ciqilan

’ him of the following. Paragraph I ‘of section I of General
’ “*P&o& ‘iri Time of War, of 12 A&ust’I949;“to the occupied
Assembly resolution 1803 (XVII) of 14 December 1962,
territories. T$se are the: three’ salien{ poi$l which were
entitled !‘Permanent sovereignty pver natural resources”,
.,
:. emphasized and hi&lighted by no fewer
‘ , . ‘than 40 speakers. +. declares that:
.
:.
.
.
-I .
.,’ ’ “The right of peoples and nations to permanent soverI
8. Gn the k&point&at
is, ~ea&hcability
of th&urth
.’ eignty over their natural wealth and resources must be
Geneva Convention of 1949 to the occupied territories.” ‘-’ exercised in the interest of their ‘hational development
. even Israel’s best, friends, among whom is, I would say,
and of the well-being of the people of the State
Israel’s benefactor, have no hesitation. The Israeli represen- : .,concerned.”
~. _.
tative’s point on partiality and partisanshp therefore does
., :
.’
Paragraph
7
declares:
not hold water.,
’
.,,
:
I. ‘.
,.
-_
“Violation of the rights of*peoples and nations to
‘...
9. , He’spoke about the right of Jews Yto coexist with the .’ .. sovereignty over their natumi:wealth and resources is
Palestinians and not to replace them’r..But,he deliberately
.. contrary to the spirit and principles of the Charter of the
avoided telling us that General Dayan’in May 1977 said to ._ . United Nations.”
./
the Jewish Chronicle of London as I pointed out in my
‘.
It
is
significant
that
Israel
voted
‘in
favour
of that resolution.
statement last -week [212.5th meeting] that coexistence must
. .. I
be under Jewish rule. Is that coexistence or subjugation? Is
14. I have before me a fresh dispatch
it coexistence among equals or, as I said in my statement,
i,, from Reuters, which
“states the following:
coexistence between the rider and the horse? Does Israel
expect the world to accept such logic? The logic which Israel
“Israel intends to launch a major settlement project on
has been and is still using against the implementation of
the occupied West Bank of Jordan after the signing of a
General Assembly resolution 194 (III)-which
has been
peace treaty with Egypt next week,,the State television of
emphasized so much here-on the return of Palestinian
Israel reported. The television report said at least 10 new
refugees to their land is that the clock cannot be turned
outposts would be established in. the West Bank in the
back. But it is obvious that Israel wants. to turn the clock
near future.
t’ ,,*.. ,
back 13 or 14 centuries on the grounds that Jews have lived
“The report said that Prime Minister Begin had
in Judaea and Samaria and that the land is part and parcel
assured the Coalition National peligious Party of immiof Eretz Israel. For the Palestinians, the.clock cannot be
nent massive settlement activity .on the West Bank to
turned back even for a few years; for the Jews, the clockcan
secure its support for the peace treaty in,a vote by the
be turned back for 14 centuries.
Knesset earlier today.”
:,.
..
10. The representative of Israel referred to coexistence,
I shall not read out the whole dispatch.
but coexistence is a two-way traflic. If Israel is keen on
coexistence in the West Bank and Gaza, then let it be in all
15. The Israeli representative spoke in rosy terms about
of Palestine wherein Palestinians and Jews can live together.
the situation in the occupied territories and I got the impresAfter all, Palestinians were the indigenous people who insion that the Palestinians live in a modem paradise. In my
habited all of Palestine before 1948.
view, that is the language of pre-cdlomalism, when occupation was glorified and foreign domination glamourized.
11. The Israeli representative took exception to the stateThat
is the logic of the dark ages, ‘the logic that is adduced
ments that criticized his Government. He thinks that Israel
and
supported
by arrogant military superiority.
is not answerable to anybody, to any organization, even to
the one that accepted it on conditions that have never been
16. If he is confident, as he portmyed to‘us, that a new
fulfilled. And in his rights of reply he enjoyed linguistic
heaven exists in the occupied territories, then I am sure that
globe-trotting, travelling as he did linguistically from the
his Government will be in a better.position’ to receive the
confines of China to the Caribbean and, more than that, he
commission
of the Security Council referred to in the draft
played the role of self-appointed champion of international
resolution before the Council. The commission will find out
human rights. This, in my view, is strange. To me it is an
whether there is in the occupied ‘territories heaven, rosy
insult added to injury. For none of the participants in this
heaven,
less rosy heaven, hell or something in between. Why
debate comes from a country that was established on the
then is he afraid, or is his Government afraid, of the comdenial of the rights of the indigenous population. None of
mission and why has his Government so far adamantly
the speakers comes from a country that was built on the
refused to admit the Special Committee to Investigate
displacement of one people that was consigned to the darkIsraeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Populaness of refugee camps.
tion of the Occupied Territories in order for it also to
conduct a complete investigation?
12. The Israeli repgesentative spoke about the teachings of
Mahatma Gandhi. I wassurprised. I wonder whatMahatma
17. The Israeli representative spoke about manipulating
Gandhi would have said if he had been involved in or had
the Security Council. I must confess that he gave me more
lived through the tragedy of the Palestinian people.
power than I deserve. The Council consists of mature and
experienced
representatives of responsible Governments.
13. The. Israeli representative spoke about the’ kter
Who can manipulate 15 members of the Council? It is an
resources in the occupied territories. I would like to remind
insult to make such a statement. Members of the Council
I United Nations, Treary Series, vol. 75,p. 287.’
\
have convictions and believe in the correctness of the issue.
2
\

:

The majority have so far supported the merits of the draft
resolution.
..l

24. We have already tried, with all decency, urgihg Isqel,
calling upon Israel, requesting and entreating it to rescind
its measures ‘$ as to show the mi&mum’&speti
:fsr “the
Charter of +e,.United Nations. We have’ exhausteg the
vocabulary for expresiing discontent and indignation and
have now reached the stage of action-and that action is
,otlilined in the draft resolution in its present form.
’
:
:. .I
,.I
25. Draft :icsQlution S/13171/Rev.2 is the product of
‘compromise, Its goal is to establish a commission, and for
the first time in the history of the Middle East there til be a
commission of the Council which will visit the area to
examine the situation in the occupied territories. We know
that nothing irritates Israel more than the Council’s involvement. In our view, the establishment of a commission is
reasonable, just and unimpeachable.

18. The representative of Israel said to us; in effect:.the
occupied territories are ours; they belong to us by virtue of
old affinities that are mentioned in the Bible; whether you
accept it or not, they, are ours and we shall continue our
colonization and expansionism. That is the message which
he gave us.
19. It happens that the Council holds a different view. In
the view of the Council, Israel must withdraw from territories occupied by force. In the view of the Councii, the
dissertation on the: benefits of occupation does not’ cut
much ice. In the v&w of the Council, the national rights Of
the Palestinians must be respected. The problem is then not
between Jordan and Israel, as the Israeli representative has
been trying to portray it, but between Israel and the Council. And surely the Council is not at fault. It is Israel that is at
fault. Therefore, action by the Council is justified along the
lines embodied in-the ‘draft resdlution before the Council.

26. I conclude my statement with the hope that the revised
draft resolution will be adopted. Its adoption will be a small
consolation to the people of Palestine and other Arabs who
have suffered from indescribable tribulations for 50 years.

20. ‘The intention of the co-sponsors of the draft resolubon is to take the bull by the horns. Israel is behaving in the
occupied territories like the proverbial bull in a china shop.
It is high time to discipline its action. It is high time to
involve the Council in an investigating mission that will visit
the occupied territories and thereafter report to the Council
about what goes on there.

27. Mr. FUTSCHER PEREIRA (Portugal): As our deliberations on the item inscribed on our agenda come to a
close, events of particular significance in the Middle East
have altered the perspective in which these deliberations
began. For although the Jordanian complaint which led to
the convening of the Council was limited and precise within
the formulation of its objective, the historical and political
framework of the questions examined, and indeed the
momentum of the debate itself, have so broadened the
dimension of the problems under discussion as to encompass the global situation of the Middle East conflict at the
present time. This dimension cannot in fact be ignored.

21. I understand that the representative of Israel is in a
diflicult situation, He is defending the indefensible, trying to
advocate the illegti; speaking on behalf of the immoral,
posing as the proponent of the warmongers and, what is
more, portraying Israel as a paragon of human equality.
22. tie said that Jews do not intend to replace Pale&ians. That is a macabre distortion of the truth. When European Jews started to Come to Palestine at the close of the last
century, they came with the same motto: “&&stence,
not
replacement’*. In fact they did replace the Palestinians.
They evicted therii from their ancestral homeland, so much
SO that in .April 1948, before the outbreak of hostilities,
there were about 300,000 evicted Palestinians who were
consigned to refugee camps. And what people thought ofas
a small cloud in the 1920s became a thunderstorm in 1948.
That is the logic that is now being used and reinforced in the
occupied territorie. In 1968 there was a handful of Jews in
the territories; in 1979 there are thousands of Jews, and the
number will snowball. That is the problem which the Palestinians are facing. :It is the erosion of their territory carried
out by superior niilitary power.

28. We deeply regret the policies and practices pursued in
the Arab territories illegally occupied by Israel and all
measures taken affecting the Holy City of Jerusalem. By the
same token we deplore Israel’s refusal to admit the possibility that the aspirations of the Palestinian people might one
day come to find institutional expression through a selfdetermined national entity.
29. But all that does not prevent us from sharing the
feelings of hope which were reborn with the news that peace
in the Middle East has become possible and that a first step
in that direction was taken with the agreement between
Egypt and Israel. Indeed, the Portuguese Government considers that agreement a highly positive factor in the evolution of a conflict which has divided peoples to which my
country is bound by historical ties of friendship and whose
moral and cultural values form so important a part of the
common heritage of mankind.

23. Prime Minister Begin said to the Knesset, as reported
in lXe New York Times of 21 March, that partial and
imperfect autonomy applied to the inhabitants, not to the
territories, that Israeli troops would remain therein indefinitely; that no Palestinian State would ever see the light of
day. That is a strange concept of inteinational relations.
That is, in my view-to use the weakest unflattering
adjective-a weird statement which merits immediate condemnation by the ‘Council. The Government of Israel is
acting in blatant defiance of the family of nations. Such a
statement cannot pass unnoticed. What should the answer
be?

30. The signing of a peace treaty in that region, limited
and frail though it may still be, may in fact signal new
innbvative. possibilities leading to a global, just and broader
solution-a solution which has to ensure the Palestinian
people’s inalienable right to self-determination while also
safeguarding the existence of the State of Israel, in conformitywith the relevant resolutions of the United Nations. the
decisions of the Security Council and the principles
embodied in the Charter.
____---3

- _-.._

ing havoc with the spiritual shrines of Jerusalem; which are
revered by all monotheistic religions and mean so much to
Moslems everywhere.

31: Naturally, we do not entertain the illusion that the
proposed treaty will provide an adequate global and dellnite answer to the problems of the Middle East; neither can
the parties themselves be under that illusion. But it should
not be forgotten that 30 years have elapsed since the creation of the State of Israel-30 years marked by war, hatred
and destruction, during which no perspective of peace,
however frail or remote, has ever been in sight. Such a
perspective now appears for the first time.

40. These Zionist practices in the occupied territories constitute a danger which in itself is living proof of aggressive
intentions, an explicit manifestation being the lack on
Israel’s part of any withdrawal from these territoriesIsrael seeking thereby to impose a fait accompli.
41. We are sure that the Security Council will live up to its
historic responsibility in the present situation. Although the
Council has adopted many resolutions banning any measure to annex Jerusalem and has decided that all legislative
and administrative measures taken by Israel which purport
to alter the legal status of the,city. are invalid, and has called
on Israel to rescind those measures forthwith, Israel has
seen fit to ignore all these resolutions,,which have remained
dead letters.

32. Although the reservations and even ‘the clear opposition which the agreement has encountered in wide international circles, namely in the Arab world, are understandable
and worthy of respect, the Portuguese delegation deems it a
duty to hail and support it as the beginning of a new path
leading to the true peace that we all seek.
33. Having said that, I should like to repeat that the
Portuguese Government views with deep concern the practices pursued by Israel in the occupied Arab territories and
Israel’s refusal to abide by the pertinent resolutions of the
Council. That is the reason why we consider it justified that
the Security Council should find ways and means to examine the situation created by those practices. ,However, this
position should in no way be interpreted as expressing
on the part of my Government any intention of minimizing
the courageous peace initiatives pursued by President Carter and the results so far achieved, which we applaud and
fully support.

42. Many resolutions have also been adopted by the General Assembly on the occupied territories, the last being
resolution 33/l 13 B, which calls upon Israel to comply with
its international obligations in accordance with the fourth
Geneva Convention and to desist from taking any action
which would result in changing the legal status, geographical nature or demographic composition of the Arab territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem.
43. Therefore, the need for concrete action by the Security
Council has become urgent, especially in view of the very
recent illegal measures taken by the Israeli Government for
the establishment of Jewish settlements in the occupied
Arab territories, measures which are scarcely conducive to a
climate favouring the search for a peaceful solution in the
region.

34. Our position only reflects the apprehension of the
Portuguese Government in the face of the complexity and
dimension of the problems that the peace treaty between
Egypt and Israel does not solve-and the solution of which
seems to us to be absolutely essential to achieve a true,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East.

44. I should now like to survey in a succinct manner the
situation in the occupied Arab territories and the inhuman
treatment that ,the Palestinian people under occupation are
receiving at the hands of the Israeli authorities. Perhaps no
better example can be cited-an example that bears on the
heart of this very problem-than
a quotation from a statement by the Acting Chairman of the Special Committee to
Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of
the People of the Occupied Territories, the representative of
Sri Lanka. He stated the following on 20 November 1978
before the Special Political Committee of the General
Assembly:
“The conclusions reached by the Special Committee
on the basis of this information are given in chapter VI
[of its reportj, and these speak for themselves. The fourth
Geneva Convention, which is applicable to the occupied
territories and which affords protection of civilian persons under military occupation, is not being implemented by the Government of Israel. Consequently, the
civilian population does not enjoy any protection whatsoever against the violations of its human rights by the
occupying Power. The claim that this Convention is
being applied on a pragmatic basis is untenable. It is
more exact to state that it is only by coincidence that
Borne, if any, of its provisions are being respected by the
Government of Israel. Indeed, the essential provisions of
that Convention are being flouted by the Government of,

35. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Saudi Arabia. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
36. Mr. ALLAGANY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President, I
should like to thank you and the members of the Security
Council for granting me this opportunity to explain my
Government’s position on the question of the occupied
territories and on Jerusalem.
37. The ‘Government of Saudi Arabia has made it abundantly clear on ntikous
occasions that there can be no
genuine peace in the Middle East without the complete
withdrawal of Israel from all the territories occupied by it,
and if the Palestinian people are not given all their legitimate and inalienable rights.
38. Of particular importance for Saudi Arabia, and
indeed the entire Moslem world, which totals over 700
million persons, is the question of Jerusalem. The position
of Saudi Arabia on Jerusalem-which is revered as the first
Qibla in Islam-has been repeatedly made clear. It is inconceivable that these several hundred million Moslems would
accept the suzerainty of the Zionists over Jerusalem.
39. The Zionist regime, besides changing the physical and
demographic character of the occupied territories, is play4

Bank’s exports and provided 90 per cent of its imports,
while the East Bank has provided a market for 37,ooO of the
West Bank’s people to alleviate the suffering and compensate for the lost markets of the people under occupation.

Israel as a matter of policv. In particular I refer to its
articles 27, 33, 47 and 53.“’
45. At this juncture I wish to cite a few examples of the
brutal methods used by the Israeli occupying authorities
against the innocent civilian inhabitants of the West Bank.
A representative of the International Red Cross reported
recently:
“On a visit which was carried out with the presence of
an observer, 8 I prisoners were found huddled in one cell.
The prisoners all declared that they were not allowed to
leave their cells, even to use the toilets or the washing
facilities. They had to use the cell tap which was situated
only 15 centimeters from the level of the floor.”

48:‘: The West ‘Bank trade deficit with Israel is financed
simply by its surplus with Jordan and by remittances,of
West Bank Palestinian workers abroad. The West Bank, in
the present circumstances, offers Israeli industries an almost
completely protected market, which results in the West
Bankers paying higher prices for Israeli goods.
49. There is no need here to stress that the question of
Palestine lies at the heart of the problem in the Middle East.
Fulfilment of the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people and the withdrawal of Israel from all the
occupied Arab territories, particularly Jerusalem, is the
only way of restoring peace and security.

Another example was mentioned by Amnesty International
in its report entitled The Methods ofTorture. I quote from
that report:
“‘(a) Police dogs let loose on the prisoner, who is
usually handcuffed with hands behind back. The dogs
are trained to throw the prisoner on the ground. The
prisoner is then ardered to get on his feet, and so on.

50. It is patently clear that the Israeli authorities have seen
fit not only to violate the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people but also to contravene the provisions of intemational law as well as those of the Charter of the United
Nations.

“(b) Fingers placed on the end of an open door, and
then the door is slammed on them.
“‘(c) Finger-nails are pulled out with ordinary pincers.
“(d) The prisoner is injected with pepper solutions.
“(e) The prisoner is injected with solutions which he is
told induce instant insanity. He is shown what he is told
is an antidote, which would be given to him if only he
confessed in time.
“v) A large metal container is fitted over the head and
neck and held firm to the body by extension. The container is then hit with sticks on the outside, at first slowly
and in routine fashion, and then with increasing tempo.
The more battered the container, the more diRicult it is
to remove.
‘(g) Matchsticks are inserted into the genitals. Sometimes they are lit.
“(h) AFcertain chemical substance (possibly a nerve
irritant) is put in the hand of the prisoner, who is ordered
to clench it. The substance gives the effect of an electric
shock.”

51. No member of this august body would deny that we all
seek peace-not peace at any price but peace in conformity
with the precepts of justice and the dignity of human beings,
peace that would restore to the Palestinian people their
inalienable rights and their right to live as a free people in
their own country.
52. Mr. MARSHALL
(United Kingdom): It is over two
years since the Council last met specifically to discuss the
situation in the occupied Arab territories. At that time
[2969th meeting], my delegation joined in the consensus
statement which strongly deplored measures taken in those
territories by the Government of Israel to alter their demographic composition with particular reference to the establishment of settlements. That consensus statement also
underlined the international view that Israeli actions in and
around Jerusalem, including the expropriation of land and
properties and the transfer of populations, were invalid and
called upon Israel to rescind measures previously taken
and to desist from taking any further action which might
change the status of that Holy City.
53. That statement, which has been supported by subsequent General Assembly resolutions adopted by overwhelming majorities, has clearly not been heeded. Indeed,
as a phrase used by the Jordanian Permanent Representative in his letter seeking this Council meeting implies, there
is increasing evidence of the continuation, and even expansion, by the Israeli Government of the policies deplored by
the Security Council.

46. As to the real intentions of the Israeli Government on
the future of the occupied territories, perhaps there is no
more revealing statement than the following quotation
from The Jerusalem Post of 13 July 1967:
‘A decisive turning-point in the history of the Jewish
people and of Israel has taken place before our very eyes.
Our ancestral heritage has been liberated and Jerusalem
redeemed to become once more a city that is one.”

54. Last October the Israeli press and radio reported that
Israel was to begin immediately a programme of expansion
and consolidation of existing settlements in the West Bank.
The United Kingdom Government stated publicly at the
time that they have always been opposed to settlement
activity which could make a negotiated solution to the
over-all problem in the area more difficult. This remains my

47. What has been taking place in the occupied territories
can be best described by citing the available figures on what
the Israeli authorities have so far pillaged. According to
these figures, Israel has taken about 62 per cent of the West
2 A/SPC/33/PV.29.

p. 7.

5

L

Government’s view. We have constantly made dain our
58. Finally, may I say that it is a source of great regret to
view that Israel should acknowledge the applicatibn of the
my delegation that we are today obliged for the third time in
fourth Geneva Convention to the West Bank, East Jerusathe past three months to criticize in this forum the activities
lem and the other territories which it occupies. We recogand policies of the Government of a country with which the
nize that a fully satisfactory and lasting solution to the
United Kingdom has for so long had close relations. If,
problems of the occupied territories can be achieved only in
however, it is true that criticism offered by a friend is the
the context of an over-all settlement. However, as the Formost valuable and most to be respected, we offer our views
eign Minister of the Federal Republic of Germany said in
gladly and hope the message will be clearly understood by
the General Assembly debate on 26 September 1978,) when
the people and leaders of Israel.
speaking on behalf of the nine member couutries of the
European Community, our view is that any over-all settie- 59. -Mr. KAISER (Bangladesh): My delegation has lisment must be based, among other things, on the need for
tened with great attention to the statements that have been
Israel to end the territorial occupation which it has mainmade by the representative of Jordan and the representative
tained since the 1967 war. It follows, therefore, that we
of Israel. We have noted with particular interest the extenstrongly believe the pursuance by the Government of Israel
sive and well-documented references made by the represenof its current settlements policies poses a major obstacle to
tative of Jordan regarding noncompliance by the Govempeace.
ment of Israel with the previous Council resolutions and the
relevant provisions of the fourth Geneva Convention. We
55. Since we began this debate over a week ago the news
believe that facts that have been broughtto the notice of this
has broken that, following an admirable and courageous
august body by the representative of Jordan are cogent and
etfort by President Carter, the Governments of Egypt and
deserve careful study and thorough examination.
Israel are on the verge of signing a peace agreement. My
Government has supported the Camp David process from
60. In this connexion, I should like to quote from the
the beginning, and we welcome this development. But we
speech of the representative of Jordan of 19 March:
welcome it as the start, the first step in the struggle to
“The second point made by the representative of Israel
achieve a genuine comprehensive settlement to the over-all
was
that my information was incorrect. Very well, if that
problem. My Government’s views on the prerequisites for a
is what he believes about it, why does he not have the
comprehensive settlement are well known and have not
courage to prove me wrong by accepting a neutral comchanged. The test of the imminent peace agreement will
mission
made up of members of the Security Council, all
come in the months ahead, and the issue we are curxently
of whom are men of integrity? We are willing to have all
discussing in this Council-Israeli
settlements in the occuthose members, friends of Israel, go and see for thempied territories-will
clearly be of crucial importance.
selvesand prove who is right and who is wrong.” [223Zsr
Indeed, if the present settlement policy of the Israeli
meering, p~nz. 132.1
Government were to continue, it is the view of my Govemment that the peace process now started would be gravely
61. My delegation believes that the commission which
jeopardized.
had been provided for in the draft resolution under consideration, to be appointed by the President, should visit the
56. It is, however, precisely because of the peace efforts
occupied areas so that the members can see things for
that my Government has reservations about the proposal to
themselves and make an on-the-spot examination of the
send a Security Council mission to examine the situation in
factual situation, and we expect that Israel in this regard will
the occupied territories. In principle we support the concept
be more co-operative than in the past. Further, in the view
of sending fact-finding missions to troubled areas. We have
of my delegation, the commission should, as well, consider
made this clear on many occasions. But we are concerned
interviewing those Palestinians who have been affected by
that on this occasion a mission such as that proposed in the
the action of the occupying Power and who are not now in
draft resolution before us might only serve to complicate the
their country but are refugees in neighbouring countries.
peace efforts currently under way. My Government would
prefer to see the Israeli Government recognize the strength
62. In conclusion, my delegation believes that the comof feeling on this issue and to see all concerned strive to
mission, if it is established, will have heav and onerous
build on the progress already achieved before considering
responsibilmes, ancl it is our firm COI’WktlOn
t’hat, given
alternative approaches. For that reason we have decided to
co-operation, it can discharge its responsibilities duly and
abstain from voting on the draft resolution before us.
effectively only by visiting the areas and thereby helping the
cause to make the true situation understood, thus helping
57. Before concluding, I should like to emphasise that our
the cause of peace itself.
decision to abstain should in no way be read as acquiescence
in, or the condoning of, the policies of the Government of
63. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representaIsrael in the occupied territories. Indeed, my Government
tive of Israel, on whom I call.
appeals to the Government of Israel to desist now from any
measures to increase its settlements and to avoid jeopardiz64. Mr. BLUM (Israel): I am grateful to the representative
ing over the next few critical months the prospects for a
of Kuwait for confirming once again, through his statement
comprehensive peace settlement in which all countries and
today, that he is indeed the undisguised spokesman for the
peoples can join.
Arab countries in thef)rdtncil, unable to let pass an opportunity to advocate their policy of denying Israel’s rights to
’ Oflciaf Records of fhe General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Pienary Meet&s,
8th meeting.
peace and security. This is only to be expected from a State
6

which is formally on record as having rejected resolution
242 (1967). Indeed, all this is in the name of the true spirit of
partisanship of the Charter of the United Nations. 1
b

70. In its edition of 8-19 September 1976 the Intemqtional
HeraId Tri@ine, reporting ,a‘,‘crackdown ,on the press in
Kuwait and is&sing press conditions ,m ‘the Arab world in
.
’
.,,
general, observed;‘,*
,.!,
i “Ironically, it is in East Jerusalem, under Israeli’rule,
: that the .&ab press is least restricted. The Arabic language dailies regularly oppose. policies of the Israeli
Government.”
’ .‘.
!., _ ‘., I
. ..
71. The PRESIDENT: There are no other speakers at this
stage; I shall therefore make a statement in my capacity as
representative ‘of NIGERIA.
‘,
72. In making this statement, I would wish to say from the
outset that, as is very clear to everyone, Nigeria has always
attempted to be even-handed and fair in all aspects of its
foreign policy. I was very glad that the United Kingdom has
joined in this even-handedness.

65. The representative of Kuwait has attempted to juggle
the posture of impartial abjudication with his true role as
the mouthpiece for the Arab group in the Security Council.
He has denied that role on previous occasions and claimed
that he comes not as a partisan of Arabs but as a partisan of
the Charter. As a self-styled partisan of the Charter, he
would know, I am sure, that as a party to a dispute he
should refrain from voting on any matters connected with
that dispute, unless, of course, he can assure us that he is no
longer a party to the Arab-Israeli dispute. After all, Article
27 (3) of the Charter ,provides that in decisions of the
Security Council, under Chapter VI, “a party to a dispute
shall abstain from voting”.
66. The Government of Kuwait spares no effort to show
that it does not lag behind any other Arab Government in
its active militancy against Israel. It is the Kuwaiti representative who sponsored the draft resolution for the Council to
adopt, and who commended it to Council members. To say
the very least, this procedure casts moral and legal doubts
on the whole process. Surely, both good taste and respect
for the Charter demand that a partisan of the Charter
observe Article 27 (3).

73. I do believe that one of the greatest problems of our
age has been that of wdrld power influence to control both
the Cape routes and the Canal routes to the East, and this
problem has manifested itself not only in racist domination
in the Cape but in the Middle East as well.
74. Having said that, I would also say that the foreign
policy of Nigeria is based on classical principles-one of
protecting the territorial integrity of our country in ensuring
that there is stability in our region, and in stretching a hand
of fellowship to all our neighbours. It is not a question of
moral justification of a policy; it is a question of a realistic
approach to what is in our enlightened self-interest, and we
do hope that in the discussion today, which Nigeria will
join, this principle may be taken into consideration.

67. Incidentally, the assertion that Kuwait and the group
of States which it represents in the Council are nartisans of
the Charter sounds rather hollow, considering ;he fact that
that group of Arab States has over the last 30 years violated,
with regard to Israel, every purpose and principle of the
Charter. They have ignored, in respect of Israel, Article 2 (1)
of the Charter-which stipulates the principle of the sovereign equality of all Members of the Organisation, Article 2
(3), which lays down the duty of States to settle their intemational disputes by peaceful means, Article 2 (4), which
prohibits the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of any State, and so on.

75. I have gone into this preamble for a number of reasons. The first reason is that I have observed that the Israeli
delegation, rather than applying their minds to the subject
that is before us, have taken one State after another and
brought in extraneous aspects of their own domestic policies. I believe that, even though I am speaking on behalf of
the delegation of Nigeria, I should draw attention to the fact
that in the Security Council we should aspire to maintain
the high standards that should be the privilege of such a
body.

68. I crave the Kuwaiti representative’s indulgence for
making such inconvenient and what he would no doubt call
distasteful observations.
69. In his statement the representative of Kuwait was
predictably solicitous about Palestinian sensibilities. Indeed,
memories in the Council are sometimes short, for it is not so
long ago that the Kuwaiti Government took measures
which, in the view of United States officials at the time, were
designed “primarily to control the large Palestinian community in Kuwait”. I quote from The New York Times of 1
September 1976:
“Under these measures, foreigners are forbidden from
becoming Kuwaiti citizens and thus are forbidden to
vote or hold public office, no-matter how long they have
lived in the country. Similarly, by law a foreigner cannot
operate a business in Kuwait without a Kuwaiti holding
a 55 per cent share.”

76. For more than a decade, the Israeli presence in Arab
territories seized in the June 1967 war has become institutionalized and transformed into sprouting Jewish settlements that are spreading over the entire area. These vexing
settlements are to be found everywhere, namely, in the
plateau north-east of the Golan Heights in Syria; along the
Jordan Valley; at other points on the West Bank, including
occupied Jerusalem--since renamed Judaea and Samaria,
in violation of all known norms of constitutional propriety;
in the Gaza Strip and in Sinai from the Mediterranean coast
to the southern tip of the peninsula at Sharm el She&h.
These settlements represent, in the view of the Nigerian
delegation, a strong element in a conscious and explicit
policy of acquisition.

It would appear that Jews and Arabs coexist with greater
ease in Israel, where such restrictions do not exist.

77. The settlements themselves are the final outcome of a
carefully laid process, starting with military or paramilitary
7

outposts, and thereafter developing into semi-permanent or
permanent settlements. The entire exercise itself naturally
involves flagrant violations of the elementary and basic
human rights of the Arab population-in the occupied territories. In the circumstances, it is therefore manifestly evident that it is these settlements, tied to the Palestinian
problem, that lie at the very roots of the continuing crisis in
the Middle Past. I personally have attempted to interpret
this as brinkmanship for bargaining purposes, but the eventual permanent nature of these settlements has befogged
me.
78. The search for a solution of the problem in the Middle
East continues to be with the international community after
more than three decades, and judged against this background-that the settlements are indeed the greatest obstacle to a durable peace in the region-my delegation believes
that any realistic search for peace must take into account
what has been going on in the occupied areas.
79. To achieve a durable peace, the ongoing process of
establishing new settlements must be halted, and dozens of
others-all illegal-must be dismantled. I believe that thereafter, all Palestinians-and I wish to emphasize this point:
all Palesiinians-both
inside and outside the occupied territories must be guaranteed unfettered freedom to enable
them to return to their homes after three decades and
exercise their inalienable right to self-determination and
independence in a politically defined homeland of their
OWIl.

80. In order to appreciate fully why the attainment of a
durable peace is contingent upon Israel’s unconditional
withdrawal from the territories seized by naked force and
aggression, one has to reflect on the record of the occupying
Power in these territories since 1967.
81. Here I might digress a little. I listened carefully to the
representative of Israel in trying to distinguish between
occupation and benevolence. I believe that occupation, as
prescribed in the Geneva Convention, means occupation
through war, and not permanent settlements; and the arguments which he adduced to indicate that there wasa benevolent regime in those territories are fundamentally against
the spirit and letter of the Geneva Convention.
82. The policy of establishing Jewish settlements on Arab
lands was initiated by the government of Levi Eshkol in
1967 and pursued with growing enthusiasm under his successor, Golda Meir, of blessed memory. I remember reading
the book, Mr Life,’ and I recall that even among the Jews
she distinguished between members of the Labour Zionist
movement and others, and there was even an element of
discrimination among the Jews themselves. The October
war of 1973 brought that policy to a halt momentarily,
exposing the false assumptions, or pretexts, on which it was
based. But even before Israel had buried its dead from that
war, the policy was resumed early in 1974 and pursued with
renewed vigour.
83. Thereafter, the Israel Labour Government embarked
on a twenty-year plan-I975 to 1995-with the main objec4 G. P. Putnam’s Sons, New York.

tive of establishing an Israeli presence in strategic areas of
the West Bank, including Arab Jerusalem. This plan is
already in an advanced stage of implementation, as the
Israelis are already in control of an estimated 70 per cent of
the cultivable land in the Jordan Valley. They have also
developed an extensive infrastructure involving the creation
of a wide network of all possible social services to serve and
connect the colonies in the settlements in the area. The
Israeli objectives in the pattern and location of the illegal
settlements are thus twofold: first, to cut off the West
Bank’s populated areas from any physical contact with
Jordan; secondly, to contain the Palestinian population by
surrounding it from the north, the west,the south, and now,
from the east, by two belts of Israeli settlements.
84. As regards the high-rise residential fortresses that
form a ring around the Palestinian population of Jerusalem, the strategic objectives appear to my delegation to be
twofold: first, to prevent the physical expansion of the
Palestinian population of Jerusalem and the accumulative
and progressive seizure of that city, and, secondly, to create
a psychological feeling of living in a ghetto, in order to cause
the Palestinians to emigrate and consequently facilitate full
Israeli settlement and control of the Arab sector of the city.
85. As though to emphasize the priority given to the
objective of acquisition, the Israelis set aside huge sums of
money, the latest being an appropriation of $40 million-it
sounds little-only last January for expanding present Jewish colonies and improving their infrastructure.
86. The policies of the Israeli military administration in
the occupied territories are therefore both callous and indefensible. My use of the word “callous” is deliberate because
the settlements involve the systematic eviction of Arab families from their lands directly and indirectly, as elucidated
earlier, and cutting them off in consequence from their only
sources of livelihood.
.87. The policies are presented as morally defensible
because on every occasion eviction has been justified under
the over-stretched formula of shoring up Israel’s so-called
security only to turn over the sequestered property to new
Jewish immigrants. And, as if to further compound the
humiliation meted out to the Arabs, Palestinian workers
have indeed been observed constructing houses for Israeli
immigrants, often on land which has been confscated from
Arab owners. Or worse still, Palestinian workers, like South
African blacks, find themselves, in order to eke out a living
and in order to survive with their families,...working their
erstwhile farms for their oppressors.
88. The cultural aspects of the Israeli occupation are
equally.disturbing. After all, nazism was basically a cultural
identity and a travesty of freedom of expression based on
racism and the notion of a superior race. According to Seth
Tillman, a former staff member of the Foreign Relations
Committee of the United States Congress, all aspects of
cultural expression, including drama, literary magazines
and the press, are subject to rigid controls by the occupying
Power. Dramatic scripts, for example, must be submitted to
Israeli military censors for advance approval. All references
to the Palestinian entity are forbidden and must not appear
in any magazine. Repressive measures have been ap

plied with increasing intensity since- the inception of
Israel’s military occupation, but in recent times they have
been directed heavily against intellectuals, students and
potential political leaders, most especially against those
who articulate Palestinian national aspirations. I do not
know whether this man from-the Congress is reflecting the
right spirit of what is happening but we do believe that
congressmen in this country have some integrity.

that there is a ,coloniai regime in the .militarily occupies
territories. Israeli references to Arab-Jewish “coexistence”
on the West Bank may be used to advance a claim that the
colonial regime is a benevolent one, but, benevolent or
otherwise, it is still a colonial regime and a colonial regime
in the sense of an occupying Power following warfare,
which makes it worse. At least the colonialists had a pattern
for leaving their colonial territory at some stage.

89. In effect, is the suppression of the Palestinian people a
matter of race? Is it a cultural phenomenon? Is it a religious
phenomenon? My delegation believes that it must be one of
them, or probably all of them. Indeed, the sudden deportations and extended imprisonments are invariably carried
out under a law of administrative detention, a heritage from
the Mandate days and a law which the British used against
Jewish partisans and which, ironically, the Israelis now use
regularly against Palestinian intellectuals, students and
activists.

94. The “coexistence” of which the Israelis speak is, in any
case, of a special nature since the settlements being established are exclusively for Jews. I have the impression that no
Arabs are invited or permitted to live in them. I hope I am
not wrong. That is clearly not a coexistence of equals but
rather one between a dominant invader and a subordinate
indigenous population which is to be kept docile by a
combination of military force and political and economic
inducements.

90. I again ask, is it based on culture, or race, or both?
When George Orwell wrote 1984 and Animal Farm he
beamed his thoughts in one direction and we are beginning
to see those thoughts becoming more universal in the context of what I have just described.

95. When I refer to southern Africa I always wonder why
the carrot and stick process is not being used in many of the
very excruciating deliberations which we have had during
the last two years. The Israelis appear to do better than the
Western Powers in this respect.

91. In the realm of international law there can be no
question but that the Israeli settlements are illegal and that
in continuing to establish them the Israeli Government is
contravening specific international agreements. Apart from
the fact that the policy of acquisition constitutes a defiance
of United Nations resolutions and of the spririt of the
Charter, there are also particular obligations-of
which
many representatives have spoken-imposed by article 6 of
the fourth Gene.~&nvention-of
which, happily, Israel is
a signatory-on any occupying Power. By no stretch of
legal imagination can that or any other provision of that
Convention be interpreted as an authorization for a belligerent occupying Power to exempt itself from its voluntarily
contracted obligation under that Convention. To affhm
otherwise, as the Israelis have done in recent times, not only
begs the question but goes to the heart of what I talked
about earlier, namely that there is a difference between
occupation in time of war and the permanent establishment
of an Israeli presence.

96. In the view of my delegation, there is nothing new
about these techniques. They are the classic devices employed by the British in India and in many of the other
classical colonial empires. There is little doubt that this
system is more enlightened, humane and efficient than the
brutal subjugation of populations practised by the Germans in Europe during the Second World War. It is, however, still colonialism none the less and of an anachronistic
variety. All that is new about it is its revival in an age when
the classical European colonial empires have all but disap
peared from the surface of our globe-obviously except for
settler colonialism in southern Africa.
97. Except for Israel itself, world opinion is now unanimous-we have seen this around this chamber-in its collective judgement that the Israeli colonialism in the West
Bank is both illegal and an obstacle to peace. The evidence
is conclusive but even in marshalling it one has the strong
sense that the practical problem lies elsewhere.

92. No less excruciating to the sensibilities as well as to the
intelligence of the Palestinian people, and indeed of the
entire international community, is the Israeli contention
that the people living under their military rule are happy
and even free. I believe that we have heard this type of very
strange logic put before us in the context of southern Africa.
The Israelis try to pull a veil over our eyes by pointing to
certain social services which they say they are providing, to
jobs provided by Israeli enterprises, and, in addition, to the
holding of free municipal elections-again this is the pattem which we learned about in southern Africa, but in the
case of Israel we are happy to note that in fact most of the
candidates that win these elections strongly support the
Piilestine Liberation Organization.

98. As my delegation sees it, the practical problem
undoubtedly lies in the bone-deep conviction of Israel’s
current leaders that the West Bank-“Judaea
and
Samati’ -is the patrimony of the Jewish people, the property of the Jews by biblical right, a gift from the Supreme
Being which cannot be revoked by Arab “squatters”, even
“squatters” who have lived in the land for 2,000 years.
99. It is something of an oddity in the modem world to
have territorial claims based on obscurantist religious
grounds. To succumb to this philosophy would lead to
international anarchy. I am sure that those who created
Israel did not anticipate this dimension. And if we were to
apply these obscurantist policies in redefining borders
among nation-States, we must all understand that we could
all trump up various devices by which to redraw our lines
and our borders. I believe that the big Powers would have a

93. Even if these claims that social services and jobs are
provided were wholly accurate-and there is abundant evidence to the contrary-they still would not alter the fact
9

Israeli military occupation of Arab lands is viewed, one
cannot but arrive at the same conclusion. Morally, the
colonization of Arab territories occupied since 1967 following hostilities is wrong and is doing as much violence to the
fabric of Israeli society itself as.it is to the legitimate rights
and aspirations of the people on which Israel seeks to
impose its authority. Juridically, the occupation process is
illegal, involving Israel in a constant battle of wits with the
international community, from which Israel has become
increasingly alienated. Politically, the annexation of East
Jerusalem, the establishment of more and more settlements
or the expansion of existing ones in territories from which
the world has long decided that Israel will have to withdraw
is futile and self-defeating; it merely perpetuates the very
hostility which it should be Israel%. first objective to disarm.

19.‘ As I’said earlier, sectirity is also.empha’sized, and no
one questions Israel% sincerity as regards its apprehensidus
for its security. After all, Israel is a fait accompli as ‘a’
nation-State. But, since the Begin Government came to
office, the emphasis has increasingly shifted to religious,
biblical grounds, to the ‘mystique of “E&z Israel”. That,
one suspects, is where. the real conviction lies; that is what
fuels Mr. Begin’s engine.. It places Israel in direct defiance of
the modem world’s primary standard of equity for the
drawing of international frontiers-the principle of selfdetermination, the rights of peoples, so far as is possible, to
live within political jurisdictions of their choice. There being
no practical way to reconcile the two standards-one’
ancient and religious, the other modem and secular-the
Israelis have found themselves in a painful moral dilemma
with respect to the Palestinian people.

104. : In the circumstances the international community
can no longer afford to procrastinate on this longstanding
evasion of its collective will by the State of Israel. The
United Nations must now demand immediate compliance
with its resolutions on the subject; unless Israel is prepared
to face the appropriate measures provided under the Charter for continued defence, it must abandon its plan to
establish new settlements or expand old ones. The occupying military administration must also stop its ongoing censured policies of evacuation, deportation, expulsion, displacement and transfer of Arab inhabitants of the occupied
territories. It must desist from further destroying or demolishing Arab homes and terminate its current mass arrests
and torture of Arab civilians, in violation of the principles
of natural justice and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. Israel must respect the sanctity of the archaeological, religious and cultural sites belonging by birthright to the
non-Jewish populations in the occupied areas and to many
more across the world. All these should be a prelude to
complete and unconditional withdrawal of the Israeli occupation force to facilitate the return of dispossessed Palestinians in safety, honour and dignity to their homes in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council.

101. Not many years ago we ,all sided with the Jews in
condemning and fighting Nazi oppression when its victims
were rapidly being exterminated. I was a little boy at that
time, but I went to the villages to sing: “Hitler, a curse of
Germans, is cruel and heartless; England, with God’s guidance, will destroy him.” And so I played a part in this
process. This pogrom remains one of the greatest horrors of
our generation. That was why a State was created for Jews.
102. It is not uncommon for victims and oppressors alike
to become brutalized through the experience of oppression.
This is what psychiatrists might call “psychogenic traumata”. However, the Israeli nation is made up of people
many of whom have been dehumanized and gone through
this psychogenic phenomenon which I have talked about
and, to say the least, have suffered and who, because of that
suffering, should be more sensitized to the effects of oppression, discrimination, deprivation and even genocide. Unfortunately, they appear to be utilizing this psychogenic
experience as the rationale for victimizing others who had
nothing to do with their trauma and for violating their
human rights. In the process, they appear to be transferring
their pain.. A few mavericks, such as Mr. Israel Shahak,
have faced the dilemma squarely, acknowledging both the
rights of the Palestinians and the wrongs done them by
successive expulsion from their native land. And there are
others, such as the former Chief of Military Intelligence,
Yehoshafat Harkabi, who has urged his fellow Israelis to
concede the right of the Palestinians to form a State. He has
also asked the Israelis “to show sympathy for the Palestinian problems and suffering, to the making of which we
have contributed”. That is not all. An Israeli journalist,
Meir Merhav of The Jerusalem Post, warns the Israelis that
“the total and unconditional rejection of Palestinian selfdetermination is partly the result of a false perception of
reality, partly the outcome of faulty logic and partly the
product of an irrational mixture of mystical beliefs, aggressive romanticism and traumatic fears, which cannot be
upheld in today’s world”. That appears to be the crux of the
existing problem.

105. I:In securing the compliance of Israel, my delegation
can& but stress the central role which the United States
Government could play in securing ihe aforementioned
objectives. The principle of self-determination of peopies is
specified in the Charter of the United Nations. It is,
moreover, pertinent to remember that it is equally rooted in
the American tradition. The United States Government has
pursu’ed a course of action, albeit outside the framework of
the United Nations, geared towards the evolution of peace
in the Middle East. I recall that when I first spoke about
this: ‘1 .described President Sadat as the only man who
understands, but probably born out of his due time. I hope
he is not born out of his time.
106. If indeed the United States intends to play a credible
role among all the belligerents, if its avowed objective is a
durable peace and not a distorted one, then it has to be
scrupulously even-handed in its basic approach to the sensitive issues prevailing in the area as a whole. In our view, it is
no longer.enough merely to describe the Israeli settlements

103. No matter how we look at the problem, and regardless of the angle from which the whole paraphernalia of

5 Oflcial Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-second.StWon.
Plenary Meerings, 78th meeting.

10

I

‘.r

as illegal or as an obstacle to peace. The United States
Government will have to consider firmer measures to halt
the ongoing process of occupation of Arab territories by the
Israelii. That is the least that should be done and it should
be the beginning of a policy of articulation. I might be
misjudging the situation, but I believe that I could be right.

aware. Nor can wc conclude that a genuinely just solution to
the Palestinian problem can be promoted by the draft resolution, which contains no clear-cut condemnation of the
occupation’of foreign territories and which does not even
contain any clear language regarding the need to monitor
the situation on the spot.

107. The United States Administration, in the candid
opinion of my delegation, now needs to pause and reexamine whether it can continue to acquiesce in Israel’s
actions in occupied Arab lands, in spite of positive pronouncements by the Administration
in that direction.
Washington .will now need to reconsider Israel’s present
policies, which appear to tarnish the American heritage and
democratic tradition built on the record of such fearless and
legendary exponents of human rights as Abraham Lincoln
and Franklin Roosevelt. I believe that the present United
States Administration, like its predecessors, has the requisite political leverage to compel Israel to comply with the
pertinent United Nations resolutions for the attainment of a
durable peace in the Middle East. That, in our view, would
be America’s most enduring and positive contribution to
Israel’s security since an Israel encircled by hostile neighbours and compelled to accept a humiliating peace will
forever remain threatened.

112. However, the Czechoslovak delegation will vote for
this draft resolution because it represents the maximum
which the representatives of the Arab countries could manage to obtain agreement upon in this particular situation. In
this connexion, we are also mindful of the position which
has been taken by the delegation of Jordan, which requested the present meeting of the Security Council to deal
with the question of the situation in the occupied Arab
territories.
113. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now put to a vote the
revised draft resolution sponsored by Bangladesh, Kuwait,
Nigeria and Zambia [S/Z327Z/Rev,lJ.
A vote was taken by show of hart&.
In favour: Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia,
France, Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Portugal, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia.

108. In this connexion, I should like to make two further
points. I am very happy indeed that the United States
Administration has consistently spoken about majority rule
and self-determination in southern Africa as well. Also, I
must congratulate the Israeli delegation for the letters which
it has recently sent to the Secretary-General stating that
Israel has decided not only to observe the Security Council
resolutions on the mandatory arms embargo against South
Africa, but also to discontinue all licences to supply any
military equipment to South Africa.
109: I now resume my function as PRESIDENT
Security Council.

Against: None.
Abstaining: Norway, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
The draft resolution wasadopted by 12 votes to hone.6 with
3 abstentions.
114. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on those representatives who have asked to speak after the vote.

of the

115. Mr. ROLGN ANAYA (Bolivia) (fmrpfetation@om
Spanish): My delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution establishing a commission to determine on the spot the
scope of the complaints of the Arab countries regarding the
alarming problem of peace in the Middle East, currently in
relation to Jerusalem and the settlements in Arab territories.

110. Mr. HULINSKY
(Czechoslovakia) (interpretation
from Russian): The discussion in the Security Council,
which on this occasion was convened at the initiative of the
Jordanian delega$ion, has provided cogent proof of the fact
that the situation m the occupied Arab territories continues
to deteriorate. The discussion has also once again borne out
the fact that the Israeli Government does not intend to heed
the apinions of the Members of the United Nations or to
take account of the actual situation prevailing in the Middle
East. In its expansionist euphoria, it is obviously deliberately closing its eyes to the danger of an inevitable explosion. That explosion cannot be averted by posturing, by
shirking responsibility or by mystification and private transactions, but only by a just and comprehensive settlement
which would not circumvent the heart of the Middle East
conflict, namely, a solution to the Palestinian problem.

116. Strictly speaking, there were too many words and it
was overwhelming to hear the marathon of statements, as
someone has already said, to set up only one commission,
limited in effective, numerical strength to the categorical
number of three.
117. My delegation repeats its preference for constructive
actions and measures rather than a repetitionofcondemnation, and we wish to emphasize once again the reasons that
we have already stated in the Council regarding the role of
peaceful persuasion and objective understanding, which is
of definite interest to Bolivia, to achieve peace in that convulsed region of the world.

111. The long and painful process of drawing up the draft
resolution which we now have before us in document
V1317VRev.2, and on which we are about to vote, has
once again convinced us that a solution to the problem of
the occupied Palestinian territories has by no means drawn
any closer despite the separate deals of which we are all

118. One of the most important international principles
for my country is respect for the territorial sovereignty of
6 See resolution 446 (1979).

11

States. Any armed territorial occupauon, any usurpation of
territories or mutilation of sovereignty is totally contrary to
the principles of the Charter, to the rules of civilized world
consensus and international doctrine and’practice which
Bolivia has observed and continues to observe, a country
which has never usurped territory and which, on the con‘trary, was the victim of encroachments, the, major one of
which left us without an outlet to the sea with which we
came into being as a republic. My country will never accept
that territorial usurpation.
119. .In its unalterable policy of support for the peaceful
settlement of disputes, Bolivia considers favourably the
importance of the negotiations designed to achieve peace in
the Middle East. Those efforts for peace, although incomplete and sometimes outside the framework of the Security
Council, are, as we have already said, welcome as an initial
step. They would have been more fruitful had they not
pursued a piecemeal political solution but had they been
more global and considered the problem of Palestine as
pivotal for peace in the region, and, finally, had they contributed to, rather than excluded, United Nations efforts
and more especially Security Council efforts.
120. In the resolution that the Council has just adopted,
we establish only a mechanism to examine the situation, as
the text says, and later for peace negotiations. Its procedure
and objective are certainly valid, even if they are only purely
procedural. We certainly cannot beagainst any mechanism
set up by the Council itself, since we view with sympathy
any efforts to achieve peace, including efforts outside the
Council.
121. To return to the substance, Bolivia reiterates its conviction that lasting peace in the Middle East region can be
attained only by means of joint and global action, without
exclusions and omissions, within the framework of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). which established Israel’s
right to exist with internationally recognized boundaries
and recognized the rights of the Palestinian people.
122. We shall support whatever selection the President
makes. And, although the resolution does not explicitly say
so, we believe that the appointment of the commission of
inquiry consisting of three members, within the consultations provided for in paragraph 4, will follow established
practice; that is to say, the investigating group will be made
up of representatives of various geographical regions, legal
systems and religious creeds which coexist and complement
each other within the Organixation.
123. As regards the status of Jerusalem and the work of
the proposed commission, Bolivia fully endorses the position of the Holy See that the Holy City should be given a
“special status*‘. For the same reason, my delegation’ supports and endorses the statement made by His Holiness
Pope John Paul II who, according to press reports a week
ago, expressed the hope that the city of Jerusalem would
obtain sufficient guarantees to become a centre for harmony among the adherents of the three major monotheistic
religions: Judaism, Islam and Christianity. Bolivia is also in
favour of the preservation and safeguarding of the urban
and historical complex of the Holy City.

124. My delegation had formal reservations on the text of
the resolution that we have just adopted, the essential objective of which is the commission provided for in paragraph 4
and which therefore rendered unnecessary the tortuous
repetition of accusations and condemnations.
125. Once again principles prevail over form, My delegation voted in favour of those principles.
126. Mr. LEONARD (United States of America): My
delegation has abstained on the resolution which has been
adopted by the Security Council. Its content generally
accords with the frequently stated position of the United
States on settlements in the occupied territories. However, I
must be frank in saying that there are certain elements of the
resolution and certain aspects of the debate in this body
which are disturbing to us.
127. Fit, I must point out that the confrontational
debate which we have witnessed over the past week has
done little to serve the cause of peace. In our view, the often
intemperate and unwarranted language used by many
members to criticize Israel has only tended to distract, to
disrupt and to complicate the peace talks and the search for
a just solution to the issue of settlements in the occupied
territories. It has been a matter of particular concern to us
that this should have been done when the peace talks wereat
such a critical stage. It is clear that some who have participated in these meetings were in fact less interested in promoting peace than they profess to be, and I must also note
that derogatory references to American Jewish groups and
citizens are insulting, unwarranted and resented.
128. I have to note in particular a number of references by
speakers here to the Nazis and to nazism. One or another
contemporary situation has been repeatedly described here
as a form of naxism, as being analagous to the crimes of the
Nazi period. These references serve no useful purpose whatsoever. They amount to a provocative and harmful form of
namecalling. Those who are accused of nazism and who
are, of course, conscious of the enormous differences
between their own historical situation and the situation in
Germany some 40 years ago, are led to a justified anger at
this false andslanderous parallel, and those so slandered are
led, unfortunately all too often, to retaliation in kind, with
another slanderous parallel-which can only make more
dilXcu!t the already difficult path to peace, I can only appeal
for an end to this sort of harmful, indeed poisonous,
rhetoric.
129. I must also point out that my Government has grave
doubts about the utility of the creation of a Security Council
commission to examine the situation regarding the settlements in the occupied territories. Now that Egypt and Israel
have made a first important move towards a comprehensive
peace settlement in the Middle East, we believe it is incumbent on the Council not to inject irritants into this process.
130. The position of my Government on the issue of
settlements in the occupied territories is well known. As has
been stated on a number of occasions at the United Nations
and elsewhere, we are opposed to these settlements. We are
opposed because we believe they could be perceived as
prejudging the outcome of negotiations, and further be

cause we believe they are inconsistent with the fourth
Geneva Convention and international law.

135. It is di&uIt to believe that anyone,‘havingwitnessed
the immense effort it has taken to bring the talks to this
point, would wish to undermine what has been so far
achieved and jeopardize the future of the process. As President Carter said a ‘few days ago: let no one be deceived.
Those who attempt to obstruct the current effort are opposing the only effoti that can bring peace to the Middle East.
The’effect of their sloganeering and rhetoric is to make them
‘in effect the advocates of the starus quo, not advocates of
change; advocates of war, not advocates of peace; advocates of further suffering, not advocates of achieving the
human dignity to which long-suffering people of the region
are entitled.

13 1. Clearly, the settlements question is a serious issue. It
is worthy of sober and constructive efforts to find a solution. We are convinced that it must be dealt with as a part of
the effort to develop a just, durable and comprehensive
settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict. Moreover, we are
convinced that it will be dealt with. As we move beyond the
Israeli-Egyptian
peace treaty into negotiations for a
comprehensive peace, the parties-joined
by the United
States-will be dealing with the question of settlements as
well as with other issues involving the West Bank and Gaze,
and with the Palestinian problem in its various dimensions.
It is of utmost importance that the fact-finding commission
created by this resolution not complicate and not impede
the negotiations among the parties.

136. The United States remains fully committed to finding
a just, lasting and comprehensive peace which must include
a resolution of the Palestinian problem. This is the peace to
which the Charter binds all of us. We call upon our fellow
members to lend their full and unselfish support, singly and
in concert, to those now engaged in this crucial search, and
to avoid actions which needlessly make this search more
arduous and more perilous.

132. Thii tragic conflict in all its agonixing complexity has
occupied the attention of the Security Council and the
world virtually since the foundation of the United Nations.
After four wars, countless deaths and innumerable brave
and well-intentioned efforts to find a just and lasting peace,
it has been the process begun last September at Camp
David which has provided the first-and to this point the
only-practical means of achieving the legitimate goals of
all the parties.

137. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Reputlics) (interpretation from Russian): The Soviet delegation considers that the discussion which has taken place in
the Security Council on the question of the illegal actions by
Israel in the occupied Arab territories has been extremely
important and very timely. This discussion has shown quite
obviously that the policies pursued by Israel and the practices in which it has indulged in exploiting the occupied
Arab territories are a blatant violation of international
agreements and of numerous United Nations resolutions.
Israel’s actions are aimed directly at depriving the Arab
people of Palestine of its ancestral lands and, consequently,
are aimed at precluding the possibility’of solving the Palestine problem and, in fact, have led to undermining a comprehensive Middle East settlement.

133. Built unon the foundation of resolutions 242 f 1967)
and 338 (1973), the peace negotiations now under way
exclude no one, and no issue. They invite and encourage the
full participation of all those-including the Palestinianswho accept as the object of these negotiations security,
recognition and peace among neighbours. The accords
deveioped in these negotiations lay out in detail principles
and procedures to govern negotiations on the full range of
issues within the Arab-Israeli conflict.
134. The process begun with the Camp David accords is
an arduous one, however-one which has required enormous courage and dedication. Even as this debate began,
President Carter was in the Middle East making a maximum personal effort to help the parties through a particularly difficult phase. And as we speak here today, representatives of the parties are discussing the last elements of
the work begun so many months ago. This will lead to the
signing of a peacetreaty between Egypt and Israel, a treaty
which is a triumph of the principles on which the Organization is based. The process of negotiation which will follow
from this historic event clearly offers the best opportunity
for the just resolution of the issue to which we have
addressed ourselves in this chamber over the past week or
more. It is clear that the peace treaty represents only the
beginning of that process, but it is equally clear that when
the present work of the parties is completed, the world will
have been brought significantly closer to a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. It is our profound
belief that this development will one day lead to the fulfilment of the hopes and legitimate aspirations of all the
parties. President Carter, at Cairo, committed himself personally to negotiations concerning the West Bank and Gaza
and other issues of concern to the Palestinians, and he urged
Palestinian participation.

138. The discussion has revealed the direct link between
the annexationist policies of Israel in the occupied Arab
territories and the separate agreement drawn up between
Egypt and Israel with the assistance of the United States of
America. As many speakers have mentioned, the socalled
administrative autonomy that is envisaged for the West
Bank and Gaze in accordance with thii separate deal is
simply a formal embodiment of Israel’s plan to consolidate
its position in the territories it has seized and would be
tantamount to depriving the Arab people of Palestine of
these legitimate national rights, including their right to
self-determination and all other rights, including the possibility of creating their own independent State. The conclusion of a separate peace treaty between Egypt and Israel will
,thus be an obstacle to the achievement of a comprehensive
and just settlement in the interests of all the peoples of the
Middle East and to the establishment of a durable peace for
all the States of the area.
139. We entirely agree with the opinion expressed here
that this treatment is capitulation to Israel, particularly
regarding the vital rights of the Arab people of Palestine and
the interests of the Arab world as a whole. No attempts to
depict what is black as white and.._.
to represent this separate
-.
13

is now ripe ta undertake these steps in order to make Israel
understand once and for all that the decis.ions of the United
Nations, including the provisions of the resolution that we
have just adopted, must be implemented.

Egypt-Israel deal as a step on the-path’to a comprehensive
settlement can mislead those who genuinely cherish the
cause of the Arab neonles and the cause of peace in the
Middle East.
- ‘.‘
140. Such attempts are itndertaken; in particular, in a
letter of 19 March from the Prime Min.ister of Egypt to the
Secretary-General.’ It assertsthat the Egyptian-Israeli peace
treaty will lead to.the gradual establishment of Palestinian
authority on the West Bank and in the Gaza Strip. However, we could say that that assertion held true for only one
day. On 20 March, speaking in the Israeli Parliament, the
Prime Minister of Israel categorically refuted that interpretation of the Egyptian-Israeli agreement. On the question of
what was to happen to the territories that had been occupied by Israel, the head of the Israeli Government unambiguously stated that Israel would “never return to the
pre-1967 boundaries*’ and that united Jerusalem was the
capital of Israel and would be so in perpetuity and would
never be divided again. He also said that in Judaea. Samaria
and Gaza there would never ever be a Palestinian State.
Even more eloquent wasthe clarification given by the Israeli
leader as to exactly what was meant by Palestinian self-rule,
or, as he had put it, “autonomy not for the territories but for
the inhabitants thereof”. If we compare-this statement with
the actions of Israel in expelling the Arab inhabitants from
their age-old homeland, actions that have been so eloquently described to the Council, it becomes completely
obvious that the separate Egyptian-Israeli treaty is simply a
further step taken by Israel completely to deprive the Arab
people of Palestine of the lands which belong to them and to
absorb those territories into Israel.

144. The PRESIDENT: The‘next speaker is the representative of Jordan, upon whom I now call.
145. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): May I express the most
profound gratitude of my Government and people for the
deep concern and the moral and humane understanding,
not to mention the selfless support, that has been accorded
our beleaguered and oppressed people in their darkest hour.
A friend in need is a friend indeed.
..
146. It would be gratuitous an my part to say from my
heart “‘thank you very much” to the Member States that
voted aflirmatively on the draft resolution presented by
Bangladesh and Kuwait and co-sponsored by Nigeria and
Zambia. It is, after all, a concreteexpression of their abiding
faith in decency, in the Charter, in genuine human rights,
and in the repudiation of illegality and usurpation.
147. It wasmore in sadness than in disenchantment that I
watched three votes of abstention being cast by Member
States whose image of concern for the fate of human individuals, let alone of a whole people of men, women, and
children, has now been compromised in a context of
ambivalence amounting to indifference. There is a limit
below which indifference on clear-cut basic human issues
that affect the survival of a whole people can degenerate
into callous acquiescence. But our people are grateful all the
same to know each country’s concern for their existence and
for the much-vaunted term “human rights”.

141. Thereis an urgent needto reject these plans of Israel,
which run counter to the vital interests of the Arab peoples
and represent a direct threat to international peace and
security.

148. And I ask in all sincerity-explanations and soothing
words notwithstanding-what
,has prompted votes of
abstention on a draft resolution, which merely reiterates
previous resolutions, stating that all Israeli measures are
null and void and should be rescinded, and requests the
dispatch of a Security Council commission to the occupied
Palestinian and Arab territories to examine the situation
and the plight of the people on the spot?.Members know of
the old remark about neutrality: “Neutral on whose side?”

142. The Soviet delegation supported the draft resolution
proposed by the delegations of Bangladesh, Zambia,
Kuwait and Nigeria since we believe it is along the right
lines. However, we believe that in its final form the text is
not -fully consonant with the demands that such a serious
and dangerous situation makes of the Security Council in
the situation that has arisen in the Arab territories occupied
by Israel. In particular, as we seeit, the condemnation of the
policies and practices of the Israeli authorities and the way
in which they have colonixed and acquired the territory
should have been much more bold apd forthright since this
policy and these practices are aimed. directly at consolidating Israel’s ownership of the occupied territories and is in
the final analysis aimed at their annexation. Israel should
have been faced with a mom-decisive demand that it put an
end to those practices and abide by the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly.

149. A people that has been in captivity for 11 years, a
people whose only encounter has been with ruthless military governors and their vile deeds, deserves, I should have
thought, that their voice at least be heard so that they may
be given a moral uplift by seeing that the world, represented
by the Security Council, has not altogether forgotten them
-or dumped them and left them to the merciless crimes of
..,.
their oppressors.
150. Speaking before the Knesset on 20 March-the day
before yesterday-Begin unravelled, in crystal-clear terms,
bow Israel views the occupied territories and the Israeli
designs for swallowing them up-which isreally thesubject
of our complaint-the
swallowing up of the occupied territories. Begin said-and I challenge the representative of
Israel to refute him:

143. The Soviet delegation considers that it is time for the
Security Council to take a more determined position in
connexion with Israel’s failure to carry out the resolutions
of the Security Council and to consider also the question of
applying to Israel those sanctions that are laid down in
Chapter VII of the Charter. It is quite obvious that the time

First, “Israel will never return to the pre-1967 lines”;

’ A/34/124.

14

i

Secondly, replying to the Prime Minister of Egypr as -.~:frusting. The area of,commonality to <which they belong,
though. Mr. Mustafa Khalil were present there; he said: ‘,I.‘and.which has strategic resourcesand potentialities that ean
‘. hardly be overestimated :in human ,and material. terms, has
“Mark my words, united Jerusalem is the eternal capital of
not as yet been even partially assembled in the just struggle
Israel*‘;
for their spiritual fountainhead, Jerusalem and the Holy
Thirdly, in what Begin termed “Judaea, Samaria and
Iand,:which. is.deserving of total dedication and concrete,
Gaza”, ‘there will never be a Palestinian State”. Referring
:‘genuine effort at rescue and redemption.
..
,.
.‘i
:-.,’ ‘,.,._‘>. 1, ., 5 ..._
to Palestinian self-rule, Begin said-and I quote verbatim:
“We never agreed to autonomy for the territories, but only
155. But permit’ me ‘to quote a message from our great
for the inhabitants.*’ Of course, the inhabitants, over the
prophet Mohammed to his compatriots in the aftermath of
next 10 yet’s, will all be dead-by attrition or of old age.
overwhelming ‘his ,adversaries in a ‘military conflict in the
’ Arabian peninsula. He said: “We have just emerged from
151. Even Shimon Peres, the Labour Party opposition
,‘the small struggle ,into,‘the real and larger struggle-the
leader, who has his own plans for the annexation of large ” struggle of the soul”; .. .
portions of the West Bank-you are all familiar with the
..~ “‘-’
Allon Plan-took exception to Begin’s autonomy plan as
‘156. More than ever before, we are convinced that money,
being ridiculous. Peres said:
military gadgets and other possessions are barren if unutil“Realistically, I cannot see how you can separate selfized or underutilized..The quicker our nations recover their
government from a’territory. Can you really distinguish
souls and their mission, the nearer will be the day of salvabetween a man and his house, a farmer and his field? It is
tion. The other tools and techniques will follow by corollary
impossible!‘*
as night follows .day.
‘,
152. ‘It is our clear understanding that for the Security
157. I do not blame those who have brought about our
Council commission to examine and ascertain the subdestruction, for they are responding to situations and
stance of the Jordanian complaint, it should do so on the
opportunities as they assessthem, in a world whose real
spot and see for itself the authenticity of our complaint,
criterion is, lamentably, reaipoIifik and not justice. Indeed,
including interviews with the aggrieved people whose lands
we have been striving for the past 11 years to achieve a just,
and resources have been stolen. Just in case Israel refuses
equitable, comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle
the commission permission to visit Jerusalem and other
‘East, but to no avail. Weakness and subservienceare invarioccupied territories, it is our understanding that the comably despised, foremost of all by those who stand to profit
mission will visit Amman, Beirut, Damascus, Cairo, Kumost from them.
wait, Saudi Arabia and whatever other country it chooses at
its discretion; it will also:interview United States citizens of
158. It is our mission in the foreseeable future to recover
Palestinian extraction or ‘who hail from those territories,
our
souls. And once we do, we can be more than equal to
and whose lands have also been confiscated, as I mentioned
the
challenge.
In the meantime, it is a waste of effort and
in one of my earlier statements. Not only will the commisenergy
to
apportion
blame or praise, because we realize that
sion find complete facts;Bgures and documentation: it will
human
nature
and
frailty cannot be changed overnight,
also find available many of the people who have been
although
in
certain
traumatic
situations, such as the one we
victims of Israeli despoliation and who will be ready and
are facing today, it could very weil happen.
willing to give incontrovertible evidence on what is taking
place in the occupied territories.
159. I need hardly stress Jordan’s abiding and profound
concern
for and commitment to its twin brothers and sisters
153. Looking at the turning point, and watching the fateand kin in the Holy Land. No force on earth can undermine
ful historical panorama of unfolding tragedy, more visible
this eternal commitment.
than ever before, I do so in a confluence of very deep mixed
emotions and reflections. The Palestinian people have made
160. What next? The masses of our great area of civilizauntold sacrifices, generation after generation, to safeguard
tion will be pondering, and very profoundly, what to do
and preserve their treasured legacy in their ancestral homenext. Here at the United Nations, which is not the preserve
land. They have had their ups and downs, facing adversities
of a handful of States, no matter how mighty, we can
over thousands of years in a hallowed land too precious and
continue our efforts tenaciously and persistently. It may
too interwoven into their very fabric to be foresaken. At this
well be that the time has come for the world community to
time, it looks as though the forces of evil have ganged up on
take a very grave view towards a Member whose behaviour
them to secure their banishment. The odds against them are
has consistently been defiant and in undisguised violation of
formidable, and the Palestinians may well be destined for
everything that the United Nations stands for.
further immeasurable suffering, as were their forefathers in
the past. It may well be that adversity will have a temporary
gain, but our people will never abandon the just struggle
161. As I have so often reiterated, Israel is not above the
which the Charter has sanctified as an imperative act of
law-we are all equal before the law--except in its own
self-defence, with the assistance of their brethren and all
perverted perception. A recalcitrant and consistently depeace-loving peoples all over the world.
fmnt Member must not be given the right to continued
membership of a world Organization whose rules of the
154. It could be that their calculations of friend and foe, at
game are the Charter and not the law of the jungle. South
various centres in the world, have been faulty and naively
Africa has been taught this lesson.
15

162. Before I conclude, my conscience compels me to read
to the members of the Council from a letter from a young
lady Palestinian prisoner sent out from the Ramleh prison-it arrived on my desk just this afternoon-and bearing the heading in Hebrew of the Directorate-General of
Prisons. Her name is Mariam Al-Shakhshir. The letter
reads:
“I wish to bring the following facts to your attention.
We have three fellow female prisoners here who have
been sentenced to life imprisonment. They have already
spent ten years in prison and are seriously ill. One of
them, Aysha Oda, suffers from heart disease, gastric
ulcers, pains in the kidneys, headaches, rheumatism and
other diseases. The second one, Ayda Saad, suffers from
pneumonia and her sputum is mixed with blood. The
third is Aftiah Bannoura, who suffers from rheumatism
which has affected her heart and the small arteries in her
legs.

arena, into the manipulation of the United Nations. Any
step taken by the Council that ignores these fundamental
and overriding aspects of the conflict will be used as yet
another political weapon, supplementing the other means
at the disposal of the anti-peace forces in the Arab world
and beyond.
168. In the course of this debate we set out our position
fully and provided the Council with all the pertinent details
and data. We also refuted one by one the empty charges
made against Israel in this debate, all this to no avail.
169. This debate and the resolution just adopted by the
Council on the eve of the signing of the Israel-Egyptian
peace treaty constitute yet another attempt to disrupt the
peace process in the Middle East and to substitute confrontation tactics for a negotiated peace in the region.
170. Israel has had a thoroughly disillusioning experience
as the result of tendentious investigation by purportedly
fact-finding commissions established by the United
Nations. Most of them were constituted with a view to
underwriting predetermined and hostile conclusions. This
approach has been adopted once again in the present case.
Thus, the matters that will supposedly form the subject of
investigation are already prejudged and disposed of in the
present resolution.

“As the continuation of this situation means death for
these three fellow prisoners. I beg you to save them. We
are all hopeful that you will take speedy and ample steps
in this regard.“*
163. I do make an appeal on behalf of those three girls.
This is a random example of the so-called “only democracy
in the Middle East”, as the media tell us every day. Perhaps
the Red Cross or some other humane organization would
take action without delay to save three girls from their
chronic agony, and there are many others who also are
afflicted with chronic diseases but who are yet kept in gaol.

171. We cannot be oblivious to the sobering experience of
Israel with regard to various fact-finding commissions of
this kind. Having been solemnly assured that such commissions would apply an impartial approach, the Government
of Israel facilitated their work in allrespects. But when their
findings and conclusions were not palatable to our defractors, they crushed those findings by using the steam-roller,
sustained by their arithmetic majority. They thus were able
to ignore cynically and to reject arbitrarily any finding
containing a modicum of objectivity. What is more, they
perverted the fact-finding machinery for their own ends.

164. In conclusion, I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for your patience, which I might have taxed on some
occasions, and to express my appreciation of the exemplary
manner in which you have conducted and presided over our
deliberations.
165. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Israel, on whom I now call.

172. The unbalanced and tendentious manner in which
the Council has dealt with the over-all issues of the ArabIsraeli conflict, as confirmed yet again in the present debate
and its ensuing resolution as well as theexperiences to which
I have alluded, inevitably affect Israel’s attitude towards
this resolution. For all these reasons, Israel rejects this
resolution in its entirety and will .treat it accordingly.

166. Mr. BLUM (Israel): The resolution which has just
been adopted is the product of many factors-the design of
Jordan and its allies to sow obstacles on the only realistic
and promising road to peace between Israel and its neighbours; the one-sided and biased positions of certain States,
based on deliberately distorted data and on malicious interpretations; and the political interests of certain members of
the Council, extraneous to the matter here under consideration.

173. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
Palestine Liberation Organization in exercise of the right of
reply.

167. Had the Council been prepared to address itself eamestly to the fundamental causesof the situation in an impartial and balanced manner, as is its duty under the Charter, it
would have long ago taken due note of the aims and actions
of Arab States during 30 years of the Arab-Israeli conflict
and now in particular of the bellicose designs directed
against Israel from Baghdad, Damascus and, recently, also
from Amman. These designs are translated on the ground
into attempts at subversion as well as into acts of terror
perpetrated by the so-called PLO and, in the international
* Subsequently

circulated

as document

174. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization): I
shall quote the sentence we have heard here: ‘This debate
went by unnoticed” [2131st meeting, para. 991. This is the
8th meeting, and representatives of more than 40 Member
States have participated in this debate. Yet clearly, in the
opinion of the Zionist racists, these Members simply do not
count. Not one of them, with the exception of Israel itself,
defended or even attempted to justify theatrocities committed by the illegal forces of occupation. If the representative
of the neo-Fascists in Tel Aviv simply ignores those who
participated and the opinions they expressed as well as their

s/13207.

16

concern, I am not surprised because such is the Fascist
mentality-why
bother7 Who cares&complete disregard
in addition to disrespect and contempt.

and could not recognize this Israel that had stolen our
country.

175. It is really ironic that someone here calls for “an
atmosphere of moral, political and intellectual integrity” so
that the Security Council can “regain some of Its resonance”. That statement was made while Israeli forces of
occupation were murdering in cold blood students peacefully demonstrating against yet another and more flagrant
violation of their inalienable rights.

179. The Council has just adopted a resolution, I am
grateful to those who supported the resolution but if I may
be permitted to express an opinion on the resolution I
would say that this resolution is in no way a consolation to
the Palestinian people. It avoided the’ issue, namely the
prolonged illegal occupation and the denial of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. It addressed itself to
only one manifestation of neo-colonialism, namely settlements.

176. I shall not elaborate on the theme of intellectual
integrity, for those who gloat and praise the virtues of
benign colonialism are not worthy to appear before the
Organization, especially when it-and I am referring to the
Organization-was
established, among other things, to
eradicate thepainful memories of the Nazi criminals. In the
Charter we find that the Organization was established “to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war. . . to
reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity
and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men
and women and of nations large and small”.

180. Concerning benign colonialism, the so-called “paradise” in the occupied territories, I shall refrain from commenting with the hope that the commission the Council has
just decided to establish-which I understand now will be
refused entry into the occupied territories-will report to
the Council in due time after having visited the occupied
territories and after having talked to the Palestinians in
Jerusalem, in Nablus, in Hebron and in Jericho. I as a
Palestinian say that the commission is welcome to come to
Jerusalem. Jerusalem is an illegally occupied territory so it
is within your powers to see to it that the commission goes
into this illegally occupied territory and they are welcome to
share the so-called “paradise”. We are certain that the
commission will walk the Via Dolorosa, the Way of the
Cross, that they will walk it in person with the hope of the
redemption of my people. I am sure that God will grant
guidance to the members of the commission when they
compare notes of their fmdings in the Garden of Gethsemane because that will be the hour of agony. To share their
agony with fellow humans is a Christian virtue and a task.

177. Those who receive billions of dollars’ worth of arms
and war matt?riel should be the last to speak of intellectual
integrity and morals. Not only should the perpetrators of
crimes be condemned but the accessories who supply them
should also be condemned.
178. It is clear that the representative of the racist junta at
Tel Aviv is not aware of decisions of the General Assembly
affirming that the root cause of the conflict in’the Middle
East is the question of Palestine, the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people and the continued denial of the national
rights, including the right to self-determination and the
right to sovereignty and independence in their homeland,
Palestine. He tried to impress by saying that the root cause is
the Arab refusal to recognize Israel’s right to exist. I
wonder. I shall quote here from an interview with Nahum
Goldmann who narrates:
“I was sitting once with Ben Gurion until three in the
morning. It was about 12.30. We were sitting in the
kitchen. We had a heart-to-heart talk. He said:

181. Yes, settlements are just one manifestation of the
aims of the Zionist movement and the Council is really
empowered by the Charter to deal with the root cause. We
have no reason to doubt the effectiveness of the United
Nations and.th&Council, but we are afraid of a tendency
that has just appeared to give a so-called chance for a
different approach, because such an approach is only a
gamble and the chips are not only the almost 4 million
Palestinians but also peace and security.
182. There is a process of sedating, let us say of drugging
by false hopes, a process erroneously called peace efforts. In
actual fact what is happening is that there is a stockpiling of
arms and war matkiel in preparation for a yet more devastating war. The United States is granting billions of dollars’
worth of war matt?riei-some say $5 billion and others say
$19 billion. The amount is irrelevant, but they are supplying
those arms and this is no indication of peaceful intentions.
Or, are we really approaching a new, infamous Munich, a
sell-out, a partial satisfaction of the insatiable greed of the
Zionist racists? While some rejoice and talk about negotiations, Begin has made it very clear-and I am afraid I will
have to repeat what Begin said:
“Israel will never return to the borders of 1967.
Neither will she allow the one and unified Jerusalem to
be divided or for a Palestinian State to be established on
her borders. The only autonomy that will be established
is the autonomy which applies to the residents of those

“‘Why should the Arabs make peace with us? Are
they crazy? If I were an Arab would I accept Israel? They
have stolen our country. What? God promised us? What
has that to do with the Arabs? What? Is it their business?
Hitler? What is their responsibility? We came and stole
their country. Why should they make peace’?’”
I am quoting from what Ben Gurion was telling the President of the World Zionist Organization, Nahum Goldmann, and that was in the wee hours of the morning when
no one was listening. But when they address the Security
Council they brag about peace. I am sure you know who
Ben Gurion is. For 50 years he led the Zionist movement
and he was the man who made this infamous assertion in
the introduction to the Israel Government Yearbook. He
says that --...the State .-of _--..-.
Israel “has been established in only a
port&%-of the land of Israei”: I believe that is a good
explanation by Ben Gurion himself of why the Arabs do not
17

lands, not the lands themselves. What I am saying does
not belong to politics. What I am saying is our very life
and existence. No force in the world could make Israel
retreat on those issues.”
183. Of course, we are told that these outstanding issues
will be resolved through negotiations-a new drug called
“negotiations”. Somebody may really doubt the integrity of
what Begin said, but let me read a quotation. On 21 March
I$gence France Presse carried the following:
“The next stage of the Israeli-Egyptian discussions on
peace in the Middle East will be difficult, indicated Wednesday at NATO headquarters in Brussels the UnderSecretary of State of the United States, Mr. Warren
Christopher. Mr. Christopher thought that the interpretation of the Israeli Prime Minister, Menachem Begin, of
the proceedings of the Knesset on Tuesday was not in
contradiction with the actual text of the Egyptian-Israeli
treaty.*‘9

very well. If no agreement IS arrived at, the result will be
that the autonomy arrangements of Israel’s security will
continue to remain in force.”
186. Again, I repeat that negotiation is just another drug.
It does not solve and will not solve the question, because
Begin has made it clear. He is not fooling or deceiving
anyone. He is just making it very clear that he intends to
stay there and keep on negotiating eternally. Well, I do not
think that we shall allow him to do that, because we are
determined to bring this situation to-an end,
187. We have heard here the representative of the United
States say that peace must include a resolution of the
Palestinian problem. I am very glad that the United
States also agrees with us that, without the resolution of
the question of Palestine, there will be no peace. Their
way of going about it is where we disagree with them, and
we reject their method. Apparently, they are oblivious to
a resolution adopted by the General Assembly at the last
session, which declared that:
“ . . . the validity of agreements purporting to solve the
problem of Palestine requires that they be within the.
framework of the United Nations and its Charter and its
resolutions on the basis of the full attainment and exercise of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including the right of return and the right to national
independence and sovereignty in Palestine, and with the
participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization ”

184. Well, it really is not in contradiction, because they
told us that all these issues-the future of Jerusalem, the
future of autonomy, the future of 4 million Palestiniansare, according to them, apparently not important for the
peace process. What is important is that all this will somehow be resolved during the negotiations.
185. But we do know what Begin and the Israeli Govemment mean by “negotiation*‘. We know what Begin meant
when he said in a statement in November 1978:
“We left no doubt and we stated that after the tiveyear transition period, when the question of sovereignty
comes up for decision, we shall assert our right to sovereignty over Judaea, Samaria and Gaza. If an agreement
is reached against the background of counter-claims,
9 Quoted

in French

[resolution 33/28 A].

188. If the United States is not aware of that resolution, I
wish to call their attention to it, because that is the road to
peace, not bilateral agreements with the drug called “negotiations”.
The meeting rose at 6.55,p.m.

by the speaker.

18
--Litha

in United

Nations.

New York

00400

7%70002-November

f982-2,250
