S/PV.8440

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8440th meeting

Thursday, 3 January 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Singer Weisinger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Dominican Republic)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Edjang Nnaga
Mr. Michon
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Tenya
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Pierce,
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2018/1149)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-45712 (E)
*1845712*

S/PV.8440

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of welcome to new members and of
thanks to outgoing members of the Security Council
The President (spoke in Spanish): As this is the
first formal meeting of the Security Council this year, I
should like to extend my warm wishes on the occasion
of the New Year to all members of the Security Council,
the United Nations and the Secretariat.
In presiding over this first formal meeting of
the Council in 2019, I am happy to welcome the
new members Belgium, the Dominican Republic,
Germany, Indonesia, South Africa. We look forward
to their participation in the work of the Council. Their
experience and wisdom will be of invaluable assistance
in the discharge of the Council’s responsibilities.
I also take this opportunity to express the Council’s
gratitude to the outgoing members — the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, the Netherlands
and Sweden — for their important contributions to the
work of the Council during their terms.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should also
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf
of the Council, to His Excellency Ambassador Kacou
Houadja Léon Adom, Permanent Representative of
Côte d’Ivoire, for his service as President of the Council
for the month of December 2018. I am sure I speak
for all members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Adom and his team for the
great diplomatic skill with which they conducted the
Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2018/1149)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Somalia to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
2/11

03/01/2019

briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia; and Mr. Francisco
Caetano Jose Madeira, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia.
Mr. Madeira is joining this meeting via videoteleconference from Dar es Salaam.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/1149, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on Somalia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Haysom.
Mr. Haysom: I arrived in Somalia on 3 October
and was well received by prominent officials of the
Federal Government and of the regional states. I have
been impressed with the Government’s far-reaching
reform agenda and its commitment to practical
implementation through road maps for delivery in
each relevant sector. Somalia has maintained a positive
trajectory, but continuing political turbulence could
throw it off course.
In December, the International Monetary Fund
completed its first review of the third staff-monitored
programme, noting the satisfactory performance by the
Federal Government. In recognition of the country’s
significant progress, the World Bank’s 2019-2022
country partnership framework unlocked International
Development Association financing through pre-arrears
clearance grants totalling $80 million to strengthen
basic service delivery, improve financial management
capabilities and restore economic resilience.
Improvements in public financial management
and an expansion of the domestic revenue base, with
a recorded fiscal balance surplus of $8 million in
September, means that 56 per cent of the Federal
Government’s $340 million budget for 2019 will be
financed from domestic revenue, with the rest provided
by donors. I want to commend the Office of the Prime
Minister for leading Government efforts to tackle
corruption, including the announcement on 9 December
of the Federal Government’s intention to ratify the
United Nations Convention against Corruption.
18-45712

03/01/2019

The situation in Somalia

Turning to political progress, the road map on
inclusive politics covers elections, the constitutional
review, federalism and reconciliation. These are
components essential to Somalia’s State-building project.
The draft electoral law has been submitted to the
Cabinet, and amendments from political parties, civil
society and the international community have been
provided. The delay in submitting the draft electoral
law to Parliament will see a key milestone missed
as per the Government’s commitment to have the
electoral law adopted by December 2018. This could
have a possible impact on the timelines for the electoral
process. However, the National Independent Electoral
Commission is still making headway with pre-voter
registration preparations, including the recruitment
and training of new staff, the planning of the mapping
of voter registration sites and the establishment and
consolidation of its subnational structure. So far, 35
political parties have been registered.
Technical cooperation has continued on the
constitutional review process, laying the groundwork
for real progress at the national level. The Federalization
Negotiation Technical Committee has been negotiating
draft political agreements on justice, mineral-resource
sharing, the allocation of powers and fiscal federalism.
Women’s meaningful participation in these
decisions is essential. Members of the women’s caucuses
from both houses of Federal Parliament recently held the
second annual conference for women representatives
of federal and state assemblies to consider the
constitutional review process and preparations for the
national elections.
Despite these positive developments, the stalemate
between the Federal Government and the federal
member states continues to impede concrete progress in
defining the federal model and in building institutions
of State, as well as in the implementation of the national
security architecture.
The halt to cooperation between the Federal
Government and the federal member states was
announced by the Council of Interstate Cooperation
on 8 September. After visits to all the regions by
Ambassador Madeira and myself, there have been
encouraging Somali-led initiatives to restore relations.
President Farmajo offered direct dialogue behind
closed doors, and in October Prime Minister Khayre
established a six-member ministerial committee to
work with the Upper House to end the stalemate.

S/PV. 8440

However, the landscape is complicated by the
electoral processes that are currently under way in
several of the member states. Politics is complex in any
nation, but in one that is still establishing its norms and
institutional parameters, and still debating the roles and
responsibilities of its respective governance structures,
there is a risk that complexity might shift to conflict.
We witnessed this during the electoral process in
South-West state. Allegations of interference by the
Federal Government and the violence that erupted
following the arrest of one of the candidates, a former
Al-Shabaab deputy leader, marred the process and does
not bode well for the upcoming electoral processes in
other regions or for the 2020 national elections. This
may also have implications for the likelihood of future
Al-Shabaab defectors who may be considering taking
a political path instead of that of violence. Regrettably,
15 people, including a regional assembly member, were
killed during the violence.
Strains between the executive and the legislature
also came to the surface on 9 December, when members
of the House of the People submitted a motion for
the impeachment of President Farmajo. Completing
the demanding legislative agenda requires continued
cooperation between the executive and legislature.
Discord between the two can seriously hinder Somalia’s
progress. I welcome the recent progress made, however,
on the passage of the 2019 budget and the pension law
before Parliament adjourned for recess.
I strongly condemn the mortar attack on our
premises that took place two days ago and the casualties
caused by such use of force. In no country are attacks
against the United Nations acceptable. As the Council is
aware, three of our staff were injured, one seriously but
not critically. It may also be aware that responsibility
for this attack was claimed by Al-Shabaab. I welcome
the Federal Government’s condemnation of the attack.
Al-Shabaab remains the biggest source of insecurity
in Somalia. Despite the ongoing operations to degrade
that terrorist group, it still has the capacity to conduct
indiscriminate attacks on Somali citizens and to target
electoral delegates, the Somali security forces and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). As
AMISOM and the Somali security forces operations
have succeeded in denying Al-Shabaab the possibility
of launching conventional attacks, it now relies on
improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and targeted
assassinations. It is of note that on 9 November,

18-457123/11

S/PV.8440

The situation in Somalia

Al-Shabaab claimed responsibility for a complex attack
against the Sahafi Hotel in Mogadishu initiated by three
vehicle-borne IEDs. More than 50 people, including
seven Al-Shabaab militants, were killed in the attack.
In Mogadishu and Puntland, elements that are
pro-Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham have targeted
business owners using extortion to extract revenue and
carrying out assassinations. It appears that the cause
of conflict between the two extremist groups is now
primarily driven by financial interests. Their focus
is now on extortion of so-called taxes. In addition
to military operations, it is therefore important to
tackle this aspect as well as the infrastructure used by
Al-Shabaab to assemble IEDs.
There has been some progress in building the
institutional capacity of the security sector to tackle
these threats. Biometric registration programmes for
the Somali National Army and the Somali Police Force
are forging ahead. An operational readiness assessment
of the regional forces is under way, and these processes
will, hopefully, assist in the mapping of regional
capabilities ahead of the future integration of these
forces into the national security architecture.
The implementation of the transition plan made
an encouraging start, but has recently slackened.
There will need to be a more comprehensive and
better-coordinated planning process to achieve the
more ambitious transition locations in the timelines
contained in the Somali transition plan. This must be
guided by respect for human rights and appropriate
measures towards stabilization, as agreed in the
transition plan. Overall, the approach to transition
should be conditions-based, with progress in building
effective Somali security institutions as the main factor
setting the pace.
We have continued to support conflict resolution
and conflict prevention efforts in several parts of the
country, in collaboration with other partners. The
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) engaged in shuttle diplomacy between
Puntland and Somaliland to help them de-escalate the
tension in Tukaraq and find a sustainable solution. As a
result of the joint mediation effort, a de facto ceasefire
is holding.
At the regional level, the tripartite agreement
signed between the leaders of Somalia, Ethiopia and
Eritrea on 6 September is an opportunity for Somalia to
4/11

03/01/2019

strengthen its regional ties and provide further support
to Somalia’s economic, political and security progress.
The humanitarian crisis in Somalia remains among
the most complex and long-standing in the world. Armed
conflict and widespread violence, as well as recurrent
climatic shocks, perpetuate high levels of humanitarian
need and protection concerns. While the humanitarian
situation has improved compared to last year, owing
to above-average Gu rains, needs remain high, with
4.2 million people in need of assistance and protection.
Of those who need assistance and protection services,
almost two-thirds are children. Around 1.5 million are
severely food insecure at crisis or emergency levels.
Around 2.6 million people are internally displaced.
The 2019 humanitarian response plan, to be announced
this month, targets 3.4 million people, or 81 per cent of
the 4.2 million people in need of assistance, requiring
$1.l billion for its implementation.
Respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law and the protection of civilians in
the context of the conflict remain key for Somalia’s
transition and sustainable peace. UNSOM has
documented 1,384 civilian casualties in 2018, with
Al-Shabaab accounting for 60 per cent of these.
Progress has been made, including in taking steps to
establish institutions that protect human rights, such
as the federal independent national human rights
commission. I encourage the Federal Government to
finalize the commission’s foundation.
Somalia has laid the foundations to make
significant progress in 2019. The plans are in place
and the milestones are clear. The management of the
upcoming regional elections in 2019 and the remaining
political processes, particularly the review of the
Constitution, will determine whether Somalia makes
further progress or not. Achieving this will require all
role players to pull in the same direction. Somalia has
set that direction, and I hope that the Council will be
updated on the progress in the year to come.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Haysom for his informative briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Madeira.
Mr. Madeira: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Council on the situation in
Somalia once again. It is always a great honour to speak
before this organ.
18-45712

03/01/2019

The situation in Somalia

In my address to the Council last September (see
S/PV.8352), I spoke of signs of movement forward
in Somalia. Allow me today to highlight three areas
of action that, if properly supported and sustainably
implemented, can remain a source of great optimism
and a force for change in the direction of our concerted
effort to help deliver for the people of Somalia a
reconciled, peaceful and prosperous country.
It has been almost two years since Somalia
successfully effected its second peaceful transfer
of power at the highest echelons of Government in
a political process that saw the establishment of a
bicameral Parliament, relatively more participatory
national suffrage, the election of President Farmajo
and the appointment of Prime Minister Hassan Khayre.
This success was possible owing in part to the concerted
role of international partners, including the strong
partnership that exists between the African Union and
the United Nations.
Taking advantage of the winds of change blowing
in the region, Somalia was able to capitalize on the
positive aspects of these changes and accumulated
significant gains both regionally and beyond.
Regionally we are seeing Somalia increasingly seeking
to complement its internal mechanisms with regionally
centred security and economic cooperation and goodneighbourliness projection and approaches, especially
with Ethiopia and Eritrea. The importance of the
regional tripartite meetings that have been taking place
at the different levels between these three countries
cannot be underestimated in terms of their potential to
foster and enhance mutual trust and bring about a more
cohesive, focused and people-centred regional harmony
and integration.
Beyond the region, the Gulf and the Horn of Africa
share together a long history of economic, religious
and political engagement. In recent years, the Gulf
States have increasingly become major economic and
political actors in the Horn region once again. Business
relations between the Gulf and the Horn of Africa are
substantial. Approximately $13-billion worth of Gulf
investment can be traced in the Horn from 2000 to
2017. Large-scale migration from the Horn to the Gulf
has a multifaceted mutual impact and influence on both
the Horn and the Gulf in terms of political, business
and religious dynamics, economic growth, peace
and stability.

S/PV. 8440

Being part of these multifaceted dynamics and
seeking to influence them in a positive direction, rather
than shying away from them, is vital for the brighter
future of Somalia. It is therefore encouraging to see that,
in addition to positive diplomatic overtures from the
Gulf States, in October Prime Minister Hassan Khayre
paid a successful visit to Riyadh after approximately 18
months of reportedly challenging relations. The Gulf
crisis spillover effect that had threatened to destabilize
Somalia’s cohesion is slowly registering improvements.
It is important that this trend continue and that the
strains in the relations that still exist between Somalia
and other Gulf States be diffused.
While 2018 has demonstrated that there is room for
optimism for Somalia in some key areas, more work
will be required by all Somalia’s stakeholders. It is at
home, in Somalia, that inclusive politics must be seen
and perceived to be working in terms of power-sharing,
resource-sharing and land issues. It is important that
substantial efforts continue to be invested in ensuring
that the issues at the base of volatile relations between
the Federal Government of Somalia and the leaders
of some of the federal member states, as well as those
between the House of the People and the executive,
are addressed in a predictable, satisfactory and
sustainable manner.
The relationship between the Federal Government
and some of the federal member states remains a key
concern for the African Union. As part of the African
Union’s own efforts, carried out side by side with those
of the United Nations to help in this regard, I agreed
to undertake a series of diplomatic engagements with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Somalia, Mr. Nicholas Haysom. Our aim was to
explore avenues for supporting a consensual solution
to outstanding disputes between some federal member
states and the Federal Government. That was the same
message that the African Union Peace and Security
Council offered to the Federal Government and federal
member states during their successful field trip to
Somalia in November.
Both the Federal Government and the federal
member states deserve praise for the landmark
agreements reached at the National Security Council
meeting in Baidoa on the electoral model that will
determine how power can be accessed in a peaceful,
increasingly participatory and democratic manner and
how federalism will be deepened in terms of powersharing and resource-sharing between the Federal

18-457125/11

S/PV.8440

The situation in Somalia

Government and the Governments of the federal
member states. In reality, the issue is not about what
needs to be done in that regard. The Baidoa meeting has
already decided on that. The issue is about how it can
be done, in what time frame and with what resources.
The issue of resources to implement those agreements
is very important. Success in that process will be vital
to Somalia’s cohesion and lasting reconciliation.
Throughout 2018, efforts were made to develop
legislative and institutional frameworks that will
be essential to the visibility, assurance and the
predictability of Government action in harnessing
people’s legitimate expectations and to the holding
of landmark elections next year. The same should be
said with regard to the regional elections that will take
place next year. Proper legislation and predictions
will prevent any future squabbles and conflict. A
key milestone towards that effort was the successful
conclusion of the national constitutional convention in
2018. It is hoped that this will strengthen rule of law
and advance reconciliation across Somalia. Building on
that legislative and institutional framework, the end of
2018 saw the Federal Government announce progress
on the constitutional review process. To date, there has
been a review of five out of a total of fifteen chapters of
the Constitution. With that progress, the African Union
looks forwards to its early completion in 2019.
The urgent need to expedite the adoption of crucial
legislation and build duly agreed and Parliamentsanctioned institutional frameworks to shape the new
State of Somalia cannot be overemphasized. If carried
out in a mutually agreed manner, it will go a long
way towards addressing the issues at the source of
recurrent political tensions and removing perceived or
real grey areas in the country. Although agreements so
far achieved in that context are in their early stages,
more discussions and negotiations between the Federal
Government and federal member states will be required
and, consequently, so will more and generous support
from Security Council members.
Throughout 2018, Somalia’s economy continued to
move in the direction of recovery. Some of its notable
successes have been the completion of the second
12-month International Monetary Fund staff-monitored
programme — now on its third review, which is
expected to be completed this year — and Somalia’s
eligibility to receive the urgently needed financial
support. In that regard, the African Union welcomes
the direct budgetary support of the European Union in
6/11

03/01/2019

the form of €100 million and grants worth €80 million
from the World Bank.
The third area of great interest remains security.
The Federal Government is increasingly showing
readiness to confront risks and tackle issues that will
allow its security forces to take over the country’s
security responsibility from the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM). The push for reform has
been at its core, particularly in the areas of biometric
registration, payroll reform and the ongoing operational
readiness assessment of Somalia’s regional forces,
which is a requirement for force integration, as part of
the national security architecture.
Throughout 2018, a noticeable commitment was
the restructuring of the Somali National Army, with the
appointment of several senior military commanders.
Security reform efforts have taken place in Mogadishu
with the restructuring of the national intelligence
and security agency, the integration of its militarized
units into the Somali police, and the deployment of the
14 October brigade in areas such as Afgooye, Balad,
Busra and Merca. In an effort to offer a durable solution
to Somali security sector reform, the National Security
Council in Baidoa endorsed the transition plan. As part
of the plan, both the Federal Government and federal
member states agreed to focus on three pilot areas: the
hand-over of Mogadishu stadium, securing the main
supply route between Mogadishu and Baidoa and the
reoccupation of Lego.
The continued threat posed by Al-Shabaab, as
witnessed by the recent mortar attack against the
AMISOM compound in Mogadishu two days ago, is a
reminder of the work still to be done. Both Al-Shabaab
and the Islamic State continue to maintain an active
presence across Somalia, with increased lethality
capacity. As I often observed during my briefings to the
Council in 2018, the threat of Al-Shabaab will ultimately
require continued efforts to deny the group the capacity
to recruit from among the population, the completion of
the national security architecture, increased integration
of regional forces and further progress on the
comprehensive approach to security. The adoption by
the Government of Somalia of the national strategy for
preventing and countering violent extremism is a very
welcome development in that direction. For its part,
AMISOM will continue to support those frameworks
and the important security reforms being implemented
by the Federal Government.
18-45712

03/01/2019

The situation in Somalia

At the inception of AMISOM’s current mandate,
the understanding was that the Mission’s efforts would
focus on transiting from Somalia. In that regard, permit
me to reiterate that AMISOM is actively working
towards its exit from Somalia. An essential part of
that has been the African Union’s endorsement of the
transition plan, which is centred on the implementation
of AMISOM’s exit strategy, particularly in helping to
empower the Somali security forces to take over security
responsibilities. Based on that reality and since my last
briefing to the Council, AMISOM has undertaken a
series of activities as part of realizing its exit strategy.
Allow me to highlight some of those activities.
First, in accordance with resolution 2431 (2018),
AMISOM’s military undertook a series of robust
operations across its areas of responsibility, aimed at
flushing out Al-Shabaab and recovering territory from
the terrorist group. Recently, these have included joint
AMISOM-Somali National Army operations to liberate
the Somali coastal areas that connect Mogadishu to
Merca. Similarly, AMISOM forces have conducted
joint operations in Jubaland, Shabelle and HirShabelle,
specifically in El-Wak and Beledweyne up to Jalalaqsi.
Following the transfer of security responsibility for the
Mogadishu stadium, AMISOM’s military continues to
work in support of the transition plan, with its immediate
focus on transferring the security of Somalia’s military
academy by next month, February. As part of that
exercise, AMISOM’s Burundi contingent has begun
relocating from the academy to its base in Jowhar.
With the operational planning for MogadishuLego-Baidoa completed, AMISOM’s military stands
ready to jointly execute the operation in the coming
weeks with its Somali National Army counterparts. On
the other hand, AMISOM police have also continued
to carry out a range of activities in furtherance of the
Mission’s exit strategy — and, I would like to add,
with very limited personnel strength. Even with those
limitations, AMISOM’s police continue to maintain
its presence across Somalia, notably in Mogadishu,
Baidoa, Beledweyne, Kismaayo and Jowhar, supporting
the empowerment of the Somali police force through
training and mentoring. Currently, and in support of
the transition plan, the AMISOM police component
is continuing its support to the operational readiness
assessment of the regional forces, which has now
reached Puntland. This is a process that will eventually
support the integration of the regional forces, as
stipulated in the national security architecture.

S/PV. 8440

Further, the AMISOM civilian component
continues to play a vital role in supporting the Mission’s
uniformed personnel across the AMISOM area of
responsibility, as mandated by the Security Council. In
that context, I am happy to report that on 30 December,
AMISOM deployed its first-ever civilian staff to
work alongside its uniformed personnel in Jowhar and
Kismaayo. Over the coming weeks and as AMISOM’s
civilian staff begins to deploy across other federal
member states, it will become important for the Council
to stand ready to consider strengthening the role of the
AMISOM civilian component. In that connection, I
want to thank Mr. Haysom and Ms. Filipetto, Head of
the United Nations Support Office in Somalia, for their
unreserved support in the deployment of AMISOM’s
civilian component through the provision of living
space, office space and other logistical support.
Last November, in close collaboration with the
Federal Government and federal member states,
AMISOM conducted an exercise to develop its revised
concept of operations. During the mandated exercise,
key issues were agreed on, including the reconfiguration
of the AMISOM military, the resectorization of our
forces and the increased presence of the AMISOM
civilian component across its sectors, in support of its
armed forces.
The AMISOM revised concept of operations for the
transition period is consistent with the transition plan
and with resolution 2431 (2018), and was approved in
November by the Chiefs of Defence Forces of AMISOM
troop- and police-contributing countries. As the African
Union looks forward to the Peace and Security Council
formally endorsing the concept of operations in the
coming weeks, AMISOM and the Federal Government
will begin detailed operational planning this month.
Last December, under the framework of the
Somalia-African Union Task Force, the civilian,
military and police components of both AMISOM and
the Federal Government of Somalia met as part of a
brainstorming exercise on the elaboration of the detailed
implementation plan for the concept of operations. The
African Union’s expectation is that future meetings on
operationalizing the concept of operations will include
the participation of key international partners.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Madeira for his informative briefing.
Mr. Osman (Somalia): I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the

18-457127/11

S/PV.8440

The situation in Somalia

03/01/2019

Security Council for this month and to assure you of my
full support. I would also like to take this opportunity
to congratulate the new members of the Council and to
wish them every success in their term.

rights and the principles and standards common to all,
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and relevant
international instruments.

I would like to begin by first expressing Somalia’s
firm condemnation of the recent mortar attack on Aden
Abdulle International Airport in Mogadishu, which hit
the United Nations compound. We have assured the
Security Council that our law enforcement agencies
promptly began investigations with a view to bringing
the perpetrators to justice. We wish the injured a swift
recovery and we stand in solidarity with the United
Nations family at this time.

In October, Somalia acceded to the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, becoming
the 178th country to do so. In the same month, our
Parliament approved a draft law prepared by the
Ministry of Human Rights and signed by President
Farmajo on 31 December. That is a milestone and a
tremendous achievement for our country, and a great
step to promote and ensure a full and equal enjoyment
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms by all
persons living with disabilities in Somalia.

I also want to thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia and
Mr. Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for Somalia, for their
valuable and comprehensive briefings today.
Since the most recent Council briefing on this issue
(see S/PV.8352), Somalia, led by President Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo, has irrefutably continued
to progress on all fronts. Somalia’s forward momentum
has been achieved with the strong support of our
partners. We pay tribute to the ongoing commitment
and sacrifice of the personnel of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and we are grateful for
the collaboration and support of the United Nations,
the African Union, the European Union and all of our
international partners.
Today, I wish to call member’s attention to the
significant developments we have achieved with their
collaboration. In the span of almost two years, we
have advanced the organizational structure for the
implementation of our Government’s agenda through
four distinct road maps: inclusive politics, security and
justice, economic recovery and social development.
Those road maps have enabled the Government
to track the implementation of projects, improve
coordination among ministries and agencies and
enhance accountability and transparency at all levels;
most critically, they will allow Somalis to streamline
the support received from our international partners.
During the seventy-third session of the General
Assembly, Somalia was elected as a member of the
Human Rights Council for a three-year term, beginning
this month. On this occasion, Somalia reaffirms its
commitment, at the national and global levels, to the
implementation, promotion and protection of human
8/11

Directly attributable to this new mode of business,
let me also highlight other key achievements we have
made. Somalia is rebranding and taking its rightful
place in the region. The end of 2018 marked an exciting
time of regeneration and partnership in the Horn
of Africa. This new reality will increase regional
cooperation to boost economic initiatives and promote
peace and security across the Horn of Africa, and is an
example of the active role that Somalia can play in the
region under President Farmajo’s leadership.
On inclusive politics, we have laid important
foundations for our reform agenda by reaching an
agreement on the electoral system for 2020 and
completing 50 per cent of the constitutional review
process. In order to put in place a legislative framework
for the election, we have reviewed the political parties
law and drafted an electoral law. With a view to
deepening federalism, various elections are under way
in many federal member states and are taking place as
scheduled, while we continue to support the devolution
of Government functions and powers to the different
administrative levels of Government.
Our working relationship with our federal member
states is becoming stronger. We are implementing
a joint developed framework for security support
with HirShabelle state and are currently finalizing
the same with South-West state. Building the trust of
Somali citizens in their Government is a key part of
our political reform, including through the tackling of
crippling corruption. In that regard, we have adopted an
anti-corruption law and established an anti-corruption
commission, and the cabinet has endorsed the
federal justice and corrections model — a key step
in strengthening the rule of law in Somalia. In order
18-45712

03/01/2019

The situation in Somalia

to deepen federalism and address practical issues, we
have reached a resource-management agreement on
the ownership, management and sharing of fisheries,
petroleum and mineral resources.
Lastly, in order to build trust among Somalis and
ensure that our political reform is generally inclusive,
my President has led reconciliation efforts across the
country. In the city of Galkayo in central Somalia,
the President brought the parties together to resolve
the conflict and broken relations. In order to resolve
the conflict, the Government has followed up with
the integration of local forces to enhance the peace.
In Tukaraq, in the north-western part of Somalia, the
President is leading mediation efforts to de-escalade
tensions and in the district of Merca in Lower Shabelle,
his support has strengthened the local community
reconciliation initiative and benefited Lower Shabelle
security along the coastal line.
With regard to security, the Federal Government
of Somalia has made considerable progress in the
implementation of the Somali transition plan and the
national security architecture. Through the security
and justice road map, we have broken down the task
into priority areas to ensure that activities are not
implemented on an ad hoc basis but are concentrated
in areas and aligned with other security efforts in order
to multiply their effect. The Somali National Army
has conducted independent operations in support of
the transition implementation in Lower and Middle
Shabelle. Key areas, such as the coastal town of Merca,
were cleared and have been held by the Somali National
Army to enable stabilization, peacebuilding and
reconciliation initiatives.
The implementation of the transition has also
continued in the capital, with the Somali police
forces taking over the security responsibilities for the
Mogadishu stadium from the African Union Mission in
Somalia. We, the federal Government, have restructured
the National Intelligence and Security Agency into
a civilian intelligence-gathering agency, moving
operational units to the Somali police force. That is no
mean feat. In line with our reform agenda, the House of
the People just this week adopted a pension and gratuity
bill that will pave the way for the disengagement of a
large number of inactive civil servants. We continue
to restructure the Somali security forces and redefine
their roles and responsibilities in support of the payroll
reform and the biometric registration, and our national
registration force is nearing completion.

S/PV. 8440

With regard to economic recovery, the Federal
Government of Somalia has achieved success owing to its
relentless fight against corruption through widespread
economic reforms. For the first time in many years,
high-ranking officials have been arrested and charged
in connection with embezzlement. The Ministry of
Finance is now the only line Ministry entrusted with
revenue collection, which was previously collected
by various other Government institutions. Domestic
revenue has increased. Taxes and Government fees are
paid directly to the Central Bank of Somalia.
As a result of those key policies and strengthened
fiscal discipline, our tax base has expanded. A stafflevel agreement has been reached with the International
Monetary Fund on the completion of the third staffmonitored programme, thereby making significant
progress to pave the way for debt relief. In partnership
with the United Nations, the World Bank and the
European Union, we have developed the recovery
and resilience framework as a means to achieve longterm economic and social responsibility to address
vulnerability. We are stepping up our efforts to prepare
the ninth national development plan. Structured
according to four key road maps, it will serve as a basis
for an interim poverty-reduction strategy paper — a
document that will lay out Somalia’s development goals,
challenges and financing requirements.
In our efforts to achieve a prosperous society
through the social development road map, we are
working to establish policies, strategies and regulations
for the enhancement of affordable and accessible basic
social services, such as health care, education, clean
water and electricity. In line with the road map, we are
working on reinstating Somali pride and ownership in
the rebuilding of our State through our flagship social
mobilization campaign. That programme creates civic
engagement and enhances the culture of volunteerism.
For the first time in our national budget, we have tripled
the budget for the delivery of basic social services, such
as health care and education for our people.
Much of the aforementioned progress has been
achieved with minimum direct investment and in
partnership with the Federal Government of Somalia.
Real partnership requires commitment, trust and
mutual respect. Over the nearly past two years,
we have listened carefully to our partners and will
continue to encourage an open and frank dialogue. We
acknowledge and offer our appreciation to the United
Nations agencies that continue to provide vital support

18-457129/11

S/PV.8440

The situation in Somalia

and assistance to the Somali people. Somalia has been
a proud member of the United Nations since gaining its
independence in 1960 and is committed to the values
and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. Moreover, the principles of respect for the rule
of law, freedom of expression and assembly, fairness,
good governance, transparency and due process are all
enshrined in our provisional Constitution.
Ultimately, our leaders’ decisions are subject to the
close scrutiny of our legislative and judiciary systems.
Those robust checks and balances, while protecting the
separation of powers, also ensure accountability and
fairness. Recognizing that our Government obtains
legitimacy first and foremost from its people, we have
ensured that public engagement is a critical pillar in our
approach to governance. That is why my Government
enjoys the confidence and overwhelming support of
the Somali people. Our youthful nation is finding its
voice and establishing new forms of debate and active
accountability through public forums. We are proud of
our active and vocal citizens, and we encourage their
engagement with their Government and elected officials.
We believe that our legitimacy and credibility and,
ultimately, the impact of our decisions depend on the
wishes and interests of our people. The Somali people
want Somalia to have its rightful place in the community
of nations, with mutual respect and reciprocity. The
Somali people demand that their Government assume
responsibility for its own decisions and shape their
future, with Somalia leading international support, not
international support leading Somalia. We therefore
have a duty to re-establish Somalia’s position in the
world and represent the interests of Somalis actively
on the world stage. For the pride and protection of
the Somali people, as their representatives we have a
duty to give them a voice and represent their wishes
and aspirations.
Allow me to address the issue at hand. Somalia
distinguishes between the institutions that we are part
of and individual conduct having a detrimental effect on
our fragile nations. Our Government is taking Somalia
to a new future. It is no longer transitional in nature but
a sovereign nation with all its rights and privileges. We
are battling terrorism, clan mentalities and corruption.
It is our expectation that the leadership of the United
Nations will support that strategic picture.
The Member States represented here will agree that
proscribed individuals from Al-Shabaab or other terrorist
10/11

03/01/2019

organizations sanctioned by this very institution cannot
assume leadership positions without going through a
stringent, established rehabilitation programme. During
the past two federal electoral cycles, United Nations
representatives in Mogadishu have reiterated again and
again that the candidature and potential election of any
individual with a history of violent extremism would
represent a regressive step. Therefore, while we strive
to re-establish the rule of law and to end the culture
of impunity, we reject the criticism and attempts to
rebrand resurgent terrorists as ice-cream salesmen
before they have redeemed themselves.
Finally, as a maturing nation undergoing a
challenging evolution, we do not shy away from the
task ahead of us as we are hard at work laying the
foundation for generations to come. The Federal
Government of Somalia remains committed to its
reform agenda to establish effective institutions that
abide by our Constitution, respect the human rights
of all citizens, adhere to international humanitarian
law and create forces that are accountable, transparent
and able to defend the people, sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and unity of Somalia.
In those endeavours, we continue to promote the respect
of human rights and commit to fully investigate any
violations or abuses against our people.
The challenges facing Somalia are complex, but
Somalia is gradually taking the lead in addressing
them through Somali-led initiatives. As we fulfil
our responsibility as a sovereign nation, I recall
that the speakers in this Chamber often call on host
Governments to act on their responsibility to govern
and to identify national solutions to challenges. Somali
has demonstrated a strong political will to do so. That
should be applauded, not extinguished.
Somalia continues to make considerable progress
across an ambitious and challenging reform agenda. We
cannot do so alone; we are grateful for the support of
international partners and their commitment to Somalia.
That support will be most effective when it is delivered
in line with objectives we have set out in our road map
and when it is directed towards Somali priorities. We
look forward to continuing to work closely with our
partners to align their support and to build a bridge and
a bright prosperous future for Somalia.
I cannot conclude my remarks without once
again reiterating our appeal to the Security Council
that the United Nations and its representatives have a
18-45712

03/01/2019

The situation in Somalia

duty — even an obligation — to respect their mandate
not to interfere in our internal affairs, and to let the
Somalis control their own destiny. We believe that
collaboration with the United Nations on that basis
is more likely to have a concrete positive outcome.
With the help of our partners, Somalia is on the right
path to recovery from several decades of civil war
and anarchy. The Somali Government is committed
to bringing political stability to the country and will

S/PV. 8440

take the measures necessary to maintain those hardearned gains, in accordance with our Constitution and
international law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

18-4571211/11
