United Nations

A/RES/56/160

General Assembly

Distr.: General
13 February 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 119 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/56/583/Add.2)]

56/160. Human rights and terrorism
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 1 the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations 2 and the International Covenants on Human Rights, 3
Recalling the Declaration on the Occasion of the Fiftieth Anniversary of the
United Nations, 4 as well as the Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International
Terrorism, 5
Recalling also the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by
the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 6 in which the Conference
reaffirmed that the acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, as well as its linkage in some countries to drug trafficking, are
activities aimed at the destruction of human rights, fundamental freedoms and
democracy, threatening territorial integrity and the security of States and
destabilizing legitimately constituted Governments, and that the international
community should take the necessary steps to enhance cooperation to prevent and
combat terrorism,
Recalling further the United Nations Millennium Declaration adopted by the
General Assembly, 7
Recalling its resolutions 48/122 of 20 December 1993, 49/185 of 23 December
1994, 50/186 of 22 December 1995, 52/133 of 12 December 1997 and 54/164 of
17 December 1999,

_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
3
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
4
See resolution 50/6.
5
Resolution 49/60, annex.
6
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
7
See resolution 55/2.
2

01 48742

A/RES/56/160

Recalling in particular that, in its resolution 52/133, it requested the
Secretary-General to seek the views of Member States on the implications of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations for the full enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling previous resolutions of the Commission on Human Rights, and
taking note in particular of Commission resolution 2001/37 of 23 April 2001, 8 as
well as the relevant resolutions of the Subcommission on the Promotion and
Protection of Human Rights, in particular its resolution 2001/18, adopted
unanimously on 16 August 2001, 9
Bearing in mind all other relevant General Assembly resolutions,
Bearing in mind also relevant Security Council resolutions,
Aware that, at the dawn of the twenty-first century, the world is witness to
historic and far-reaching transformations, in the course of which forces of
aggressive nationalism and religious and ethnic extremism continue to produce fresh
challenges,
Alarmed that acts of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations aimed at the
destruction of human rights have continued despite national and international
efforts,
Bearing in mind that the right to life is the basic human right, without which a
human being can exercise no other right,
Bearing in mind also that terrorism creates an environment that destroys the
right of people to live in freedom from fear,
Reiterating that all States have an obligation to promote and protect all human
rights and fundamental freedoms and that every individual should strive to secure
their universal and effective recognition and observance,
Seriously concerned about the gross violations of human rights perpetrated by
terrorist groups,
Profoundly deploring the increasing number of innocent persons, including
women, children and the elderly, killed, massacred and maimed by terrorists in
indiscriminate and random acts of violence and terror, which cannot be justified
under any circumstances,
Expressing its deepest sympathy and condolences to all the victims of
terrorism and their families,
Noting with great concern the growing connection between terrorist groups
and other criminal organizations engaged in the illegal traffic in arms and drugs at
the national and international levels, as well as the consequent commission of
serious crimes such as murder, extortion, kidnapping, assault, the taking of hostages
and robbery,
Alarmed in particular at the possibility that terrorist groups may exploit new
technologies to facilitate acts of terrorism, which may cause massive damage,
including huge loss of human life,
_______________
8
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2001, Supplement No. 3 (E/2001/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
9
See E/CN.4/2002/2-E/CN.4/Sub.2/2001/40, chap. II, sect. A.

2

A/RES/56/160

Emphasizing the need to intensify the fight against terrorism at the national
level, to enhance effective international cooperation in combating terrorism in
conformity with international law and to strengthen the role of the United Nations in
this respect,
Emphasizing also the importance of Member States taking appropriate steps to
deny safe haven to those who plan, finance or commit terrorist acts by ensuring their
apprehension and prosecution or extradition,
Reaffirming that all measures to counter terrorism must be in strict conformity
with the relevant provisions of international law, including international human
rights standards,
Mindful of the need to protect the human rights of and guarantees for the
individual in accordance with the relevant human rights principles and instruments,
in particular the right to life,
Noting the growing consciousness within the international community of the
negative effects of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations on the full
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms and on the establishment of
the rule of law and democratic freedoms as enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and the International Covenants on Human Rights,
1.

Expresses its solidarity with the victims of terrorism;

2.
Strongly condemns the violations of the right to live free from fear and of
the right to life, liberty and security;
3.
Reiterates its unequivocal condemnation of the acts, methods and
practices of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations as activities aimed at the
destruction of human rights, fundamental freedoms and democracy, threatening the
territorial integrity and security of States, destabilizing legitimately constituted
Governments, undermining pluralistic civil society and having adverse
consequences for the economic and social development of States;
4.
Reaffirms the decision of the heads of State and Government, as
contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 7 to take concerted action
against international terrorism and to accede as soon as possible to all the relevant
regional and international conventions;
5.
Urges the international community to enhance cooperation at the regional
and international levels in the fight against terrorism, in accordance with relevant
international instruments, including those relating to human rights, with the aim of
its eradication;
6.
Calls upon States to take all necessary and effective measures, in
accordance with relevant provisions of international law, including international
human rights standards, to prevent, combat and eliminate terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, wherever and by whomever it is committed, and also calls upon
States to strengthen, where appropriate, their legislation to combat terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations;
7.

Urges all States to deny safe haven to terrorists;

8.
Calls upon States to take appropriate measures, in conformity with
relevant provisions of national and international law, including international human
rights standards, before granting refugee status, for the purpose of ensuring that an
asylum-seeker has not planned, facilitated or participated in the commission of
terrorist acts, including assassinations, and in this context urges those States that
3

A/RES/56/160

have granted refugee status or asylum to persons involved in or claiming to have
committed acts of terrorism to review these situations;
9.

Condemns the incitement to ethnic hatred, violence and terrorism;

10. Commends those Governments that have communicated their views on
the implications of terrorism in response to the notes verbales by the SecretaryGeneral dated 16 August 1999 and 4 September 2000;
11. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General, 10 and requests him to
continue to seek the views of Member States on the implications of terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations for the full enjoyment of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms and on the possible establishment of a voluntary fund for the
victims of terrorism, as well as on ways and means to rehabilitate the victims of
terrorism and to reintegrate them into society, with a view to incorporating his
findings in his report to the General Assembly;
12. Decides to consider this question at its fifty-eighth session under the item
entitled “Human rights questions”.
88th plenary meeting
19 December 2001

_______________
10

4

A/56/190.
