United Nations

S/PV.5922

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5922nd meeting
Tuesday, 24 June 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Khalilzad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Grauls
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Spatafora
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Arias
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Kumalo
Sir John Sawers
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-39591 (E)

*0839591*

S/PV.5922

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jan Eliasson,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Darfur.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Eliasson to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, Special Envoy of the African
Union for Darfur.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Salim to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Jan Eliasson, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Darfur, and by Mr. Salim Ahmed
Salim, Special Envoy of the African Union for Darfur.
I now give the floor to Mr. Eliasson.
Mr. Eliasson: It is an honour and a pleasure for
me to address the Council today, together with my
colleague and dear friend, Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, the
African Union (AU) Special Envoy for Darfur. As
members may be aware, we also briefed the African
Union Peace and Security Council jointly on 12 June in
Addis Ababa. The fact that we are holding these
briefings together is an indication of the ever closer
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU, in
the spirit of Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter.

2

Darfur is a case in point. The complexity and
scope of the conflict make it even more essential that
we strengthen regional and international collaboration.
The visit of the Security Council to several African
States, including the Sudan, only three weeks ago, is an
important manifestation of this growingly important
dimension of international relations.
Today, I will provide an overview of the political
process and the search for peace in Darfur. As members
will recall, in November 2006 at the Addis Ababa high
level consultations on Darfur, there was a unanimous
call for a re-energized political process. The Darfur
Peace Agreement of 2006 was not welcomed or
accepted by a majority of Darfurians. There was also a
clear need to bring the fragmented non-signatory
movements together and to prepare the parties for
substantive talks. By December 2006, Mr. Salim and I
were appointed as Special Envoys with this task at hand.
At my first briefing to this Council, in March
2007, I reported a sense of deep fatigue and deep
frustration on all sides, following four years of conflict
and suffering in Darfur. I cautioned, however, that
there were voices advocating status quo or a military
solution. Furthermore, I expressed concern over the
gravity of the humanitarian and security conditions on
the ground.
Still, at that time, Mr. Salim and I felt that there
was a window of opportunity, a potential for dialogue
between the parties. We noted a certain readiness among
them to engage in the political process. Conditions on
the international and regional fronts seemed relatively
favourable at that time. Momentum was being built
toward the deployment of a joint AU-United Nations
peacekeeping operation. During this period, we
developed the roadmap for the political process,
presented to this Council in June last year. The aim was
to convene substantive talks by the end of last summer.
Over the past 18 months, Mr. Salim and I have
urged the parties to prove their serious intentions,
notably by improving the security and humanitarian
situation. There was a need to build confidence and an
environment conducive to peace talks. We travelled
numerous times to movement-controlled areas of
Darfur and to locations in the region, and urged the
movements to build internal cohesion. We urged them
to adopt an issue-based approach and to focus on
common concerns in the areas of power-sharing,

08-39591

S/PV.5922

wealth-sharing and security. We strongly advised them
to come to the negotiation table with unified positions.
We also met frequently in Khartoum and Juba
with officials of the Government of National Unity,
and urged them to show preparedness and make
compromises in order to speed up the political process.
We requested them to exercise political and military
restraint. Also, we urged them to discuss with us how
the issues of power- and wealth- sharing, as well as
security could be dealt with at the talks.
During all this time, we visited over-populated
refugee camps and internally displaced person camps
on the ground. We sat under the trees with traditional
leaders and we walked through many local, tragically
empty, markets. We saw with our own eyes and felt
with our own hearts why Darfur to many is considered
forgotten and neglected. To all the people we saw, we
had the same message and were met with the same
response: it is time for a serious peace process which
brings an end to the suffering, an end to political
marginalization, an end to socio-economic inequality
and an end to the climate of insecurity and fear
prevalent today in Darfur.
Last summer, the atmosphere was positive. The
Security Council had adopted resolution 1769 (2007).
There had been no reported cease fire violations for
four months. Most movements had indicated that they
would be ready to start negotiations by the end of the
summer. Despite continuing fragmentation among
them, progress was made, notably in Arusha, Tanzania,
in August 2007, when their leading personalities
agreed on a common platform for the talks.
Based on these developments, Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and Chairperson Konaré decided to
launch the first phase of the formal peace talks in Sirte,
Libya, in October. While the tone of the exchanges
between the parties was constructive, the absence of
key movements and of a consolidated National Unity
Government delegation made it extremely difficult to
engage in substantive discussions. The conditions were
just not ripe. The start of a peace process was,
however, a catalyst for the movements to intensify
their unification efforts, not least assisted by the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM) in Juba.
Mr. Salim and I were encouraged by the work done to
restructure the tangled web of smaller groups. We saw
the emergence of five main groupings: the Sudan
Liberation Army (SLA)-Unity, the United Resistance

08-39591

Front (URF), SLA-Abdul Shafie, SLA-Abdul Wahid
and the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM)-Khalil
Ibrahim.
Unfortunately, the willingness of the movements
to embark on the road to peace has over time not been
consistent. SLA-Abdul Wahid continues to place
severe pre-conditions for participation in the talks.
JEM-Khalil Ibrahim has pursued the military track and
has been met with international criticism for doing so.
Both these movements have also refused participation
in the talks if what they call “splinter movements”
were to take part. The URF and SLM-Abdul Shafie are
basically positive to the process but are still working to
resolve internal problems. SLA-Unity has been
cooperative and declared itself ready to attend talks at
any time.
In the beginning of last fall, JEM split and SPLM
suspended its work in the Government. Since then, the
environment has continued to deteriorate. The
incursions and stand-off between Chad and Sudan have
underscored the urgent need for good neighbourly
relations between them. The attack on Omdurman
proved that there are those who still believe in a
military solution. The destruction in Abyei showed the
lingering North-South tensions in Sudan and the
consequences of unimplemented agreements. Continued
clashes in Darfur between the movements and the
Sudan Armed Forces and among tribal militias make it
clear that this intractable conflict is still unfolding.
To this should be added continued violence and
dire humanitarian conditions on the ground.
Humanitarian access is constrained by fighting
between the movements and between them and the
Government’s armed forces. Access and security have
been further curtailed by attacks on humanitarian
workers and assets, by banditry, by looting and even by
abductions and murders. This has taken a heavy toll on
humanitarian operations, not least on the delivery of
food which the World Food Programme (WFP) has had
to substantially diminish. High food prices globally
and the impending rainy season give further reasons
for alarm.
The security situation in Darfur should now be
our primary concern. In accordance with our
framework for the way forward, presented this spring,
Mr. Salim and I have, for a few months now, placed
strong emphasis on reducing the level of violence. As a
part of these efforts, we had extensive contacts with the

3

S/PV.5922

parties on convening informal security consultations
between the movements and the Government of Sudan
in Switzerland earlier this month.
In the end, JEM and SLM-Abdul Wahid chose not
to agree to meet for such consultations at this time. For
that and other reasons, we decided to postpone.
Meanwhile, we continue to discuss security with the
parties on a bilateral basis.
Against this background, it is with much regret
that I report today that we are in a troubled state of
affairs in the political process. Since the Sirte talks, the
parties have not been willing to come together for
substantive talks. Mr. Salim and I have not sensed a
prevailing willingness on the part of the parties to
engage in confidence-building measures so as to
improve prospects for negotiations. Trust among them
has not been established and is in some cases
completely absent.
Fragmentation within the movements continues to
affect their cohesion and preparedness for talks.
Instead of coming together around issues that would
facilitate the process and improve the lives of
generations of Darfurians, some of the movements
have been engaged in power struggles and in-fighting.
They have been preoccupied with formulating
preconditions for talks and using rhetoric often distant
from reality. The original movements, SLA-Abdul
Wahid and JEM-Khalil Ibrahim, claim to be more
legitimate than the other groups. Thus, they should, in
my view, accept responsibility, exercise leadership and
promote cooperation with the other movements.
At the same time, we must recognize that the
movements have great and genuine lack of trust in the
Government of Sudan. They seriously doubt that there
will be a fair implementation of a peace accord. They
look at the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement and Darfur Peace Agreement as
examples of why not to come to the negotiation table.
Continued attacks against civilians and resettlement on
land owned by people now languishing in the camps do
not foster an atmosphere of confidence. Let us also
remember that it is first and foremost the Government
of Sudan that has the resources and responsibility to
ensure protection, prosperity and a life of dignity for
all the people of Darfur and Sudan.
Mr. Salim and I have thus called several times
upon the Government to exercise maximum restraint
and be forthcoming on key issues of the conflict in

4

order concretely to demonstrate its commitment to a
political solution. Further, for trust to be established,
for a credible political process to be made possible and
for reconciliation to occur, respect for human rights
and the rule of law is crucial.
I often ask myself why the conflict in Darfur is so
difficult to resolve. I have come to the conclusion that
it is because it requires simultaneous harmony at four
levels: the international community; the regional
partners; the Government of National Unity of Sudan;
and, finally, the movements in Darfur. Such harmony
has, over time and in varying degrees, been
conspicuously absent.
It is now crucial that influential players from the
international community explore and analyse their
comparative advantages vis-à-vis the parties and the
region. To make progress, all must accept
responsibility. A much more efficient division of labour
is required in dealing with this crisis. There is an
urgent need for outside actors — international
organizations, Member States and especially members
of this Council — to jointly exert influence, as well as
use bilateral leverage on the parties to stop further
hostilities and take steps towards peace. A wellprepared high-level international meeting could play a
positive catalyst role in that respect.
To succeed, we must also look at Darfur through
the broader lens of Sudan as a whole, as well as of the
region. In so doing, we should keep the following
considerations in mind.
First, the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement obviously has far-reaching
implications for Darfur. This is true in terms of
confidence-building, but also for future power-sharing
arrangements in Darfur and Sudan.
Secondly, there will be no peace in Darfur
without a normalization of relations between Sudan
and Chad. Concerted efforts are required to assist and
influence both countries to re-establish security and to
live up to existing agreements, the most recent of
which is the Dakar Accord.
Thirdly, peace will require political will and a
willingness from the parties to compromise. This also
requires that key international and regional actors come
up with more credible diplomatic, financial and socioeconomic incentives and disincentives, including

08-39591

S/PV.5922

recovery programmes in places where conditions are
stable.
Fourthly, there must be a more rapid and effective
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The
implementation of resolution 1769 (2007) is critical for
the credibility of the international community and for
this Council and for the security and well-being of the
people of Darfur. The international community has
demonstrated solidarity with Darfur through the brave
men and women offered to UNAMID from many
nations. At the same time, I must say that hand-picking
eligible nationalities for a peacekeeping operation is
hardly consistent with the spirit of the United Nations
Charter, and it certainly complicates the peace process.
Fifthly, the quest for peace will always be
obstructed when there is an abundance of arms. More
effective efforts must be made to end the arms flow to
Darfur, in accordance with the United Nations
embargo.
Finally, the people of Darfur must be much more
actively engaged in the process. We should recall
resolution 1325 (2000) when we see that women and
children suffer the most. Ordinary citizens and
internally displaced persons have carried a heavy
burden and have already paid a huge price. Any future
agreement will be stillborn unless civil society,
traditional leaders and representatives from the
displaced communities know that their voices are
heard. Their interests — and not only those who have
taken up arms — must be respected. In this regard,
Mr. Salim and I welcome the recent commitment by
the Government to a stronger engagement with civil
society in Darfur.
I would like to conclude with a few personal
reflections. I often quote the old Swedish saying that
you can bring a horse to the waterhole, but you cannot
force a horse to drink. In the case of Darfur, there is
now reason to seriously question whether the parties
are ready to sit down at the negotiation table and make
the compromises necessary for peace. Mr. Salim and I
have tried our best to assist them. The appointment of a
full-time joint United Nations-African Union chief
mediator to continue in this quest is now imminent.
The name is to be announced as soon as the parties
have been informed. Mr. Salim and I will remain
available for advice and engagement as need be.

08-39591

However, the appointment of a chief mediator
will, in itself, of course, not bring peace to Darfur. As
mentioned, others must contribute by providing more
enticing incentives and more credible disincentives to
the parties. That may require a shift in mindset in how
the main protagonists and we all view the crisis. There
has been a tendency to compartmentalize the conflict
in Darfur, without taking sufficient account of the
national and regional dimensions.
The outside world, as much as the parties, has a
responsibility to bring an end to this tragedy. It risks
tearing apart a great nation of Africa, seriously
destabilizing the region and endangering international
peace and security. For over five years, millions of
people have suffered enormously. This simply cannot go
on. A new generation in Sudan may be doomed to a life
in conflict, a life in despair and a life in poverty. The
international community should have learned enough
lessons from other conflicts in which populations were
left to stagnate and radicalize in camps.
Therefore, we must now urgently mobilize all
available political energy inside and outside Sudan to,
first of all, stop escalation and reach a cessation of
hostilities and, secondly, lay a foundation for serious
peace talks for Darfur. But, at the end of the day, we
will not make progress unless the Sudanese themselves
show seriousness, political will and a focused
commitment to peace. It is for them to accept
responsibility and finally settle the outstanding issues
that for so long have plagued the people of Darfur and
the people of Sudan.
The President: I thank Mr. Eliasson for his
briefing. I now give the floor to Mr. Salim.
Mr. Salim: I am honoured to have this
opportunity to address the Security Council. I am
particularly pleased, Sir, to do so under your
presidency. I am aware of the significant efforts made
by your country in the search for an end to the conflict
in Darfur and the achievement of a just and durable
settlement. I am particularly conscious of the active
support given to both my colleague and friend Jan
Eliasson and me by the United States and other
international partners in the discharge of our mandate
as Special Envoys of the United Nations and the
African Union on Darfur.
I am not a stranger to the Security Council as far
as the issue of Darfur is concerned. During the InterSudanese Peace Talks on Darfur held in Abuja in 2005

5

S/PV.5922

and 2006, during which I was the African Union
Special Envoy and Chief Mediator and which
culminated in the signing of the Darfur Peace
Agreement, I had occasions to brief the Council. This
time, however, I do so jointly with Special Envoy
Eliasson, manifesting our teamwork and eloquently
displaying in practical terms the growing cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union in
our collective quest for peace and security and, more
specifically, in our collective determination to
contribute to ending the tragic conflict in Darfur. As
Mr. Eliasson rightly observed, 12 days ago both of us
had the opportunity to brief the African Union Peace
and Security Council in Addis Ababa.
In his presentation today, Special Envoy Eliasson
has given a detailed and elaborate account of our joint
activities. Those include intensive consultations, road
maps, work plans, programmes and strategies that the
Special Envoys, assisted by the Joint Mediation
Support Team, put in place, with the full support of
regional and international players, aimed at bringing
the parties in conflict to the negotiation table. I fully
share what he has said.
Sixteen months ago, the Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
entrusted us with a specific mandate, namely, to
re-energize the political process. In other words, we
were to create propitious conditions for the parties in
conflict — that is to say, the Government of the Sudan
and the armed movements — to engage in a more
inclusive political dialogue leading to a more
acceptable, and therefore more durable, political
settlement of the Darfur problem. During this period,
we travelled many times to Sudan. In particular, we
visited Khartoum, Darfur and Juba.
In Darfur we visited extensively several different
areas to meet with the leaders and commanders of the
armed movements. During those visits we consulted
extensively with stakeholders, including signatories
and non-signatories to the Darfur Peace Agreement,
traditional leaders, leaders of political parties,
representatives of internally displaced persons, civil
society organizations, women’s and youth groups and
intellectuals. One of the shortcomings of the Abuja
Peace Talks was to confine the entire process to the
Government and the armed movements. This time, we
were determined to rectify that by ensuring that the
broadest range of stakeholders were involved, or at the
very least consulted.

6

In Khartoum, during our consultations with
Government leaders and officials at various levels,
while welcoming the Government’s preparedness to
enter into negotiations, we urged them to take concrete
measures to allay the concerns and fears of the
movements, which have a very deep distrust of the
Government. We underscored the fact that the
Government has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of security, and consequently should take
deliberate and sustained steps aimed at de-escalating
violence, including exercising restraint and refraining
from aerial bombardments, which invariably have
terrible consequences on innocent civilians. We also
urged the Government to be more proactive and
flexible on the fundamental issues that constitute the
current divide between them and the movements in
respect of the future dispensation of Darfur.
In Juba, we also met on several occasions with
top leaders and officials. We supported and encouraged
their efforts aimed at promoting the unity of the
movements. We did so because, first, we believe that,
as part of the Government of National Unity, the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM) can, and
should, play an important and constructive role in the
achievement of a just and lasting settlement of the
Darfur crisis. Secondly, we believe that the SPLM’s
own experience and its historic relations with some of
the movements in Darfur would be helpful in
encouraging them towards the process of negotiations.
We spent a considerable part of our time, energy
and the limited resources at the disposal of the joint
mediation encouraging and supporting efforts by the
movements aimed at bringing about unity, or at the
very least the attainment of common positions. We did
so in the firm belief that such unity would contribute
immensely to the peace process and that, conversely,
continued fragmentation was inimical to peace and
stability in Darfur. In our efforts and initiatives we
interacted and consulted closely with regional partners.
We also had the support of international partners.
The Arusha consultations in August 2007
provided a ray of hope. Regrettably, however, that
optimism was shattered with the division that occurred
within the leadership of the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM) soon thereafter. Subsequent to the
commencement of the Sirte process in October last
year, and drawing from the lessons of Sirte, which,
inter alia, necessitated the postponement of the talks
due to the absence of some of the major players, efforts

08-39591

S/PV.5922

were intensified aimed at forging some degree of unity
and cohesion. The emergence of five groups — instead
of having to deal with about two dozen factions or so —
is to be welcomed. Of course, ideally we would have
liked to have the situation that prevailed at the
beginning of the Abuja Talks, namely, only the Sudan
Liberation Movement and the Justice and Equality
Movement. Regrettably, however, for the present that
remains a mere ideal. Furthermore, it is important to
recall that the process of fragmentation within the
movements started in earnest while the Abuja Talks
were still taking place.
The reality on the ground is therefore that there is
still division among the movements, and in some
instances within them. Another sad reality is that some
of the movements are not prepared, or are unwilling,
not only to enter into substantive negotiations but are
even against taking part in any formal or informal
talks. Some insist on preconditions that are clearly
unacceptable, even though some of their legitimate
demands as such should form a basis for negotiations.
Others claim an exclusive monopoly on representation
and are dismissive of all other movements. Still others
seem to vigorously pursue a military option, as
manifested by JEM’s unfortunate attack on Omdurman,
which has drawn universal international condemnation.
To compound the situation, the process of
fragmentation has not been completely halted. In short,
the political process has reached an impasse and, as it
was stressed in a meeting we held with regional and
international partners earlier this month in Geneva,
there is a need to rethink the strategy on the way
forward. As the Security Council reflects on this rather
gloomy picture and considers the way forward, I
believe it is important to take into consideration the
following factors, among others.
The number one concern of Darfurians — as
eloquently expressed to us whenever we met with
them, in towns or villages, whether in Government
areas or in rebel strongholds — is the question of
security. There is fighting involving the Sudanese
armed forces and some of the movements. There is
fighting between some movements themselves. There
is the terror that continues to be unleashed by the
Janjaweed. And there is the sheer banditry and
criminality perpetrated by some armed groups. It is
indeed no exaggeration to assert that Darfurians in
general have been eagerly waiting the deployment of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in

08-39591

Darfur (UNAMID), and have great expectations that its
full deployment will make a great difference in their
daily lives. Such a deployment will certainly go a long
way in helping to create a favourable climate for the
launching of the peace process.
It is therefore all the more regrettable that such a
deployment has been agonizingly slow in the face of
numerous difficulties, some due to the position of the
Government of the Sudan on such matters as the
composition of the force and others due to the failure
of the international community to act decisively. We all
recognize that what is needed in Darfur is a robust,
well-equipped force with a reasonable mobile capacity.
In this connection, I believe that it is a sad commentary
that notwithstanding the existence of thousands of
helicopters it has not yet been possible to obtain two
dozen or so helicopters for UNAMID. And yet the
international community at large has repeatedly called
for the rapid deployment of a robust UNAMID.
Given these circumstances, it is, in our opinion,
important to be vigilant so that the euphoria of
expectation among Darfurians does not yield to
despondency. At the same time it is evident that
UNAMID per se, even when fully deployed with the
necessary equipment and logistical backup, will not
translate into peace and stability in Darfur. The hybrid
force will need the cooperation of all the parties in
order to effectively discharge its responsibilities.
Above all, it will need a peace to keep; hence the
crucial importance of the political process.
The situation of insecurity in Darfur is made
worse by the tense and deteriorating relations between
Chad and the Sudan. In the interests of the peoples of
both Chad and the Sudan, it is crucial that this situation
be defused. The various accords reached between the
two countries, including the latest one agreed upon in
Dakar, cry out for implementation. Clearly, without the
reduction of tension between these two neighbours and
the normalization of relations, it is inconceivable that
there can be a lasting solution to the conflict in Darfur.
Another issue of grave concern which requires
urgent attention and action is the flow of arms into
Darfur despite the existence of an arms embargo. The
Security Council should look into this and should close
whatever loopholes exist.
On 16 November 2006 a high-level meeting
involving a number of States and institutions, including
the representatives of the Government of the Sudan and

7

S/PV.5922

the representatives of the permanent members of the
Security Council, was held at the headquarters of the
African Union in Addis Abba. That meeting was jointly
chaired by the then Secretary-General of the United
Nations, Mr. Kofi Annan, and the then African Union
Commission Chairperson, President Alpha Oumar
Konare. It decided on a number of key issues including
re-energizing the political process and the creation of
an African Union-United Nations hybrid force. In
Geneva, in June, a proposal was made and generally
accepted, subject to appropriate preparations,
recommending the holding of a high-level meeting to
be convened by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
AU Commission Chairperson Jean Ping to chart the
way forward. It is recommended that the participants at
the meeting should include the Foreign Ministers of the
permanent members of the Security Council,
representatives of the Government of the Sudan and
regional and international partners. Given the current
situation in Darfur, with its repercussions in the whole
of the Sudan and in the region, this proposal, in our
opinion, merits serious follow-up so that it can be
realized as soon as possible. As a new approach is
required in dealing with this crisis, such a meeting
would provide a unique opportunity for reflection,
consideration and possible action.
Given the enormity of the challenges that lie
ahead, the need to have someone following events on
daily basis and engaging the parties on a more regular
basis is self-evident. That is why Jan Eliasson and I
very much look forward to the appointment of a
common AU-United Nations chief mediator, who will
be based in Khartoum. He will need the active support
of the United Nations Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council. He will certainly
have the full support of the two Special Envoys and the
Joint Mediation Support Team. Even more crucially,
however, he will need the support of the Government
of the Sudan and the movements. In the meantime, it is
important to underscore the need for both the United
Nations Security Council and AU Peace and Security
Council to be actively engaged in the process and to
send the right signals and strong messages to the
parties. They should encourage those who support the
peace process and effectively discourage all those who
constitute an obstacle to peace.
It is now five years since the armed conflict
erupted in Darfur. These have been five very difficult
years for the people of Darfur, who have seen tens of

8

thousands of their compatriots, including their wives
and husbands, their mothers and fathers, their children
and grandchildren, killed or maimed and millions more
displaced in camps for internally displaced persons or
as refugees. The challenge before the United Nations
and the African Union is how to put an end to this
catastrophic conflict, contribute to lasting peace and
thereby enable the Darfurians to live in dignity, free of
constant threats to their lives. Peace, security and
stability in Darfur are crucial not only for the people of
that western region of the Sudan but for the Sudan as a
whole, inasmuch as the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement is vital for the entire
country.
Equally challenging is the task of reducing
tension in the region and promoting normal relations.
The international community, and more particularly
those countries and institutions with comparative
advantages, should use their influence with the Sudan
and the region to assist in the efforts to end the conflict
and promote peace, security and development. But
ultimately, the responsibility is that of the Sudanese
people themselves.
The President: I thank Mr. Salim for his
briefing.
I shall now call on Council members wishing to
make statements.
Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I am pleased to welcome
Mr. Jan Eliasson and Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim to the
Council and to thank them for their briefings. We are
highly appreciative of their endeavours in discharging
their complex and difficult — but noble and lofty —
mandates.
It is regrettable that the security situation in
Darfur has deteriorated during the period under
consideration, as attested to by this morning’s
briefings, by the reports of the Secretary-General and
by what internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
humanitarian workers told the Security Council
mission during its visit to Darfur.
The 10 May action by the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM), targeting the capital, and the
ongoing violence among tribal groups, rebel
movements and the Government underscore the need to
accelerate the deployment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and to

08-39591

S/PV.5922

ensure that it has the capacity necessary to protect
civilians, in particular those in IDP camps, and
humanitarian workers. The number of IDPs grows by
the day, which regrettably means an increased number
of people in need of assistance and protection.
But there has been a delay, if not a disruption, in
the deployment of UNAMID, due in large part to the
mission’s considerable shortfall in equipment. For
example, as the report indicates, the deployment of the
first Egyptian battalion has been delayed owing to the
absence of necessary equipment. The same is true for
the Ethiopian battalion. Be they Egyptian or Ethiopian,
these troops are prepared to be deployed in Darfur. Yet
the camps were not ready to receive them, thereby
impeding their arrival. In addition, the Nepalese and
Thai troops were also late to arrive.
We listened to the Sudanese officials whom we
met during our visit expressing their unqualified
cooperation in the deployment of the hybrid force.
Because the deployment of the hybrid force is clearly
in the interest of the Sudanese Government and, more
broadly, in the interest of stability and peace, we
expect that the Sudanese Government, together with
the Mission, will constitute a joint team to overcome
all the problems standing in the way of the
deployment. The Sudanese officials clearly expressed
their willingness to operate the airports in the Darfur
region on a continuous 24-hour basis, although that
required overcoming technical deficiencies and
completing the unfinished airport infrastructure to
enable them to receive the aircraft deployed for the
mission. In this regard, paragraph 29 of the report
contained in document S/2006/400 deserves special
attention. It reads as follows:
“Despite ongoing efforts, critical mission
capabilities are still lacking, namely, 18 medium
utility helicopters, six attack helicopters, one
aerial reconnaissance unit, one medium transport
unit, one heavy transport unit and one multi-role
logistics unit.”
Once again, the mission is regrettably still facing
deficiencies that hamper its deployment.
All of us know that success in deploying the
hybrid Mission depends on providing for its
requirements so that it can discharge its tasks. That is a
sine qua non, a precondition to ameliorate the
humanitarian and security conditions in Darfur and to
improve the chances for success of the political process.

08-39591

Participants at the Geneva meeting on 5 June
under the chairmanship of the two mediators expressed
their disappointment over the late deployment of the
force as well as the adverse consequences resulting
therefrom on the political process. The two mediators
emphasized this fact in the Council this morning as
well.
It is regrettable that, despite the efforts deployed,
particularly by the two Envoys, Mr. Jan Eliasson and
Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, the political process has not
achieved even a modicum of progress; rather, it has
deteriorated. Some rebel movements refuse to join the
political process. Further, they insist on continuing the
violence, despite the fact that the Sudanese
Government expressed its readiness to engage in
dialogue and hastened to declare a unilateral ceasefire,
as mentioned at the launching of the Sirte negotiations.
We believe that greater attention must be directed
by this Council to the political process, in addition to
supporting the efforts made by the two Envoys,
providing propitious circumstances for the launching
of the peace process. In our estimation, that requires
the following steps. First, there must be an attempt to
achieve Sudanese-Chadian reconciliation through the
support of the efforts of the contact group that was
formed as a result of the Dakar Agreement. On that
score, I agree with Mr. Salim about the impossibility of
achieving peace in Darfur if there is no SudaneseChadian reconciliation.
Secondly, persons and groups that refuse to
accede to the peace process or seek to achieve a
ceasefire with the current measures should be targeted.
The Council has hesitated a great deal on this point.
Some movements have refused even to engage in mere
participation in designated security consultations
despite the efforts of the two international mediators
and the specific appeals made to them. It would also be
useful for the peace process to offer incentives to those
who are taking positive stands.
Thirdly, greater attention to and support for civil
society and the traditional leadership are also
important. Unfortunately, we have to acknowledge that
traditional tribal leaders have tremendous influence,
greatly exceeding that of the political leadership. We
believe that civil society and the traditional leadership
are more eager to achieve peace, stability and security.
That is the reality in tribal societies.

9

S/PV.5922

Fourthly, we are in full agreement with the
observations made by the participants in Geneva,
namely that the continued flow of arms to Darfur
unfortunately persists. It is therefore important to
redress this matter urgently and effectively.
In conclusion, I agree with Mr. Eliasson’s
statement on the need to agree to the six points he
raised. That will undoubtedly have a considerable
effect on advancing the peace process.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I would like
to add my very warm thanks to Jan Eliasson and Salim
Salim for their efforts over the past 18 months. Their
statements today had something of the flavour of a
valedictory report, and we very much welcome the
intention of the Secretary-General to appoint a joint
chief mediator for the United Nations and the African
Union in the days ahead; he briefed the Council on this
point yesterday. We welcome this move and we fully
understand that the role of the two Special Envoys will
change and retreat a little bit. After the 18 months of
labouring in the Darfur vineyard, eating the sour grapes
and drinking the undrinkable wine, that decision is
fully understandable.
The Security Council visit, as my good friend
Ambassador Ettalhi has said, was quite revealing for us
all in terms of the real difficulties on the ground in
Darfur, in Khartoum and also in Chad. We came to
many of the same gloomy conclusions that the two
Special Envoys have reported to the Council today. We
briefed the Council on our findings, but I think it is
very striking that the six factors that Mr. Jan Eliasson
have identified are very similar to some of the factors
that we focused on as well.
I would like to take those six considerations in
turn, keeping in mind that they overlap extensively
with what Mr. Salim said in his own report.
First of all, I think it is quite right to put the
centrality of the peace agreement first, even in
discussion on Darfur. It was very clear to us all in
Sudan that the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA)
is the cornerstone of peace in the Sudan. If the CPA
founders, then there is no hope in the short term or the
medium term for progress elsewhere. We have to do
everything we can to keep the CPA on track, and the
United Nations can do more in that respect. The events
in Abyei just a few weeks ago showed that the role of
the United Nations presence, the United Nations force
on the ground, could be more active and could be more

10

involved in preventing the sorts of clashes which led to
the forced displacement of up to 60,000 people and the
razing to the ground of one of the main towns of
southern Sudan.
Secondly, it was clear in visiting both Sudan and
Chad on consecutive days that the situations on either
side of the border are intimately linked. The Council
has vehemently condemned the attacks by the Justice
and Equality Movement into the suburbs of Khartoum.
It has also condemned the attacks by Chad rebels
towards N’Djamena. The fact is that rebels on each
side are backed by the other’s Government. We have to
be very clear that the international presence on the
ground cannot be used as a shield behind which
Governments in Khartoum and N’Djamena make the
Council’s goals in Khartoum more difficult to achieve.
I believe the focus that the two Special Envoys have
placed today on the centrality of establishing stable and
good neighbourly relations between the Sudan and
Chad is absolutely fundamental, because without that
we are not going to make progress in Darfur.
Thirdly, I was struck by what Mr. Eliasson said
about incentives and disincentives as being clearly
insufficient. This does not mean that we simply reach
for more sanctions, but we do have to consider whether
sanctions are not part of the mix against those who are
obstructing the peace process. We must also consider
what incentives we can offer to both parties to engage.
At the moment, they are not sufficient.
Fourthly, Mr. Eliasson focused on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). The Secretary-General has spoken of a
target of 80 per cent deployment by the year’s end. We
all know that UNAMID has been bedevilled in its first
year by the gap between the commitments the parties
have made and the reality. There is a gap in the
provision by the international community of key units,
which we need to continue to address. There is a gap
on the United Nations side in building up the capacity,
as my Libyan colleague identified, to receive new units
on the ground. Here, the United Nations has not done
as much as it could. There is a gap on the Sudanese
side where there is much talk about cooperation, but, as
we saw on the ground, the reality is continued lowlevel difficulties and, at times, obstruction. UNAMID
is not going to be the single way to solve this problem
in Darfur, but is a crucial element which we need to get
right.

08-39591

S/PV.5922

Fifthly, Mr. Eliasson focused on the arms
embargo. It is very striking when one is in Darfur that
any local thug with some money can buy a pick-up
truck, some rocket-propelled grenades and kalashnikov
rifles and turn himself into a militia. We need to
address this free availability of weapons in Darfur if
we are to solve this problem. That means that all
members of this Council have to do more to address
the seriousness of the arms embargo that we have
placed on Darfur and to make sure that we do not idly
sell weapons which just happen to find their way there.
We are responsible for ensuring that weapons do not
reach Darfur. We may need to look at an extension of
the scope of the arms embargo if we are to address this
problem. That is one thing that needs to be on the table.
Sixthly, Mr. Eliasson focused on the people of
Darfur. I believe the efforts to bring together civil
society, community groups, traditional leaders and
tribal elders in Darfur are crucial. Too often the
negotiations on Darfur are seen as negotiations
between militias, whereas it is actually the people who
have to live together — they have lived together there
for centuries and they need to continue to live together,
albeit in stressful circumstances. If we can generate an
understanding from the bottom up, this will be a
crucial part of our efforts. The United Kingdom stands
ready to play a role to bring the parties together if and
when that would make a helpful contribution.
Lastly, one factor that Mr. Eliasson did not
mention is the question of impunity. After we were in
Darfur, the Security Council went to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which knows about the
problem of impunity. President Kabila said that one
cannot put justice aside and hope for a durable peace.
That applies as much in Darfur as it does in the Congo
and elsewhere in Africa.
So it is with these thoughts that I wanted to imply
that the Council has some very serious and difficult
business ahead on Sudan. It will remain the most
demanding topic on our agenda. I would say, once
again, how grateful we are for the efforts of Mr. Salim
and Mr. Eliasson over the last 18 months in trying to
move this dossier forward, and we are glad that they
remain available and on-call should we need their
services again in the future.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this meeting. Let me also
welcome the Special Envoys, Mr. Jan Eliasson, whom I

08-39591

choose to remember in his capacity as President of the
General Assembly, and, of course, Mr. Salim Ahmed
Salim, who will forever be associated with the
Organization of African Unity, now known as the
African Union (AU).
I must say at the outset that, having been to
Darfur, I admire the fact that these two Special Envoys
were able to go there over and over again to try to
assist the people of Darfur. In fact, I would like to say
that those who always wonder what is wrong in Darfur
and what can be done probably should spend time
studying the two statements delivered to us today.
Although we left Darfur a while ago, I am still
concerned that the people in Darfur are crying for
Darfur. I sometimes wonder whether we can address
their cries. We all say that the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) should
be at full strength, but we should also be aware that,
even if UNAMID was deployed at full capacity, it
cannot be a substitute for dialogue and political
negotiations. Without the political process, one would
need 200,000 soldiers and perhaps 100 helicopters in
the air at all times. Certainly, we should call for
helicopters, which are so sorely needed in Darfur; but
without the political process, one would need to keep
those helicopters in the air for 24 hours a day to give
any kind of assurance to the people of Darfur, who are
exposed, not only to the elements of nature, but to the
violence that can come from every imaginable
direction and from every imaginable source. We in
South Africa remain very committed to trying to find a
durable solution to the situation in Darfur, one of
whose very important pillars is the political process.
We pay tribute to what Mr. Eliasson and Mr. Salim
have done in trying to re-energize the peace process.
I was very struck by my visit to Sudan. Before I
went there, I thought there were basically two
movements, one called the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM) and one called the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army (SPLA), and those were really the two
movements, with, of course, splinter factions from
those two. But among everyone that I talked to in
Sudan, no one ever believed that JEM was really
serious about Darfur. First Vice-President Salva Kiir
said that JEM has always had the goal of regime
change. They are more worried about changing the
Government in Khartoum.
It is not been surprising that JEM, which was of
course roundly condemned by all of us for their attack

11

S/PV.5922

on Omdurman, is viewed by all those who know about
them as not having their hearts in Darfur. Darfur is a
good halfway station for them, because Darfur comes
with publicity and the world’s attention.

or remember the same song. Right now, the four that he
mentioned that make up that four-part harmony do not
even have the same sheet music among themselves so
how can they sing together in four-part harmony?

That raises the question that I would like to ask
both Special Envoys, through you, Mr. President. The
Envoys were very diplomatic, saying that we should
put pressure on them. But what about taking serious
measures against these people? What about putting
pressure on them? Of course, it is easy to put pressure
on the Government, because they are there, but these
guys are operating out of the back of their pickup
trucks. What about finding ways to also put pressure on
them? Some of them live in Europe, so we can get to
them if we want to. I am not saying we should not put
pressure on the Government. But I am trying to ask:
what is the way in which we could also apply pressure
to these people?

I agree on the arms embargo and the proliferation
of arms in Darfur, but that will also only be addressed
if we have all the pieces in place, if we have UNAMID
at full strength and if we have a political process under
way. That may do it, but right now, when the people of
Darfur ask us the difficult question “Can you help
us?”, at this moment we should be humble enough to
say that we are not yet well enough equipped to help
them. We truly want to, but we just are not there yet.

Based on the statements we have just heard, I
want to say a small prayer for the chief mediator who
will be appointed, because expecting the mediator that
the Secretary-General will appoint to go into this
situation and to do better than these very seasoned
international civil servants in front of us is asking too
much. We must provide tools that the international
community is going to use to assist the mediator in
doing his work. Otherwise, the only difference between
this person who will be appointed and Mr. Salim and
Mr. Eliasson will be that he or she will be based in
Khartoum and will be there all the time. But if we are
going to deal with some of these people, who are so
well-described here, maybe we need to say something
about how that should happen.
At the same time, with regard to the political
process — and I realize that this is not the meeting for
that, but I have said it before and I will say it again — I
was very surprised at how inadequately resourced the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) is. I told the story about going into
a camp in Darfur and listening to the people saying
“we need protection” and then going to UNAMID and
realizing that we do not have the resources to assist
them at this stage. That is why we hope the deployment
can speed up as soon as possible.
I am tempted to comment on Mr. Eliasson’s fourpart harmony, coming from Africa, where we sing
without instruments. To really have a good four-part
harmony, you must all sing from the same sheet music

12

Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
will be very brief. China thanks Mr. Eliasson and
Mr. Salim for their briefings. China has taken note of
the fact that the two Special Envoys recently presided
over informal consultations on the political process in
Darfur in order to pool our collective wisdom to push
ahead the political process in the region. China
appreciates the tireless efforts made by the two Special
Envoys and their teams to resolve the Darfur issue.
The current situation in Darfur leaves no room
for optimism, and efforts in all areas face challenges.
The international community should continue to follow
the dual-track strategy and make full use of the
tripartite mechanism, with a focus on pushing the
political process forward and ensuring the deployment
of peacekeepers.
As pointed out in the Secretary-General’s reports,
the key to restarting the political process in Darfur lies
in the parties’ political will to seek a negotiated
settlement of their differences. China supports the
appointment of a chief mediator to integrate
international resources, optimize regional strategies
and present a united front to the parties, in particular
by sending a clear message to the rebel groups in
question and urging them to join the political process at
the earliest possible date.
China is deeply concerned over the lack of
resources for the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), because substantial
funding is available. We hope that the Secretariat will
continue to enhance its coordination with the troopcontributing countries and to seek, from the
international
community,
the
civil
aviation,
transportation and engineering contingents that are so
badly needed. China welcomes the assistance to the

08-39591

S/PV.5922

troop-contributing countries provided by Member
States in a position to do so through various means,
including in the areas of equipment and training, so as
to help the Secretariat in accelerating the deployment
of the peacekeeping forces.
The recent security situation in Darfur has
severely interfered with the humanitarian relief efforts
there. China urges the parties concerned to refrain from
attacking international relief organizations and their
workers, and to facilitate their work.
With the onset of the rainy season, humanitarian
problems resulting from food shortages, blocked roads
and rampant banditry will become ever more serious.
We hope that this will be given adequate attention by
the United Nations.
As always, China will support the United Nations
and the African Union in their efforts to resolve the
Darfur issue.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank the Special Envoys of the SecretaryGeneral and the African Union for their briefings. I
commend them for their commitment and tenacity.
The political process that Mr. Jan Eliasson and
Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim are trying to bring about is
crucial to peace in Darfur. Like all of our colleagues,
we call on all the parties to end the violence and
engage unconditionally in the political process. That of
course applies, first of all, to the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM), whose attack in Khartoum in May
France and the European Union have condemned. It
also applies to the ruling party, which, as the mediators
have said here, has carried out indiscriminate attacks
against villages in recent months, including aerial
bombardments and the use of Janjaweed militias, in
spite of the repeated appeals of the Security Council
and in flagrant violation of international humanitarian
law. Lastly, that also goes for all the other movements
in Darfur. For its part, the French Government is
continuing its efforts to convince Mr. Abdul Wahid
al-Nur to rejoin the peace process. It is true that the
task has become more difficult while we await a
genuine meeting.
My delegation agrees with the choice of the
co-mediators to organize consultations with the
movements on security issues. We regret that the
holding of those consultations has had to be postponed
due to the lack of sufficient participation at this stage.

08-39591

However, we must break out of the vicious circle into
which the political process risks becoming trapped.
While that process is coming together, as Mr. Eliasson
has said, it is also essential to pursue negotiations with
civil society in order to listen to their expectations and
not allow those who have taken up arms to be the sole
representatives of all Darfurians. Finally, my
delegation welcomes the upcoming appointment by the
United Nations and the African Union of a joint chief
mediator to strengthen the mediation team. The
political process is not a separate process detached
from other aspects of the crisis. To the contrary, we
cannot hope to move the political process forward
unless we make progress on the other issues.
The effective deployment of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid operation in Darfur (UNAMID)
continues to be essential and urgent. That United
Nations operation has the task of protecting the
population and actively monitoring the ceasefire. So
long as the operation does not have the sufficient
capacity to meet its mandate, the civilian population
will continue to live in fear, humanitarian workers will
risk their lives on a daily basis and the parties will
continue to view each other with suspicion. It is
therefore urgent that we strengthen UNAMID. That
means that we must have the full cooperation of the
Sudanese authorities, which is still lacking. In the
meantime, we believe that in no way can UNAMID
hesitate to assume its responsibilities, in particular by
organizing more secure convoys and by ensuring the
safety of road corridors. During the Council’s mission,
we saw that that task was not impossible.
Combating impunity also continues to be an
essential task. How can we persuade the population of
Darfur to adhere to their genuine desire to make peace
when a person wanted by the International Criminal
Court for war crimes and crimes against humanity
continues to serve in the Government and is in charge
of humanitarian affairs? The people of Darfur have the
right to justice. Those responsible for the gross
violations committed in Darfur must be held
accountable. The response of the President of the
Sudan to the Security Council mission’s request in that
regard has been inadequate. In that connection, I
should like to reiterate that the European Union has
stated its readiness to consider additional measures
against those who continue to refuse to cooperate with
the International Criminal Court.

13

S/PV.5922

As the mediators have said, the proper
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement is also an essential element in bringing
peace back to Darfur. The Government of National
Unity, which was established by virtue of the
Agreement, has the primary responsibility to bring
about peace in the entire country, and therefore in
Darfur as well.
My delegation is pleased to note that the recent
crisis in Abyei has been overcome and that the United
Nations was able to learn valuable lessons as a
consequence. We hope that the north-south process will
be strengthened as a result, thereby contributing to
establishing the environment for a national agreement
on Darfur. At stake is the unity and prosperity of all of
the Sudan, to which we are especially committed.
Lastly, regional tensions must be calmed. We
welcome the commitment of regional partners,
especially that of Libya and the Congo, to follow up
the Dakar Accord. It is in the interest of both the Sudan
and Chad to re-establish cooperative and goodneighbourly relations. As the Security Council’s
mission declared, people in both Khartoum and
N’Djamena must distance themselves from the armed
rebel groups. That is the only way to establish trust
between the parties.
My delegation believes it crucial to make
progress in all those areas in order that the efforts to
relaunch the Darfur peace process can produce results.
We therefore once again reiterate our confidence in the
Secretary-General, Jan Eliasson and Salim Ahmed
Salim.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
too would like to thank the two Special Envoys,
Mr. Jan Eliasson and Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, for their
respective statements, which have given us an
overview of the current situation in Darfur, especially
as regards the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). I would also like to
congratulate them and to assure them of our full
support in the great efforts they are making to ensure
that UNAMID is at last effective and to restore peace
to Darfur.
The recent mission of the Security Council to
Sudan allowed us to see the reality on the ground at
first-hand, to fully assess the scope of the challenges
facing UNAMID and, above all, to hear the
expectations of the civilian population as regards

14

security and stability. What we saw there, especially in
camps for refugees and displaced persons, was fully in
line with the statements we have just heard. The
continuation of violence serves to remind us of the
urgency of finding a way out of the crisis. We have
taken note of the assurances given by the Sudanese
Government. We reiterate our strong condemnation of
all acts of violence, regardless of who the perpetrators
are.
The confrontation between the Sudanese
Government and various illegal armed groups, which
include inter-tribal and inter-factional groups, is
exacerbating the humanitarian and security situation in
Darfur, thereby endangering the political dialogue
currently under way. That situation of insecurity —
which also affects humanitarian workers and UNAMID
personnel, who are also victims — serves to limit
access in providing humanitarian assistance to the
vulnerable civilian population.
Burkina Faso believes that the lack of genuine
political will by the parties to engage in substantive
negotiations, in particular on the part of various illegal
armed groups, is the major obstacle to resolving the
crisis. The Security Council must therefore call upon
all parties to agree to the principle of peace. In that
regard, we welcome the decision of the SecretaryGeneral to soon appoint a joint chief mediator to begin
negotiations as quickly as possible.
With regard to the deployment of UNAMID, as
several speakers before me have emphasized, along
with senior UNAMID officials, we have taken into
account the difficulties and constraints facing the
deployment of the Operation.
There is a lack of infrastructure for the operation,
a lack of engineering capacity, difficulties in
transporting equipment, lack of security, et cetera.
Solutions to these problems must be found as soon as
possible, lest UNAMID be endangered.
We are gratified by the Sudanese Government’s
willingness to work for the effective deployment of
UNAMID, and we take note of its hope that some of
the mission’s concerns can be resolved in collaboration
with the competent Sudanese authorities. It is a fact
that UNAMID needs vigorous, concrete and substantial
support if it is to be fully operational in the near future.
The Security Council has a central role to play in that
regard.

08-39591

S/PV.5922

We thank the countries that are providing support
to the mission and at the same time appeal to all
partners to contribute to eliminating the obstacles that
continue to hamper the deployment of the force. We are
confident that the commitment of all States Members
of the United Nations, and of Security Council
members in particular, will make it possible to resolve
these logistical issues.
As many have noted, the search for a lasting
solution to the Darfur crisis hinges on a regional
approach, specifically the normalization of diplomatic
relations between Chad and the Sudan. Here, we urge
those two countries to begin constructive political
dialogue and to resume the meetings of the contact
group supporting the implementation of the Dakar
Agreement, without forgetting, of course, the African
Union mediation. We believe that on that basis it will
be possible to build lasting peace and stability in
Darfur and throughout the subregion.
Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I warmly welcome Special
Envoys Jan Eliasson and Salim Ahmed Salim back to
New York, and I thank them for the very lucid
briefings, as well as for their tireless efforts to achieve
peace in Darfur. In fact, what we have seen today is a
very disturbing and gloomy picture — indeed, the word
“gloomy” was used by Mr. Salim. And as Special
Envoy Eliasson put it, “this intractable conflict is still
unfolding” (supra).
We understand that there is frustration and fatigue
there. I think that we have to prevent frustration and
fatigue from overcoming us in the Security Council as
well. We have to react, and we have to prevent. Like
others, we regret that despite all the efforts there has
been no real progress in the political process for Darfur
since the Addis Ababa conclusions of November 2006.
Since the various tracks — political, security
and peacekeeping, humanitarian, rule of law and
impunity — are interrelated and mutually reinforcing,
lack of progress in one has a negative impact on the
others. Breaking this vicious circle should be our
priority. In this we will require a higher degree of
cohesion and unity among Security Council members.
I wonder also whether what Mr. Salim said was
exactly the right point, that there is “a need to rethink
the strategy on the way forward” (supra). I will come
back to that. Is it a question of rethinking the strategy
or is it a question of shortcomings in the delivery of the
strategy that we have. We will have to think about that.

08-39591

Of course, I think that any new strategy has to
remain within the six milestones described by
Ambassador Eliasson. I shall not elaborate on this, as
Ambassador Sawers has already done so and I fully
agree with what he said. Whatever our strategy, it must
remain within those milestones. Of course, as
Ambassador Kumalo said, we have to be sure that all
the pieces are in place; we must not be selecting,
picking and choosing here and there. What I am not so
sure about is whether I can agree with Ambassador
Kumalo when he says that we have to be humble
enough, when we hear the appeals for help, to say that
we are not in a position to help. I do not know if I
would be comfortable with that. Yes, there is
frustration and fatigue, but what is important is that
there is still hope. I think we must not remove the
oxygen from that hope. If we give the perception that
for the moment we cannot help, that hope might fade,
which I would not like to see. It is our responsibility
not to betray the small hope that, one hopes, remains,
and we must ensure that there is follow up.
The Security Council has been limited in its
action on Darfur by a sort of hesitation to openly and
resolutely address each problem on its own terms. Too
often we around this table have been constrained by the
self-imposed attitude that we must be comprehensive at
all costs. We have not been strong enough in
addressing the Government’s responsibilities regarding
UNAMID or the protection of civilians because of the
Government’s valid concerns with respect to the
political process. At the same time, we have refrained
from using all the means at our disposal to persuade
the rebel movements to join the peace process, because
we did not want the Government to see this as a reward
for its behaviour.
The result of the situation is there for everybody
to see. I think we should honestly assess our
performance and renew our collective capacity to
address each track of the Darfur crisis with the same
determination, but with the necessary individual focus.
Italy sees merit in the proposal mentioned by
Special Envoy Salim of a high-level meeting on
Darfur, put forward during the recent informal
consultations held in Geneva on 4 and 5 June.
However, the meeting would have to be well prepared
in advance. What is needed now is leadership, direction
and a new strategy, not just brainstorming. The time for
brainstorming has passed. As I said before, we should
also be clear on whether we want to adapt our strategy

15

S/PV.5922

or to improve its delivery. But the idea is worth
studying, and my delegation is ready to engage in any
further work on it.
I would also like to support what was said by the
Special Envoys about the crucial need to ensure the
participation of civil society. This is particularly
important in a situation in which, because of the
fragmentation of the rebel movements, on which
Ambassador Eliasson has put the accent, it is difficult
to understand who is representing whom. The
representation issue is particularly serious ahead of
next year’s national elections. Italy has in fact chosen
to direct much of its aid to Darfur to civil society, most
recently through a contribution of $3 million to the
Darfur Community Peace and Stability Fund.
Finally, Mr. President, thanks to your delegation
we had the privilege last week of hearing important
representatives of broader public opinion, who
reminded us of the reality of the conflict and of what is
expected of the Security Council.
Following that meeting, I am even more
convinced that the worst thing we can do is to become
accustomed to the lack of progress and give in to the
sense of frustration and fatigue that I mentioned earlier.
We must accept responsibility, individually and
collectively, for resolving the crisis and not let this
sense of fatigue prevail, both for the sake of the people
of Darfur and for the sake of the credibility of the
United Nations.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): I join other
Security Council members in welcoming once again
the Special Envoys, Mr. Jan Eliasson and Mr. Salim
Salim, to the Council. I wish to express my
delegation’s gratitude to them for their service to peace
in Darfur.
The situation in Darfur today is dire, as the
Security Council witnessed for itself when visiting the
region earlier this month. It is indeed deeply troubling
that the Darfur conflict has intensified, that the
humanitarian situation has worsened and that the
political process has faltered. More than that, however,
it is disconcerting that all of this has taken place since
the adoption of resolution 1769 (2007) last July and the
initiation of the Sirte political process last October.
My delegation remains convinced that the
attainment of political reconciliation and agreement
has to be at the centre of the settlement of the Darfur

16

crisis by addressing the root causes of the conflict
rather than its symptoms. Peacekeeping operations,
humanitarian assistance, and courts of justice can and
must complement the political process and perhaps
even create the conditions for it, but they cannot be a
substitute for it.
We commend the sustained and untiring efforts
and hard work of the Special Envoys and the Joint
Mediation Support Team. The appointment of an
African Union/United Nations joint mediator after the
necessary consultations is essential.
My delegation believes that the Security Council,
for its part, needs to give greater focus and attention to
the political process and to take action as necessary to
support the process. The Security Council, together
with the Secretary-General, also needs to review the
United Nations strategy for Darfur and to identify
improvements that could be made. We believe that
members of the international community who could
prevail upon the rebels have the responsibility to do so.
We fully agree with an approach that involves putting
pressure on them, as others have mentioned. We also
appreciate the potential contribution that the
normalization of relations between the Sudan and Chad
can make in promoting agreement and reconciliation in
Darfur.
Ultimately, however, it is for the parties
themselves to come to the table and to achieve a
political agreement. They need to understand the
unique support of the international community in this
endeavour. It is not often that the international
community lends its support and helps rebel groups to
unify in negotiations with a Government. Therefore,
the international community needs to be assured that
this course of action remains the most viable one to
pursue.
The security situation is increasingly worrying
and increasingly compounding the humanitarian
situation. We are deeply concerned by reports of
humanitarian organizations reducing their operations as
a result of the security situation.
In spite of the less than ambitious political
process, the deployment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) must
take place as scheduled, in order to help, among other
things, to strengthen security and protect civilians. The
Secretary-General noted in his latest report on
UNAMID (S/2008/400) that the security situation has

08-39591

S/PV.5922

deteriorated throughout Darfur; that significant clashes
have continued between tribal groups, between rebel
movements and between rebel movements and the
Government and its affiliated forces; and that acts of
banditry have continued to increase, with attacks
against UNAMID and humanitarian personnel. In spite
of these difficulties, we need to do all we can to help
the people of Darfur.
It is clear that UNAMID’s deployment needs to
be accelerated as much as possible. There are real
hurdles to overcome, not least those related to
infrastructure and logistics. In this regard, we urge
closer cooperation, coordination and consultation
between the Secretariat and UNAMID headquarters on
the one hand and the Sudanese authorities on the other.
A military solution is not possible in Darfur;
otherwise we would not be discussing the Darfur
situation today. All the parties should cease all
hostilities even though they have yet to exhaust their
energy. That energy should be directed to the
negotiating table rather than the battle front. Once
again, for us, the political process is key. The plight
and the future of the civilian population should be
reason enough to re-engage the political process.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Special Envoys, Mr. Salim and
Mr. Eliasson, for their presentations. I would like to
thank them also for their tireless efforts over the past
18 months. We would like them to know that Belgium
has very much appreciated their commitment.
The briefings that we have just heard confirmed
once again how much the political process in Darfur is
deadlocked and how tragic the humanitarian situation
remains. I would like to focus my statement on a few
points.
The parties’ lack of political will to engage a
negotiating process shows that the international
community must review its overall strategy for the
region. Even more so than in the past, the international
community must in the future provide its political
support to the mediation efforts and bring influence to
bear on the parties to get them to change their
behaviour.
In that context, it seems to us that the idea of a
high-level meeting to be convened by the SecretaryGeneral and the African Union presidency should
undoubtedly be reactivated, and I think the two Envoys

08-39591

were quite right to offer this proposal. That meeting
should obviously be very well prepared, but in our
opinion it could make a difference.
The Security Council has remained — let us be
honest about this — silent for far too long with regard
to the absence of progress. It is time for us to call
clearly on the parties to act responsibly. We also need
to think seriously about adopting new measures against
those who are standing in the way of peace, and to see
how we can positively influence the parties who are
showing goodwill.
We also welcome the imminent appointment of a
joint mediator. We need to find a mechanism to give
that mediator the necessary support and political
direction.
I wish to express Belgium’s extreme concern with
regard to the recent deadlock in relations between the
Sudan and Chad, a deadlock to which Mr. Eliasson and
Mr. Salim alluded. We very much regret the crosssupport to rebel movement on both sides of the border.
We call upon the Sudan and Chad to respect both the
spirit and the letter of the Dakar Agreement. They must
work with countries of the region and international
partners that are part of the contact group in order to
normalize their bilateral relations as soon as possible.
The Council has mandated a hybrid mission that
is expensive and complex in order to protect civilians
in Darfur. This international commitment makes it even
more inadmissible that the parties to the Darfur conflict
continue the violence, leading to an increase in the
number of displaced persons and other victims. As the
Secretary-General has said, no matter how many troops
or how much equipment a peacekeeping mission has, it
cannot truly exercise its mandate in the midst of open
hostilities directed against the civilians it is supposed
to protect.
Given the impasse in the political process, I
would like to recall the importance of the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). It is the basis for any solution to the
situation in Darfur. In that context, we welcome the
road map concluded between the CPA parties on 8 June
to finally resolve the problem of Abyei, and we call
upon the parties to implement the road map forthwith.
I would not want to conclude without once again
stressing a major priority of my delegation: the fight
against impunity in Darfur. The Sudan has a dual

17

S/PV.5922

obligation in this respect — to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in accordance with
resolution 1593 (2005) and to work to implement the
sanctions imposed by the Security Council. Last week,
the Council adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2008/21) reminding the Sudan of its
obligation to cooperate with the International Criminal
Court, including with respect to the arrest warrants
with regard to two individuals, one of whom is now a
Minister in the Government of the Sudan. It is essential
that the Security Council persevere in this approach
and that, whenever necessary, it remind the Sudan of
its obligations under that resolution.
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): First of all,
like others, I wish to thank Mr. Jan Eliasson, the
United Nations Special Envoy, and Mr. Salim Salim,
the African Union (AU) Special Envoy on Darfur, for
their respective presentations to the Council this
morning.
Viet Nam shares the Secretary-General’s concerns
about the deteriorating humanitarian conditions in
Darfur, where tens of thousands of people continue to
be homeless, to live in dire conditions and to fall
victim to various violent acts. We condemn all acts of
violence against civilians and humanitarian aid
workers. My delegation is also deeply concerned over
the worsening security and humanitarian situation in
Darfur. Military actions have further complicated the
situation and the political process. We call on the
parties concerned to exercise the utmost restraint and
to cease military and violent activities. We urge the
rebel groups, in particular those that have not signed
the peace agreement, to renounce the use of force and
to engage in the peace process, with a view to reaching
a comprehensive solution ensuring the legitimate
interests of all parties concerned.
My delegation highly commends the activities of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), especially under such difficult
circumstances on the ground, where the force has not
been enhanced in terms of either manpower or
equipment. The deployment of UNAMID on time and
in full capacity in accordance with resolution 1769
(2007) is extremely important to promote the political
process and to improve the humanitarian and security
situation in the region. Member States should fulfil
their committed contributions to UNAMID promptly so
that the force can fulfil its mandate. My country highly
values the roles played by the United Nations and the

18

African Union, and strongly supports the efforts made
by the Secretary-General and the United Nations and
African Union Special Envoys, Mr. Jan Eliasson and
Mr. Salim Salim, in promoting the peace process in
Darfur. We also support the appointment of a United
Nations-AU joint chief mediator, who will assist the
work of the Special Envoys and promote the peace
process.
Finally, we note with profound regret the recent
events taking place in the border area between Chad
and the Sudan, which have strained bilateral relations
and complicated the regional situation. Viet Nam
wishes to call upon the Governments of both Chad and
the Sudan to exercise the utmost restraint and to
comply with the provisions of the Dakar Accord,
particularly to resolve the conflicts through peaceful
negotiations.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): First of all, like other
members I would like to extend our thanks to the
Special Envoys, Mr. Jan Eliasson and Mr. Salim Salim,
not only for today’s briefings, but also for the work
they have been carrying out over the past 18 months.
We would like to extend our strong support for their
work.
We express our deep frustration that the situation
in Darfur and other parts of the Sudan deteriorated
further during the reporting period. Not only did the
security and humanitarian situation, which was very
bad some months ago, deteriorate further, but the
political process, despite the ongoing mediation efforts,
stalled, and there is clearly no political will among the
parties to cease hostilities and pursue substantive
negotiations. What is more, some parties possess no
political will to pursue a political solution to the
situation.
In that regard, we affirm the central role of the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). We welcome the announced
appointment of a joint chief mediator and express our
deep hope that this would be a step forward in the
direction of getting all sides together at the negotiating
table. There is always obviously a clear link between
security
situations,
political
processes
and
humanitarian situations. That is so in Darfur as well.
The experience of our recent visit to Darfur makes it
clear that security is a precondition for all other
processes. We have seen the situation on the ground;
we have talked to the people in the camps for refugees

08-39591

S/PV.5922

and internally displaced persons, and obviously there is
a feeling of despair, which is caused primarily by
security concerns, which are extremely grave.
One of the facets of the security element is, of
course, respect for and implementation of the arms
embargo. There is obviously a need to cut the free flow
of arms throughout the Sudan and throughout the
region. The arms embargo should be fully respected by
all actors.
The deployment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), as has
already been mentioned today — and before — is slow.
Even the targeted figure of 80 per cent by the end of
the year is not satisfactory. It is not only an issue of the
pace of the deployment, but also an issue of equipment.
That is also where we are facing problems. During the
visit, it was stressed — at least this was my
understanding — that the crucial issue is that of
helicopters. It should be part of our responsibility to try
not only to ensure that deployment is on time, but also
to get the equipment delivered on time.
It was mentioned that another precondition is the
normalization of relations between the Sudan and
Chad. We saw how this issue influences not only the
whole political process, but also the concrete security
and humanitarian situation on the ground. Today, in the
briefings and in our discussion, it was stressed that, all
stakeholders should be involved in the future political
process, which means not only the Government and not
only the movements, but also the representatives of
civil society and traditional leaders. We think that that
direction is the only possible one. We saw on the
ground how important that structure, that portion of
society is.
We also welcome the announcement regarding
the convening of a high-level meeting, but we stress
that this meeting, as has already been noted today, must
be well prepared. I believe it was the Italian
representative who said that we have no time for
brainstorming sessions, we must really have wellprepared high-level meetings.
Allow me to say that, while Darfur should remain
in our focus, there are other very pressing points that
should not be overlooked. The north-south conflict
continues to affect large numbers of people as well, as
recently demonstrated by the tragic events in Abyei.
Therefore, the continued implementation of the

08-39591

Comprehensive Peace Agreement is relevant and
necessary.
Finally, allow me to stress a point that has been
raised already. It has been said that there are no
confidence-building measures on the ground, that there
is an obvious lack of them. In our opinion, one of the
key elements in such confidence-building measures is
the issue of impunity, an issue that was stressed during
our visit. We saw that bringing those responsible for
crimes to justice would contribute greatly to public
support for confidence-building measures. In our talks
on the subject with officials in Khartoum, we stressed
our conviction that all sides must cooperate fully with
the International Criminal Court and implement the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We too are grateful to the Special Envoys of
the Secretary-General and of the African Union, Jan
Eliasson and Salim Ahmed Salim, for their substantive
briefings on ways to move the Darfur political process
forward in order to ensure an effective settlement of
the crisis there. The analysis provided by the Special
Envoys reaffirms that international efforts on a Darfur
settlement, in particular through the Security Council,
must be focused on maintaining a maximally inclusive
negotiating process among the sides in Darfur under
the aegis of the United Nations and the African Union.
In our view, resuming political contacts between
the Government and the Darfur opposition in order to
achieve speedy agreements on the cessation of
hostilities is of the highest priority. Moving forward
the political process would unquestionably promote a
strengthening of security in Darfur. It would also allow
for the speeding up of the deployment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). The lack of such consistent progress on a
political settlement makes the efforts undertaken,
including peacekeeping efforts, ineffective as regards a
long-term solution to the crisis in Darfur. It is obvious
that the deployment of UNAMID, which indeed should
be speeded up as soon as possible, in itself will not
lead to a long-term solution to the crisis.
We share the views of the Special Envoys
regarding the primary responsibility of the Sudanese
themselves for the fate of the settlement and, in the last
analysis, for the fate of the country. The obstacles on the
road to a political settlement as of today are primarily
being created by some of the Darfur rebel groups.

19

S/PV.5922

Today we have heard confirmation from the
Special Envoys of the highly negative fact that there
continues to be a splintering of the rebel groups. The
leaders of the rebel groups are not in a position to
agree upon a unified political negotiating platform.
Moreover, the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) is
openly embarking upon the path of armed struggle
against the Government of the Sudan. It is also obvious
that the rebels have well-developed channels for the
purchase of arms and for obtaining financial assistance.
There is no need to reiterate that all of the Security
Council decisions on Darfur, including on the arms
embargo, must be implemented fully by all parties.
We believe that, as regards the leaders of the
irreconcilable rebel groups, appropriate measures must
be taken, up to and including sanctions. We have
listened very carefully to the views presented by
Ambassador Kumalo of South Africa, and we share
those views. We also express our hope that the
appointment by the Secretary-General of a joint
mediator for the political process in Darfur, which we
expect very soon, will provide a substantive impetus for
the resumption of negotiations among the Darfur sides.
Naturally, we welcome the great contribution of
the Special Envoys, Mr. Eliasson and Mr. Salim, to the
cause of re-establishing peace and normal life in
Darfur. Their experience and knowledge will
undoubtedly be required in the future as well.
We fully support and share the argument of the
Secretary-General regarding the indivisibility of peace
in Sudan. Progress on a settlement for the south of
Sudan will determine to a significant extent progress in
resolving the conflict in Darfur. We welcome, in that
connection, the recent agreements on the settlement of
the problem in Abyei, and we are counting on the fact
that those agreements will be fully implemented by
both parties. The Security Council recently had an
opportunity to take a stand on that issue, and we
remain devoted to that stand.
What is also of the greatest importance is the
normalization of bilateral relations between Sudan and
Chad. Once again, I would like to state that we share
the views of the Special Envoys on that subject. We
agree with their conclusions with regard to the
significance of the regional dimension in resolving the
problems of Sudan and also of the importance, for the
stability of the entire African continent, of preserving
the unity and territorial integrity of Sudan.

20

Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
was recently able to speak with the President of Côte
d’Ivoire, President Gbagbo, and I told him that my
country, as a nation of Latin America, did not have any
strategic involvement in Africa. When we examine
African realities, we try to do so in a spirit of good
faith and we truly try to make a contribution to the
peace processes in the region.
It is with that same attitude that we approach the
issue of Sudan and the region. We have advocated
many times in this Council for a regional approach.
There are bandits such as Joseph Kony skipping around
from one country to another in the region to elude his
pursuers. Today the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan (UNMIS) is searching for him, tomorrow it
could be the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) or the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).
Everyone is after him, but our efforts remain
disjointed. Today we have heard the Special Envoys
state that the problems in the region are really one
problem. The international community must first deal
with this entire, singular problem in all its complexity.
I should briefly like to emphasize the need for the
Government of the Sudan to provide certain conditions
that seem to us fundamental: working conditions for
the United Nations missions, security for the missions
and security for humanitarian workers. When we talked
with representatives of humanitarian organizations in
Darfur — and with the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) itself — they
told us about the loss of almost $2 million in vehicles
and equipment. Humanitarian organizations told us
about the lives lost and the times they were attacked.
They also told us about the restrictions on movement
imposed on them and how it was impossible to go
about in rented vehicles beyond certain areas. In other
words, there are too many restrictions. I believe that
primary responsibility falls on the Government of the
Sudan, which must have a more open attitude towards
the international community.
In Friendship Hall, we 15 ambassadors heard
presidential adviser Mr. Nafi Ali Nafi speak without
hesitation about his Government’s major concerns and
reservations with regard to United Nations actions.
Listening to and reading the reports of the Special
Envoys, I am now struck by their assessment of the
internal divisions within the various movements and

08-39591

S/PV.5922

their will, or lack thereof, to participate. I truly
understand what they have both said. I feel that their
reports contain little assessment of the attitude of the
Government of the Sudan. As understandable as that
may be, it nevertheless seems to me that the Council
can hardly act consistently without a fairly clear
picture of the Government of the Sudan’s attitude with
regard to the efforts of the United Nations.

Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, allow me to thank Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim and my
great friend former General Assembly President
Eliasson for their briefings. I would also like to convey
to them the gratitude of the Republic of Panama for
their tireless efforts and personal dedication to this
difficult task. We hope they will continue to work as
vigorously as they have in the past.

It is worth recalling that the United Nations will
spend $2.3 to $2.4 billion in the Sudan this year. As the
representative of a country that does not have strategic
interests in the region, I genuinely feel that this is a
Government with deep distrust of the actions of the
United Nations. It is a Government that ignores the
resolutions adopted by the Security Council under the
provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter. It is a
Government that does not make any link between
peace and justice. It is a Government that, with a
certain degree of insolence, continues to keep
Mr. Ahmad Harun as its Minister for Humanitarian
Affairs and has not brought to justice Mr. Ali Kushayb,
a well-known member of the Janjaweed who is also the
subject of an arrest warrant issued by the International
Criminal Court. One therefore legitimately wonders
about the meaning of such action.

There are currently three closely interlinked
socio-political processes under way in the Sudan that
involve the Security Council. These are the peace
process; the deployment and operationalization of the
Hybrid Operation; and the decision of the Council to
refer the situation in Darfur to the International
Criminal Court. None of those processes is making the
appropriate progress expected. As pointed out by
Mr. Eliasson and Mr. Salim, the failure of the peace
process is in large part due to the failure, both on the
part of the Khartoum Government and certain rebel
groups, to decide to begin a political dialogue.
Moreover, some of the rebel groups are being
supported by influential members of the international
community from within and outside the region.

I agree with Mr. Eliasson and Mr. Salim that it is
necessary to achieve consistency at the various levels of
action. I believe there needs to be consistency in the
international community and in regional efforts. We
have not achieved that yet, but those are areas in which
we can continue to work. I believe that achieving
consistency in international efforts vis-à-vis the
Government of the Sudan is an enormous task at the
moment. We must approach it positively and in a spirit
of cooperation and of making a contribution and
building confidence. In that connection, we welcome the
idea of a joint mediator. We are certain that, along with
the work of the two Special Envoys, that should
contribute to creating trust between the United Nations
and the Government of the Sudan. Such understanding is
absolutely essential. If we can achieve it, I am sure that
the movements, militias and groups disrupting the peace
in Darfur and the Sudan can see their problems resolved.
Do forgive me, Mr. President, for deviating from
my written statement. Having listened to my colleagues
and the Special Envoys, my delegation and I would be
very grateful if the Special Envoys, if they deem it
appropriate, could give the Council an assessment of
how they feel about the Government of the Sudan.

08-39591

With regard to the deployment of the Hybrid
Operation, despite a small amount of progress, there is
a clear lack of cooperation on the part of the Khartoum
Government. In addition, despite significant efforts in
that regard by the Organization, including the Security
Council and the Secretariat, the United Nations has not
been able to put together the necessary troops and
equipment to allow the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur to carry out its mandate.
With regard to the decision of the Council to refer
the situation in Darfur to the International Criminal
Court, the Court has carried out the task given to it.
Nevertheless, the Council has not provided the support
that decision merits. In that connection, I cannot fail to
refer to the words of President Kabila as cited here by
Ambassador Sawers:
(spoke in English)
“... one cannot put justice aside and hope for a
durable peace ...” (supra).
(spoke in Spanish)
If we add to the foregoing the repeated
breakdown of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement —
as recently reflected in the reprehensible destruction of
the town of Abyei — and the conflict between the

21

S/PV.5922

Governments of the Sudan and Chad, we cannot but
conclude that, despite the words of Ambassador
Spatafora, we are facing a fairly hopeless situation.
Given that situation, we cannot hope to overcome the
violence in Darfur and in the Sudan in general unless
the Council and all Members of the United Nations act
differently and in greater conformity with the decisions
of the Council. As Mr. Eliasson has said, that will
require that we provide incentives and disincentives to
the parties to the conflict. As the Permanent
Representative of Libya said, it will require more
active participation by civil society and traditional
leaders. And as the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom said, it will require strengthening the
current sanctions, especially the arms embargo, and the
imposition of new sanctions if necessary.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United States.
Many points have been made, and the discussion
has gone on for a while. I shall therefore be brief and
will make just a few points.
First of all, I want to thank the two Special
Envoys for their service and for their briefings today.
They have described well the situation and the
challenges that we face. They have challenged the
Security Council; now, the ball is in our court as to
what to do in the face of what they have described. I
would like to emphasize a few points drawn from their
briefings and to speak of what we need to do.
Secondly, the situation could, of course, get
worse. Therefore, the first task for us is to determine
what we can do to avoid that. Certainly, if the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) is not
implemented — if the North-South agreement falls
apart — the situation in the Sudan could get a lot
worse. Therefore, it is very important that we remain
attentive to the implementation of the CPA. Right after
this meeting, the Council will issue a presidential
statement with regard to Abyei; that should send the
good message that the Council remains engaged and
focused on the issue of the CPA. That has to be a
continuing preoccupation of ours in the coming period.
The third point I would like to make is with
regard to the security situation. I think it is clear, at
least to me and to my delegation, that that is
fundamental: without security — or improved security,
as we will not be able to have perfect security for some
time to come — everything is at risk. I do not think

22

you can have much political progress in an
environment where there is the current degree of
insecurity. I will come to the political track later, but
we know that there are many sources of insecurity.
Addressing all of them simultaneously is also a
considerable challenge. There are internal factors and
external, regional, factors that affect the security
situation.
One thing that is a very important help with
regard to security is the deployment of an effective
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). The Council has expressed itself
unanimously on this issue. Unfortunately, the
deployment has not taken place as expected in terms of
speed and the effectiveness of the force. There are
challenges that we need to address and that we need to
be more attentive to, in our view. One of these is to
make sure that we are attentive to the Secretariat: that
the United Nations and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations do what they need to do.
Several colleagues spoke about the logistics
requirement, which needs to be addressed. There are
resources available: money that has been dedicated to
this effort. But I think that this has been rather slow.
The United Nations — the Secretariat — can and
should do more, and we need to be more attentive in
order to make sure that our intent is well understood
and that all possible speed that can be generated is
indeed generated.
Also, I think frankly that we have not been tough
enough with the Government of Sudan. I think it has
been, shall we say, dragging its feet with regard to the
implementation of an effective force, and colleagues
have not been prepared to incentivize that Government
appropriately. I think we need to look at what we can
do and what should be done to make sure that an
effective force is in place. Sometimes, the willingness
of the Government to negotiate on the political track is
being used as a shield to avoid pressuring it on these
other things as much as it needs to be pressured. I think
that to deal with this problem we need to focus on this.
The third point is the issue of getting the right
capabilities there. All of us need to redouble our efforts
to get the international community to ensure that the
capabilities are made available, whether it be heavy-lift
or medium-lift capacity or helicopters. For our part, the
United States, of course, is spending about
$100 million to get African forces — 6,000 of them at
least — to the level of capability where they can be

08-39591

S/PV.5922

deployed there as quickly as possible. I think we could
be more focused in order to encourage the deployment
or availability of appropriate assets.
Also, I think one factor that affects the situation
is the arms in the area. We need to look at the situation
with regard to the embargo — several colleagues have
raised this — and see whether the embargo is being
implemented effectively or not.
I will briefly touch on the fourth point, on the
political process. It is obviously very important.
Ultimately, without it there cannot be peace in Darfur
or in Sudan. The challenges have been outlined very
well: the fragmentation of the rebel movements; the
disagreements among rebel groups; the Government
policies, not only with regard to Darfur — although it
has been willing to negotiate — but also, as mentioned,
its policies relating to the CPA; and the regional
rivalries that exist. All of that makes this difficult. We
have to look at whether there are ways in which we
could incentivize the parties to move. What can each of
us do, or what can we — or some subset of us — do
together to do better?
We welcome the imminent appointment of a chief
mediator. Ambassador Kumalo said we should pray for
him; we will do more than that: we will pray for him
and we will cooperate with him as well. I know that he
will face a serious challenge, and for him to succeed
we need to see how to incentivize the various parties.
In my view, we would be mistaken to expect a lot
from the political track in the short term, given the
difficulties that exist. Therefore, I think that the shortterm focus needs to be more on the security track: to
improve the security environment by having more
capable forces there.
My last point is that I think that the situation —
which some colleagues have described as gloomy or
difficult — could lead one to be fatigued and perhaps
to say that there is not much we can do about it and
that we have to learn to live with the situation. I think
that would be a mistake. I think it is important to
restate that this is an important situation with huge
implications, not only in political and security terms,
as was described very ably by the two Special Envoys,
but also in terms of the terrible humanitarian situation.
It therefore needs to remain a focus of our efforts.
Certainly, it is for my Government. But also, we have
to recognize that our own credibility, as the Security
Council, is at stake here, given the resolutions we have

08-39591

adopted and the resources that are being spent and that
there is a willingness to spend.
What we need to do is to adjust our approach, to
be more effective than we have been, because there is
certainly a big gap between where we want to be and
where we are. Thus, I think that the two
Special Envoys have provided us with some issues to
consider — and to consider seriously. Again, I want to
thank them for their service and for their briefings
today. My country holds both of them in high regard.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Eliasson to respond to
comments and questions raised.
Mr. Eliasson: I thank the members of the
Security Council for their very constructive and
productive remarks, and also for the strong support
they have expressed for our work. I think we have
identified certain directions in which we should go in
the future.
I am pleased that members referred to the six
points that I mentioned in my presentation. As to one
of those points, namely the north-south relationship to
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), I would
like to provide members with some additional
information. This relationship is crucial for Darfur and,
of course, for Sudan as a whole.
As to the terms of reference of the new joint chief
mediator, a role whose creation we have proposed for a
long time, we would recommend that he take into
consideration the regional and national dimensions of
the issues. Those criteria were not contained in our
terms of reference, but we hope that, in the light of this
discussion, it is seen as a constructive step forward. In
a way, the mandate has been widened, not in a formal
manner that will require the mediator to deal in detail
with these issues, but one simply cannot deal with
Darfur without taking into consideration the
relationship with Chad, for instance, and the
relationship to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
Another aspect that I would like to mention, in
response to the question posed by my friend
Mr. Kumalo, is the issue of incentives and
disincentives as well as action taken or pressures
brought to bear by the Security Council. This is a
difficult question for Salim and me to answer. We are
in the business of mediation, of bringing the parties

23

S/PV.5922

together. We try to present a fair report on the situation,
but then it is the role of the Security Council to draw
conclusions from our reports. I must say, however, that
in the course of our talks it has been helpful to know
and to remind the parties that the Council has to take
certain measures and has certain tools to use. I
remember in particular the presidential statement that
the Council issued on 24 October 2007, where it was
stated that parties — including, of course, both the
Government and the movements — that obstruct the
political process, the peacekeeping operation or the
humanitarian operations, will be subject to measures
from the Security Council. At times, Salim and I
reminded the parties of the Council’s action and it
certainly had an effect. I think similar discussions
should take place at present.
I think it is important that members look both at
incentives and disincentives. Talks have to be an
attractive option for the movements as well. Here, I
believe the Government has a particular role to play,
not only as the party with the resources and
responsibilities for the security and prosperity of the
nation, but also as the party that could deliver at least
some constructive ideas on power-sharing, wealthsharing and security.
The movements are constantly asking about
compensation for the horrible years of 2003 to 2005
and are asking for the disarmament of the Janjaweed
militias. We are asking the Government to send signals
of a more concrete nature so that the incentives are also
coming from the Government side. I believe it
important that there be a new reminder from the
Council, similar to the message contained in the
24 October presidential statement, which emanates
from Council’s latest consideration of the issues.
I was asked whether the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM) had a national agenda. Yes, it does
have a national agenda, and I think that that is one of
the reasons why the Government reacts more strongly
vis-à-vis JEM than with respect other movements,
apart from the fact, of course, that there was an
offensive attack against Umdurman in the
neighbourhood of Khartoum only a few weeks ago.
I would claim that we should probably continue
to encourage a process for talks or dialogue with the
JEM. The Government is now aiming to put JEM on
terrorists lists and the like. That is not something with
which we as mediators will become involved. But I

24

believe it to be important that channels of
communication also be extended to the JEM in line
with the conclusion that we usually reach in conflicts
around the world, namely, that in the end one has to
speak to one’s enemy, one has to speak to the parties
relevant for the ending of the conflict.
The issue of impunity was raised. This is not,
again, part of our negotiation mandate, but I still wish
to repeat one point I made during my presentation,
which places impunity in a larger context. Respect for
human rights and the rule of law is crucial for trust to
be established, for a credible political process to be
made possible and for reconciliation to occur. We made
that point in our general perspective where I believed it
to be appropriate.
My last point is related to the Council President’s
very good summary of today’s discussion. I believe it
to be important for us not to fall into despair and
passivity. On the contrary, with the situation reaching
such a serious level and the margins being so thin out
there — we have been in the field, we have seen
women crying out for water, we have seen kids dying
more or less in front of us, we have seen the despair in
the eyes of the people — I think it is now extremely
important that we take a realistic approach, both in the
short-term and in the long-term. I believe the shortterm perspective should be that everyone should feel a
responsibility to make sure that we do not have an
escalation of hostilities, in fact, that we take steps in
the direction of a cessation of hostilities, and that we
are extremely sharp with everyone or anyone who goes
down the military road.
There is no military solution to the problems in
Darfur. We have to prove that point, and I believe we
have to make that point not only as mediators or as the
Security Council or as the African Union Peace and
Security Council, but also all of us individually,
representing nations that, for example, in your case,
Mr. President, sit on this extremely powerful body
responsible for international peace and security.
So I believe we also need to mobilize our
individual countries’ leverage and influence. Only if
we do this, only if we show that there is a solid front in
denouncing insecurity and stopping escalation, that we
can now make a contribution. By that, as you, Sir, just
said, we can create the environment in which we can
then take the steps more in the medium-term, but as
soon as possible, for a credible political process. I

08-39591

S/PV.5922

think that that is an agenda. It is not driving us into
hopelessness; rather, it is a realistic approach. Let us
deal with security and then take the step to a credible
political process.
With those remarks, I thank the Council for
calling this meeting and giving us the opportunity to
have a discussion in such an open and transparent
fashion as we have done today.
The President: I thank Mr. Eliasson for the
clarifications and responses that he has provided.
I now give the floor to Mr. Salim to respond to
comments and questions raised.
Mr. Salim: Like my colleague, I would also like
to thank the Council for the opportunity given us, and
also for the serious attention with which the Council
has been addressing this issue. I shall also be very brief
in answering the specific issues that were raised, in
particular the link between the political process and the
issue of security.
Ideally, we would obtain an agreement, and then
life would become much more comfortable for
everybody, especially for the peacekeepers. But that is
the ideal. The reality on the ground is that there is no
such agreement. The reality on the ground is that
unless you address the issue of security the political
process becomes impossible.

talking about how important it was to have UNAMID.
But the minute they begin to see that, really, the
difference between UNAMID and AMIS is very small,
there will be a problem. So I think that it is in the
interest, not only of the peace process, but also for the
credibility of the Security Council, that this question is
addressed in an effective manner.
The engagement of civil society, I think, is a
must, and as Jan has pointed out, initially, both the
Government and the movements were totally opposed
to any idea of involvement with civil society. Now we
have begun to see some change. As he said, the
Government of the Sudan has told us clearly that they
are supportive of the idea of civil society. But in the
final analysis, you have got to involve these people,
because neither the Government nor the movements
can claim to have exclusive representation of the
people of Darfur. There are people, whether traditional
leaders or civil society organizations, who want peace.
One thing that comes out in this situation is that the
people in Darfur want peace. Irrespective of their
political affiliation, irrespective of where they are
located, they want peace.

Wherever we went, whatever we discussed,
whether it was with the representatives of the internally
displaced persons or the representatives of civil
society, whether it was in areas I covered in my
statement, in Government areas or in areas controlled
by the rebels, everybody has been talking about
security, security, security. So the issue of security
becomes important. Therefore, the question of the
rapid deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) becomes
important.

On the question of incentives and disincentives, I
think my friend Jan has responded rightly. He used the
words “incentives and disincentives”. If you go
through my speech, you will see that I used the phrase
“encourage or discourage”. But basically what we are
saying is that the Council must be in a position to do
something. I would humbly caution against repeated
warnings which have no follow-up action, warnings
like “if you do this, something will happen; if you do
not do that, something else will happen”. And nothing
happens. Then not only is the credibility of the Council
is at stake, but even the capacity of those who are
involved in the peace process becomes somewhat
impaired. So I would say that, yes, there is a need for
encouragement or incentives, and there is a need also
for discouragement or disincentives.

I want to say one more thing on this point. The
African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) was there,
and it did a lot under very, very difficult circumstances.
But AMIS began to lose credibility because it did not
have the required resources and the required
equipment. Now there is a danger that if nothing is
done to really beef up UNAMID, it will face same
problems that AMIS had. I talked earlier about the
euphoria of expectations. When we were in Darfur
everybody was waiting for UNAMID. Everybody was

On the question of inclusion, I think that
inclusion is very important, as Jan said also. We know
the position of the Government of the Sudan. We know
how they feel after the attack on Omdurman. But the
response of the international community has been
swift. Going beyond that, one cannot say that a given
party should be excluded. I think that it should be the
movement itself which excludes itself from the
process. You should not start excluding people from
the negotiations, especially a movement which has

08-39591

25

S/PV.5922

some degree of support — although I understand full
well, as was rightly explained, that there is a feeling
that JEM’s agenda goes beyond Darfur.
In specific response to the representative of Costa
Rica, I will say this: In both of our statements, we have
made it very clear that primary responsibility for the
situation in Darfur must be that of the Government of
the Sudan. There are areas where the Government of
the Sudan has not responded regarding what we expect
them to do. For example, every time that we have gone
to Khartoum, we have repeatedly appealed for the
non-utilization of aerial bombardment. We have said
very clearly that there should be a proportionate
response. What do we mean by this? If there is an
attack, for example, like JEM’s attack, it is logical for
the Government of the Sudan to exercise self-defence.
However, when one uses air power and the air power
affects not only the movements but also ordinary
civilians, then there is a problem. That is why we have
been insisting on that.
Secondly, at this point in time, when it comes to
negotiations, it is very difficult to hold the Government
of the Sudan responsible, because they say all the time
that they are ready for negotiations. Maybe we can say
that, although they say that they are ready to negotiate,
perhaps in their hearts and minds they are not ready.
You cannot argue on that basis; you can only argue on

26

the basis of what is real. I think it is important to reach
a stage where the Government of the Sudan will be
tested, and they can only be tested in negotiations:
What is your position on power sharing? What is your
position on wealth sharing? What is your position on
the question of security? When we reach that stage,
then we will be in a position to say whether or not the
Government of the Sudan is cooperating on the
question of negotiations.
Finally, after my limited experience in dealing
with the Darfur question, I will say this: when we talk
of incentives and disincentives, they must be universally
applied. Even though, as I said, the Government of the
Sudan bears primary responsibility, it would be wrong
to assume that on the one hand you have all the nice
guys and on the other hand you have all the bad guys.
That is not true. In other words, therefore, you have to
deal with the nice guys and the bad guys wherever they
appear, whether they come from the Government side or
the side of the movements.
The President: I thank Mr. Salim for his
comments and clarifications.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on the agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

08-39591
