A/55/PV.92

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-fifth session

92nd plenary meeting
Thursday, 22 February 2001, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Holkeri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Finland)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 122 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/55/745/Add.2)
The President: I should like to draw the attention
of the General Assembly to document A/55/745/Add.2.
In the letter contained in that document, the SecretaryGeneral informs the President of the General Assembly
that, since the issuance of his communications
contained in document A/55/745 and addendum 1,
Sierra Leone has made the necessary payment to
reduce its arrears below the amount specified in Article
19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in that
document?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 179 (continued)
Review of the problem of human immunodeficiency
virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome in all its
aspects
Draft resolution (A/55/L.76)
The President: As members are aware, the draft
resolution before us is the result of long and arduous
negotiations. The two facilitators, Ambassador Penny

Wensley of Australia and Ambassador Ibra Deguène
Ka of Senegal, and delegations worked very hard to
reach a consensus in a constructive way.
I should now like to consult the Assembly with a
view to considering immediately draft resolution
A/55/L.76. In this connection, since document
A/55/L.76 has been circulated only this morning, it
would be necessary to waive the relevant provisions of
rule 78 of the rules of procedure, which reads as
follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be discussed
or put to the vote at any meeting of the General
Assembly unless copies of it have been circulated
to all delegations not later than the day preceding
the meeting.”
Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the
Assembly agrees to consider draft resolution
A/55/L.76.
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/55/L.76, entitled
“Organizational arrangements for the special session of
the General Assembly on HIV/AIDS and its
preparatory process”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/55/L.76?
Draft resolution
(resolution 55/242).

A/55/L.76

was

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

01-26158 (E)

*0126158*

adopted

A/55/PV.92

The President: I am sure members will join me,
on behalf of the General Assembly, in thanking the two
facilitators, Ambassador Penny Wensley of Australia
and Ambassador Ibra Deguène Ka of Senegal, who
undertook so ably the task of holding consultations and
negotiations on the resolution just adopted. I am
confident that with the assistance of the two

2

facilitators, the preparations for the special session will
continue in the same efficient and smooth fashion.
We have thus concluded this stage of our
consideration of agenda item 179.
The meeting rose at 3.10 p.m.
