S/PV.9163

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9163rd meeting

Tuesday, 25 October 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Biang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Issahaku
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Mythen
Ms. Muigai
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020), 2585 (2021) and
2642 (2022) (S/2022/775)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-65173 (E)
*2265173*

S/PV.9163

The situation in the Middle East

violence of multiple kinds when bearing children; and
the denial of education and livelihoods. Women civil
society activists are too often targeted by violence when
attempting to engage in public life. Women political
and civic leaders struggle to secure their rightful seats
at negotiating tables.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401 (2018),
2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020), 2585
(2021) and 2642 (2022) (S/2022/775)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria; and Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director for Operations
and Advocacy at the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
The Security Council will now
consideration the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/775, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401
(2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020), 2585
(2021) and 2642 (2022).
I give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: I brief the Security Council after a
busy period of diplomatic engagement, including a visit
to Damascus. Before I update members on that, let me
first thank all those Syrians, from inside and outside
Syria, who continue to engage with us, especially
Syrian women.
In a few days, we will mark the twenty-second
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). Over nearly
12 years of conflict, there is almost no indignity that
Syria’s women and girls have not suffered: poverty and
malnutrition; detention, disappearance and abduction;
sexual assault and rape; forced and early marriages;
2/23

25/10/2022

Nonetheless, Syrian women are successfully
heading households, assuming responsibilities in their
communities and demanding full representation in
political processes. They help guide the interventions
of the international community in the humanitarian
sphere. They advocate for the rights of the detained,
abducted and missing. Many find ways to come together
across divides and articulate an unrelenting demand
for dignity for all Syrians. They embody a hope that
a political settlement can bring about real peace and
enable Syrian women to assume their rightful and hardearned place in society.
Deputy Special Envoy Rochdi and I will continue
to engage and develop platforms such as the Syrian
Women’s Advisory Board and the Civil Society Support
Room to ensure women’s equal access to the political
process. We continue to advocate for quotas in Syrian
political bodies of at least 30 per cent, and we seek
to create opportunities where issues of importance to
women can be raised, including in the Constitutional
Committee. I look forward to engaging with the
Women’s Advisory Board again in Geneva next month.
We also continue our regular dialogue with a wide
range of Syrian civil society representatives — men
and women — through the Civil Society Support
Room. Syrian civil society is keen to put forward its
knowledge, expertise, time and ideas to help Syria move
towards a comprehensive political solution. Recently,
we launched a thematic group on issues related to local
governance and decentralization. Another group of
Syrian experts will start discussing issues related to
protection needs. That engagement helps to build trust
among Syrians and also provides us with advice on
possible openings for the political process.
Tragically, however, the political process has yet
to deliver for the Syrian people, and they continue
to suffer, not least from acute violence. Even as the
strategic stalemate persists, the conflict remains very
active across Syria. Let me mention a few examples.
After infighting among armed opposition groups
in recent weeks, Security Council-listed terrorist group
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham deployed fighters in Afrin and
22-65173

25/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East

reached the outskirts of Azaz. There are now reports
that they are withdrawing from Afrin following a
ceasefire. Elsewhere, the listed terrorist group the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant remains a serious
threat. Since the so-called caliphate fell, one of the
largest weapons caches was recently discovered in
north-east Syria, underlining the group’s continued
capacity to stage attacks.
Pro-Government air strikes were reported in northwest Syria, both in Idlib and also on the outskirts of
Azaz, in areas where strikes had not been reported for
a very long time. Violence in the north-east continues,
with frequent reports of drone strikes, mutual shelling
and confrontations between the Syrian Democratic
Forces, on the one hand, and Türkiye and armed
opposition groups, on the other.
Strikes were reported in the vicinity of United
States forces in Deir ez-Zor. The south-west continues
to see a string of security incidents every month,
including ambushes, assassinations and attacks with
improvised explosive devices. There was an unclaimed
attack on a bus carrying Syrian Government soldiers in
Damascus. Strikes attributed to Israel have hit targets
in Syria, including once again Damascus and Aleppo
international airports.
I reiterate my call on all parties to protect civilians
and civilian infrastructure, preserve deconfliction
channels and de-escalation agreements and build on
them towards a full nationwide ceasefire. I also call on
them to continue to find cooperative ways to counter
Security Council-listed terrorist groups in a manner
that fully respects international humanitarian law
and preserves stability, as well as Syria’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. It is unacceptable
that hostilities continue to result in civilian casualties,
including many child casualties. We once again
conveyed our concerns to key stakeholders in recent
weeks and will continue to raise them with members of
the ceasefire task force here in Geneva.
Let me also stress the scale of the economic
challenges in Syria and my concerns about Syrian
humanitarian suffering and livelihoods. The Syrian
pound has lost a tremendous amount of its value in
recent weeks, which in turn has seen food and fuel
prices jump to even higher record prices. Syrians
are enduring the worst economic crisis since the war
began, and it will only get worse this winter for the
vast majority of them. It is vital to ensure increased

S/PV.9163

and unfettered humanitarian access to all people in
need throughout Syria via the most direct routes,
including cross-border and cross-line access. And the
deeper causes of economic suffering in Syria need to be
addressed, both by the Government and by outsiders.
As my colleague from the Office for the Coordination
for Humanitarian Affairs will brief the Council, the
recent cholera outbreak is spreading rapidly. Cases have
already spread to Lebanon, and other countries in the
region have also expressed concern about the prospect.
That was preventable and serves again as a reminder
that we need to find a solution to alleviate the severe
health and water conditions throughout Syria.
My team and I continue to pay very close attention
to the file on detained, disappeared and missing persons.
We have deepened our engagement with victims, family
associations and civil society organizations, which
continue to lead the way and are voicing their priorities
and pursuing solutions. Regrettably, we continue to
receive reports of arbitrary arrests throughout the
country. Meanwhile, six months after the presidential
amnesty decree, there is nothing new to report. Despite
our continued engagement, official information is not
forthcoming, and independent monitoring has not been
facilitated. In that context, and also more generally,
families stress the concerns that arise from the lack
of transparent communication and the resulting
vulnerabilities and lack of confidence.
In recent weeks, I engaged widely with diplomatic
counterparts at the General Assembly in New York and
in Washington, D.C., Berlin, Geneva, Damascus and
Amman. I met with the Syrian Foreign Minister and
the President of the Syrian National Council. I also met
with the Foreign Ministers of Iran, Russia, Türkiye,
Egypt and Jordan and other senior officials from the
Arab world, the United States, Germany and other
European countries. I will continue that engagement in
the period ahead.
I am pushing all stakeholders to engage in stepfor-step confidence-building measures to help advance
the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). The key
Syrian and international stakeholders need to rebuild
their confidence that cooperation on Syria is indeed
possible, that the other side is willing and able to deliver
and that Syria can be firewalled from other conflicts.
Such confidence can be built only through concrete
actions. In order to serve that purpose, the initial steps
must be precise, reciprocal, verifiable and implemented

22-651733/23

S/PV.9163

The situation in the Middle East

in parallel, and they must address the daily concerns
of the Syrian people. The dialogue necessary to
achieve that has deepened as a result of my most recent
engagements, with some key stakeholders identifying
concrete areas for potential steps and all engaging
with heightened interest. Those discussions need to be
further developed. I particularly look forward to further
engagement with the Syrian Government in that area.
I continue to work to unblock obstacles to
reconvening the Constitutional Committee here in
Geneva. Council members will recall that the Syrian
Government nominees decided not to come to Geneva,
pending the resolution of issues related to the venue
cited by the Russian Federation. I have discussed the
issue with senior Russian counterparts, our Swiss hosts,
the Syrian Foreign Minister, the Syrian Governmentnominated co-Chair of the Constitutional Committee in
Damascus and the Syria National Council.
Even if sessions were to resume in Geneva, that
would not be sufficient to restore the credibility of the
Committee in the eyes of most Syrians and international
stakeholders. That is why I am seeking to work with
the parties and the co-Chairs so that, when meetings
reconvene, there will be the political will to engage in
a spirit of compromise and at a faster pace, with better
working methods and more substance.
Let me recall that the Syrian-led and -owned
political process is designed to reach a negotiated
political solution to implement resolution 2254 (2015).
Such a solution must rest on Syria’s sovereignty, unity,
independence and territorial integrity, and it must
enable the Syrian people to determine their own future
via a process that culminates in free and fair elections
administered under the United Nations supervision,
with the participation of all eligible Syrians, including
members of the diaspora. Such a political solution is the
only path towards a sustainable peace.
Sadly, we are currently a long way from that
goal, and there are challenging diplomatic and ground
realities that make advancing towards a comprehensive
solution difficult. But the status quo should not be
acceptable, and there are ways forward. I appeal to all
Council members for support for my efforts to create
some movement among the Syrian parties and key
stakeholders as we seek to advance the implementation
of resolution 2254 (2015).
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
4/23

25/10/2022

I now give the floor to Ms. Ghelani.
Ms. Ghelani: As the Special Envoy has mentioned,
communities in Syria are caught in the middle of a
spiralling security, public health and economic crisis.
They are basically struggling to survive. Allow me to
share the latest facts.
The conflict continues to cause civilian death and
injury, primarily along the front lines. As the Special
Envoy has already described, the ongoing active fighting
and its impact on civilians and civilian structures
have continued. According to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, at least
92 civilians were killed and 80 injured in August and
September alone. Twenty-seven of them were killed by
explosive remnants of war. Syria is reporting some of
the largest numbers of victims of explosive ordnance
worldwide, and two in three victims are children. And
the deaths and injuries do not stop when active fighting
stops. Those weapons pose a lasting, deadly threat to
civilians. Security operations in Al-Hol camp in August
and September damaged shelters and temporarily
restricted people’s access to humanitarian assistance
and services. In addition, many children were detained,
and humanitarian partners still lack access to them.
I would like to give a little more detail about the
cholera outbreak that is rapidly spreading throughout
Syria and has been made worse, as was also mentioned,
by the country’s severe water shortages. More than
24,000 suspected cholera cases have been reported and
cases have been confirmed in all 14 governorates. At
least 80 people have died so far. While that is a tragedy, it
should not come as a surprise. Millions of people across
Syria lack reliable access to sufficient and safe water,
and the health system has been devastated by more than
a decade of conflict. Insufficient and poorly distributed
rainfall in many places, severe drought-like conditions,
low water levels in the Euphrates River and damaged
water infrastructure are all factors compounding the
outbreak. From 11 August to 20 October, the Allouk
water station was unable to service close to 1 million
people in Al-Hasakah city and surrounding camps
with water. Some water reportedly reached the city on
22 October. A similar situation is unfolding in Al Bab,
in Aleppo governorate, where 185,000 people still face
severe water shortages.
The United Nations and our partners have been
sounding the alarm on the water crisis in northern Syria
for the past year at least. The crisis is likely to get even
22-65173

25/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East

worse. The outlook from now to December suggests an
increased probability for below-normal precipitation
and above-normal temperatures. If that materializes,
it will further exacerbate an already dire water crisis.
The equation is simple. When people drink the same
contaminated water that they use to irrigate their crops
and when they do not have sufficient water to practice
proper hygiene, waterborne diseases spread, causing
people, especially children, to fall ill and sometimes
die. The three-month cholera response plan coordinated
by the United Nation requests just over $34 million to
assist 162,000 people with health services and 5 million
people with water, sanitation and hygiene assistance.
Our two pooled funds, the Syria Humanitarian Fund
and the Syria Cross-border Humanitarian Fund, will
make around $10 million available to partners across
the country. We are grateful to the donors who pledged
new support to the cholera response, but much more is
needed. It is also now critical that donors convert their
generous pledges into early disbursals of funding.
The water scarcity has also affected crops and
farmers’ livelihoods, driving prices up and putting food
further out of reach for millions of people. Syria is now
experiencing its lowest wheat harvest since the crisis
began, following two consecutive seasons of droughtlike conditions. Food insecurity is spiralling out of
control and malnutrition rates are rising. Syrians today
can afford only 15 per cent of the food they were able to
purchase only three years ago. The lack of water leaves
the communities affected, and particularly women and
girls, more vulnerable to sexual exploitation and abuse.
We are just weeks away from another winter
in Syria, and a painfully familiar scenario will soon
unfold. Snowstorms, sub-zero temperatures, strong
winds, rains and flooding are expected to hit soon.
Over the past decade, we have seen year after year
what that means for families living in tents and
makeshift shelters. We have also seen how severe fuel
and electricity shortages make it very difficult for
families to keep warm and for essential services to keep
functioning. This year, the number of people who need
winterization assistance has increased by a staggering
30 per cent across the country compared to the previous
year. In the north-west, some 2 million depend on winter
assistance to meet their most basic needs. Most are
women and children living in camps with limited or no
access to heating, electricity, water or sewage disposal.
Humanitarian partners have launched a winterization
response, but it remains grossly underfunded, with the

S/PV.9163

shelter and non-food-items sector funded at just 10 per
cent. If that gap is not filled, families will not receive
the heating, fuel, blankets and winter clothes they
desperately need to keep warm.
The United Nations and its partners will continue
to provide life-saving assistance, such as food, water,
health and protection services, to millions of people
across Syria. And because early-recovery and livelihood
activities are a core pillar of the humanitarian response,
we are providing more than life-saving assistance. We
are supporting the repair and rehabilitation of critical
basic civilian services. We are providing access to
electricity and removing debris and solid waste,
launching income-generating activities and providing
vocational and skills training and interventions to
support the social cohesion of communities. But we
need support for two crucial aspects.
First, we need access to all people who need
humanitarian assistance. That includes continued
cross-border access and increased cross-line access, in
line with what international humanitarian law requires
of all parties to armed conflict. A non-renewal of the
authorization to carry out cross-border humanitarian
assistance at the peak of winter and in the middle of a
massive cholera response could cut off access to millions
of people in the north-west just when they need it most.
At the same time, we need the continued facilitation
and support of all parties to increase cross-line access
throughout the country. In the north-west, the eighth
cross-line mission to Sarmada, in Idlib governorate,
was completed over the weekend. The inter-agency
convoy delivered 503 metric tons of food for more
than 56,000 people, as well as nutrition, shelter, water,
sanitation items, health kits and other supplies.
Secondly, we need urgent funding. Almost 11
months into the year, our humanitarian appeal for Syria
still faces significant funding shortages. We must bring
the world’s focus back to what the women, men and
children of Syria need most — immediate aid, early
recovery, hope for a dignified life and a better future.
And above all, they need peace.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Ghelani for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and

22-651735/23

S/PV.9163

The situation in the Middle East

Director of the Operations and Advocacy Division
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs Reena Ghelani for the briefings on the political
and humanitarian situation in Syria.
We advocate advancing a Syrian-led and Syrianowned political process with United Nations assistance.
We support the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General to deliver on his direct mandate
established in resolution 2254 (2015). The key element
in that process is the Constitutional Committee,
within which there is direct inter-Syrian dialogue on
constitutional reform.
Currently, the meetings of the drafting committee
of the Constitutional Committee have been suspended,
inter alia because Geneva has lost the status of a truly
neutral platform as a result of Switzerland supporting
the anti-Russian and anti-Syrian sanctions. We hope
that this problem will be overcome either by selecting an
alternative venue or by providing appropriate guarantees
from the Swiss side to the arriving representatives.
The situation in Syria continues to be of concern. In
addition to the existing problem areas in the territories
not controlled by Damascus, primarily Idlib and the
trans-Euphrates area, the situation in the north of the
country also has a destabilizing effect. Idlib has long
been turned into a Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham terrorist
enclave. The withdrawal of fighters from the southern
part of the de-escalation zone did not take place, the M4
road has not been unblocked, there are no joint patrols
and there is no separation of moderate fighters from
terrorists. Western countries’ backing of Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham terrorists is linked to recent attempts by the
terrorists to expand their zone of control beyond Idlib.
A serious problem remains — Washington’s intent
to encourage Kurdish separatism and deepen the
territorial rift in Syria through their continued illegal
presence in the trans-Euphrates region and around
Al-Tanf. In addition, the Americans and their allies
are promoting the reinstallation of terrorist structures
and their arbitrary actions in the Al-Hol and Rukban
refugee camps.
With regard to Rukban, whose inhabitants have
recently been a source of active concern for our
American colleagues in the Council, we would like to
stress the following. Over the past nine months, only
730 refugees have been able to leave the camp for areas
controlled by the Syrian Government. The rest are being
held against their will by pro-American illegal armed
6/23

25/10/2022

groups. According to our information, the victims of the
fighters are denied access to humanitarian assistance,
medication and education. The American command,
demonstrating its impotence in providing security
guarantees in the territory it controls, continues to
block the arrival of a joint mission of Russia’s Centre
for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides and Refugee
Migration Monitoring in the Syrian Arab Republic and
international humanitarian organizations to conduct
a real assessment of the situation in the camp and
evacuate the remaining refugees. The United States,
as the occupying party, bears full responsibility for the
civilians therein.
Another destabilizing factor in Syria is Israeli
attacks, with their systematic violation of the airspace
above Syria and neighbouring Arab countries, in the
course of which strikes are being carried out against
civilian targets. The Syrians have repeatedly launched
appeals in that regard to the Secretary-General and
the Security Council, citing the numerous violations
of the Charter of the United Nations and the norms
of international humanitarian law. We consider it
unacceptable to leave those letters unanswered, all
the more so because on other topics the SecretaryGeneral expresses his views and assessments much
more actively, sometimes without even waiting for
the States Members of the United Nations to express
their positions.
Returning to the topic of Idlib, we certainly welcome
the recent dispatch of another cross-line humanitarian
convoy to Sarmada. However, let us be frank — this is
only the eighth convoy, and there is no real enthusiasm
to increase humanitarian assistance to Syria’s rebelheld areas, in cooperation with the Government. This
situation looks especially cynical in the light of the fact
that Damascus regularly issues the necessary permits.
It is worth noting that both the Secretariat and those
who allege that there is insufficient security in the
region are actively and demonstrably clamouring for
cross-line access in other country contexts, where the
intensity of hostilities makes such operations much
riskier for the security of humanitarian workers. We see
this as yet another display of double standards.
Overall, the socioeconomic and humanitarian
situation in Syria continues to deteriorate, primarily
in Government territories, where 67 per cent of the
population lives. In fact, many of those living there are
forced to fight for their survival. The main reason for
that is not — in any way — the actions of the Syrian
22-65173

25/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East

authorities, but rather the consequences of United
States and European Union sanctions, combined with
new challenges, such as the pandemic, a food crisis and
a growing number of cholera cases.
The specialized agencies of the United Nations
and the International Committee of the Red Cross are
chronically short of funds to extend urgent assistance
to all those in need. The humanitarian plan is only
25 per cent funded. Western donors, led by the United
States, only declare their generosity, but in reality they
are plundering Syrian natural resources. According to
estimates of Syria’s Ministry of Petroleum and Natural
Resources, the country’s energy-sector losses as a result
of the actions of the United States and the Kurdish
Administration amounted to more than $107 billion,
due, among other things, to the activities of American
companies such as Delta Crescent Energy, as well as
the consequences of the so-called Caesar Act.
In that regard, we attach great importance to the
regular review of international humanitarian activity in
Syria as part of informal interactive dialogue designed
to ensure the implementation of resolution 2642 (2022).
That is important not only to ensure a conscious and
informed decision regarding its extension in January
2023, but also for creating the basic conditions needed,
inter alia, for the return of Syrian refugees. For
neighbouring Lebanon, continuing to host Syrians on
its territory has already become an unbearable burden.
The country’s authorities openly declare that, but none
of our Western partners is interested in a fundamental
solution to the problem, just as no alternatives are being
proposed to return people to normal life. Humanitarian
workers are passively looking on, fearful of provoking
anger in the West with actions and initiatives that
run counter to the political stances of well-known
Western capitals.
The refugee problem requires an urgent solution. At
the end of September, a boat that left Tripoli capsized
and sank. According to different sources, 120 to 150
Syrian refugees headed to Europe were on board.
One hundred people died, and the survivors are being
cared for. The ships of the Mediterranean group of the
Russian navy took part in the rescue operation. Such
refugee tragedies are yet another grim wake-up call.
For our part, we are doing everything we
can — in close cooperation with Damascus — to rectify
the humanitarian situation on the ground. Thanks to
those efforts, more than 2 million Syrian citizens have

S/PV.9163

returned to their homes to date. Of those, more than
1,375,000 are internally displaced persons and more
than 1 million are refugees from abroad. Since 2018, we
have repaired and put into operation more than 22,000
socially significant and industrial facilities in various
regions of the country, and construction work is under
way at more than 4,100 additional facilities.
In the past month alone, 11 new farming cooperatives
were established in the provinces of Aleppo, Latakia,
Tartus, Dara’a and As-Suwayda, in support of farmers.
Concessional lending programmes were launched in
the country, and the main irrigation station was put
into operation in the province of Deir ez-Zor, enabling
the use of about 7,500 hectares of agricultural land. In
addition, in the provinces of Damascus, Deir ez-Zor and
Homs, the construction of 921 residential properties is
being completed. Those housing units are to be donated
to refugees and internally displaced persons.
In addition, we are working to preserve the cultural
and historical heritage of Syria. Through the efforts
of representatives of the Department for Rescue
Archaeology of the Institute for the History of Material
Culture of the Russian Academy of Sciences and Syria’s
Directorate-General for Antiquities and Museums, the
first stage of restoring the Arch of Triumph at Palmyra
has been completed. As part of that project, Russian
and Syrian experts are successfully carrying out a set of
activities in order to provide a post-traumatic response,
conduct comprehensive archaeological research on the
territory of the arch and work on its restoration.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Pedersen and Director Ghelani for their
informative and sobering briefings.
We are deeply troubled by the renewed and
intensified fighting in the north-west. The violence
endangers civilians and interferes with the delivery
of humanitarian assistance, compounding an alreadydire situation and creating conditions that could lead
to significant displacement. Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham,
a designated terrorist group, must stop its escalatory
actions in the area. The Syrian people have suffered
enough, and this new round of violence only exacerbates
conditions on the ground.
As we heard from the United Nations and its
partners, the growing cholera epidemic reflects the still
worsening humanitarian situation. The time to ramp up
our assistance to the Syrian people is now, before the
outbreak spirals further out of control. For our part, we

22-651737/23

S/PV.9163

The situation in the Middle East

provided funding to help first responders throughout
the country to deliver medical care, nutrition and clean
water. Those efforts are essential to saving lives and
stopping the spread of the infection. We are also proud
to support humanitarian early-recovery projects that
are rehabilitating community water systems, which is
critical to preventing future outbreaks.
But, with thousands of suspected cases and
mounting deaths, the situation will only worsen without
unfettered access for humanitarian actors. Central to
that effort is the renewal and expansion of the United
Nations cross-border aid authorization in January.
While there has been some notable progress on crossline assistance, cross-border deliveries are the only
realistic mechanism to ensure that millions of people
in north-west Syria get the help that they need through
this upcoming winter and beyond.
Russia’s decision to block a 12-month extension of
the cross-border mandate is having real consequences
on the ground. The humanitarian operation is among
the largest and most complicated in the world. Yet the
Council was not able to give United Nations aid workers
what they most need to succeed: a resolution mandate
that prioritized the humanitarian needs of the Syrian
people above cruel political calculation.
The United Nations is having trouble recruiting
staff to join the mission given the uncertainty after
January. Procurement has been undermined because
orders need to be placed months in advance. Aid workers
are spending time worrying about contingency plans
rather than on how to roll out stronger interventions,
including early-recovery.
As we heard on many occasions here in the
Security Council, from United Nations reports, from
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and at
the informal interactive dialogue in September, the
United Nations operation is transparent, efficient and
apolitical. It delivers assistance based on need — full
stop. As we look to January, we need to be focused on
the renewal of that life-saving mandate.
In addition to our efforts to meet the immediate
needs of the Syrian people, we must also stay focused
on a long-term political solution. The United States
fully supports Special Envoy Pedersen’s efforts
to revive the Constitutional Committee and take
other steps to achieve the aims of resolution 2254
(2015). It is imperative that the Al-Assad regime take
meaningful action to demonstrate its commitment
8/23

25/10/2022

to the political process. One such action would be to
provide information about the approximately 130,000
disappeared or arbitrarily detained Syrians.
Human decency demands that the Government at
least provide basic information on the whereabouts
and well-being of detainees to families that have been
left in the dark. But information, while critical, is in
no way enough. Providing information to victims’
families should be pursued in parallel with other
efforts. We call on the regime and all parties to the
conflict to immediately and humanely release all
unjustly detained persons, clarify the fate of those
missing or forcibly disappeared and provide support to
the victims’ families.
The United States fully supports the establishment
of a stand-alone entity with a humanitarian mandate
focused entirely on clarifying the fate of all Syria’s
missing persons — people who went missing at the
hands of the Al-Assad regime, the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS) or other parties to the conflict.
Confirming the whereabouts and status of the thousands
of missing Syrians and releasing the arbitrarily detained
are essential to achieving a stable, just and enduring
peace in Syria. We believe that the new entity will be
vital to that work.
As was detailed in the Secretary-General’s recent
report (A/76/890), while there are various entities
that work on aspects of that important file, none
have the explicit mandate to solely focus, or conduct
investigations, on the missing and the detained.
We stand with the Syrian human rights defenders,
survivors and families working on the file. We look
forward to continuing to support them, Syrian civil
society, the United Nations and NGOs in order to
make genuine progress towards the establishment of a
new mechanism. Nearly every Syrian family has been
traumatized by the disappearance of a loved one, and
we all have a responsibility to do right by those families
and those still detained.
If I may, I will just respond to some comments made
by the representative of the Russian Federation. As we
said many times, the United States is in Syria for the
sole purpose of enabling the ongoing campaign against
ISIS. We are committed to preserving our limited
presence in north-east Syria as part of a comprehensive
strategy to defeat ISIS and Al-Qaida, working by, with
and through the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) and
other local partners. On the issue of Syrian oil, Syrian
22-65173

25/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East

oil is for the Syrian people. The United States does not
own, control or manage any of those resources, neither
do we wish to. As part of the effort to defeat ISIS, the
SDF will continue to deny ISIS access to oil and gas
revenue in north-east Syria, which it previously used to
fund its terror campaign.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I deliver this statement on
behalf of Norway and Ireland as co-penholders on the
Syria humanitarian file. We thank Director Ghelani for
her briefing today.
In this reporting period alone, 92 civilians, including
35 children, were killed as a result of hostilities. Let us
consider that for a moment. Thirty-five children were
killed in the past 60 days in Syria — 35 young lives
lost. It is unacceptable that many attacks appear to be
directed against civilians or carried out near locations
of a civilian character.
Furthermore, we are deeply worried by the
significant increase in child recruitment and the use
of children in armed conflict. We call on all parties
to engage with the United Nations with the aim of
signing and implementing action plans to strengthen
the protection of children.
We repeat our call on all parties to comply
with international humanitarian law, including the
obligation to take all feasible precautions to avoid harm
to civilians and civilian infrastructure. We also call on
all States with influence over the parties to the conflict
to be proactive and take all possible steps that can
lead to increased protection and safety for the civilian
population in Syria.
Cholera was confirmed in all governorates of
Syria — yet a further challenge to a health system that
has been decimated by more than 11 years of conflict.
We welcome the efforts of the United Nations and
partners to respond to the outbreak, which highlights
the difficulties posed by the severe water shortages
throughout Syria.
Not only are water shortages now threatening lives,
but they also risk exacerbating a food and protection
crisis that is already desperate. The lack of available
water severely increases the vulnerability of affected
communities. The levels of acute and severe food
insecurity are quite simply staggering. As stated by
the Secretary-General, Syrians can afford only one
sixth of the food that they could purchase in 2019
(see S/2022/775).

S/PV.9163

Negative coping mechanisms, which particularly
impact women and children, continue to increase.
Children are withdrawn from school to help support
their families, forced to work or forced into early
marriage. Suicide rates among young women and girls
are rising. The destructive effects of nearly 12 years of
conflict are robbing them of their futures.
Humanitarian needs are at their highest-ever levels.
Syrians will once again face a bitter winter. Six million
people are in need of winter assistance — a figure that
has grown by 30 per cent since last year. We know that
winter will threaten the lives of millions of Syrian men,
women and children.
Soaring fuel prices mean that families will once
again be forced to choose between keeping warm and
eating. Many are living in overcrowded, old tents,
exposed to harsh weather. They urgently need our help.
Early-recovery support is changing lives and
building resilience, from the rehabilitation of hospitals,
bakeries, water systems and classrooms to the
installation of solar systems. Since January, more than
8 million Syrians have benefited directly or indirectly
from early-recovery projects, which are taking place in
every governorate of the country. More than 40 per cent
of the projects that received funding by late August
contribute to the provision of electricity to support
basic needs or electricity in households.
Norway and Ireland strongly support the use of all
modalities to reach the many Syrians in need across
the country. We welcome the completion of the eighth
cross-line delivery. The efforts of the United Nations
and humanitarian partners with regard to cross-line
deliveries are clear, and we encourage them to continue.
The United Nations cannot increase the rates of
cross-line deliveries by itself. We call on all parties to
support cross-line deliveries, including by providing
timely security guarantees. The cross-border operation
remains an absolutely critical lifeline, for which there
is currently no substitute. It is imperative for the
Council to work together to confirm the continuation
of the highly monitored operation at Bab Al-Hawa. I
reiterate the commitment of Norway and Ireland to
supporting the people of Syria. Our collective efforts
on the Council must be dedicated to them, so that they
can hope for a better future.
I will now address the political situation on behalf
of Ireland. I want to thank Special Envoy Pedersen for

22-651739/23

S/PV.9163

The situation in the Middle East

the update on his recent travel, as well as his continued
efforts on step-for-step confidence-building measures.
European Union foreign ministers agreed to engage in
that process in January, while Damascus and its allies
have not, despite repeated calls by Ireland and others.
Ireland calls for the calming of tensions and hostilities
between the belligerent parties across Syria. We call on
them to exercise the utmost restraint to spare civilians
any further horrors. There must be a nationwide
ceasefire, in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
Only a political solution can bring the stability and
security needed for the Syrian people. Ireland supports
the efforts of the Special Envoy to resolve the issues
that are preventing the holding of a ninth session of
the Constitutional Committee in Geneva. We call for
full and meaningful engagement by Damascus and
reiterate that the Committee should meet in Geneva.
Any new constitution and related political process must
be fully inclusive and benefit from the full, equal and
meaningful engagement of women.
Ireland reiterates its call on Damascus for
transparency on the release of arbitrarily detained
people, in particular on the implementation of the
amnesty decree announced in April. The report of
the Secretary-General (S/2022/775) documents that
detainees in custody are dying from alleged natural
causes, with families denied the opportunity to question
the cause of death or even know the whereabouts of
their loved one’s body — that is unconscionable. The
reported arbitrary arrest of 19 civilians during the
reporting period is very troubling. Ireland thanks
the Secretariat for the Secretary-General’s study on
missing persons in Syria (see A/76/890) and calls on
the international community to support a process to
enable Syrian families to find answers on the fate of
their loved ones.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank Mr. Geir Pedersen and Ms. Reena
Ghelani for their thorough briefings today. We highly
appreciate their efforts on that dossier.
Despite the ongoing developments in the security
and humanitarian situations in Syria, it is unfortunate
that the Syrian dossier does not garner enough
attention in the international arena. The diplomatic
efforts to reach a solution to end the crisis have also
waned. Therefore, we would like to remind everyone
that the Syrian dossier is no less important than the
other dossiers on our agenda. The living conditions of
10/23

25/10/2022

the Syrian people are among the worst in the world.
They deserve our attention and interest, just as other
conflict-affected peoples.
We will not be able to break the current deadlock
in the political process if international efforts are
not focused on achieving that goal. We appreciate
in that regard the continuous attempts of the Special
Envoy, in his engagement with the Syrian parties, to
find a solution to the crisis, and we stress the need to
include women in those efforts. The deadlock that has
paralysed the work of the Constitutional Committee
over the past months must be overcome, as the
Committee is the only platform through which to carry
out a constructive and national Syrian-led and -owned
dialogue in order to move the political process forward
without foreign interference or dictates. That does not
only apply to logistical matters, but must also include a
clear timeline and an agreed plan for the next steps on
the constitutional track. The United Arab Emirates will
continue to reiterate its rejection of foreign intervention
in Syria’s affairs, as well as our calls to end such
intervention in order to maintain Syria’s sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity.
The security situation will not improve without
efforts to address the chaos in security, of which the
terrorist Da’esh organization and other groups are taking
advantage to launch attacks against Syrian territories.
What Mr. Pedersen has mentioned about Da’esh
weapons caches is a source of concern, as is the fact that
Da’esh has extorted and looted local communities in
the eastern Deir ez-Zor governorate to fund its terrorist
activities. We have also heard concerning reports about
other groups that have been gaining control over a
number of Syrian areas in northern Aleppo during the
past few weeks. We demand the withdrawal of those
groups and a halt to all hostilities in northern Syria to
ensure the protection of civilian lives.
The developments I have just mentioned illustrate
the continuing threats and long-term repercussions
posed by those groups to the security and stability of
both Syria and the region as a whole. Those situations
must be addressed and not ignored. We reiterate here
that the safety and stability of Syria is an integral part
of the safety and stability of the region.
The worsening humanitarian conditions and the
economic regression in Syria will not improve unless
sustainable solutions are reached that go beyond
temporary and limited measures. That requires
22-65173

25/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9163

international efforts to focus on early recovery and
reconstruction. We note also that the humanitarian
situation is becoming more dangerous owing to the
cholera outbreak in all Syrian governorates. In addition,
there are growing concerns regarding the crowded
conditions in camps for displaced people, which suffer
in particular from a lack of clean drinking water. In that
regard, we commend the United Nations for setting a
plan to respond to that epidemic.

Although the implementation of the general
amnesty decreed in April has thus far resulted in a
limited number of releases, it can help create better
conditions for dialogue. We therefore support the
Special Envoy’s follow-up efforts in that regard.

We also stress the need to providing the appropriate
security conditions to allow the passage of humanitarian
convoys to their intended destinations in order to ensure
the unhindered and impartial delivery of humanitarian
aid to all those in need throughout Syria, including
women and girls. In that regard, we welcome the recent
entry of the seventh and eighth convoys into northwestern Syria and the distribution of foodstuff by the
World Food Programme.

As humanitarian needs continue to grow, access to
humanitarian assistance is a priority. What occurred
at Al-Hol camp is therefore worrisome, as insecurity
forced some organizations to temporarily suspend
their services, thereby affecting education and
health services.

In conclusion, I would like to note that every day
that goes by without finding a peaceful solution is one
more day added to the suffering of the Syrian people.
We must therefore restore the international momentum
to end the current impasse on the political track.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Director
Ghelani for their briefings and welcome the delegations
of Syria, Iran and Türkiye to today’s meeting.
Mexico deplores the armed clashes that continue
to affect the daily lives of civilians in regions such as
Afrin, Idlib and Raqqa. We deplore the attacks that have
affected five internally displaced persons camps in Bab
Al-Hawa, as well as those in the vicinity of schools and
health-care facilities. We reiterate that all the parties
to the conflict must respect the rules of international
humanitarian law, without exception.
We call on the parties to agree a nationwide ceasefire
in order to put an end to the suffering of the civilian
population and create a space for the resumption of the
political process. We hope that the small body of the
Constitutional Committee will be able to hold its ninth
session before the end of the year.
Mexico is confident that the Special Envoy’s
recent meetings with the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Expatriates of Syria, as well as the President of
the Syrian National Council, will serve to gradually
advance the discussions and build confidence between
the parties.

We urge the Syrian authorities to take concrete steps
towards national reconciliation, including by clarifying
the status of missing persons and ensuring unimpeded
entry for humanitarian agencies into detention centres.

The increase in the number of cholera cases has
further aggravated the humanitarian situation. The
country’s 14 governorates are already in an emergency
situation. In addition to the much-needed medical
response, access to safe water and sanitation is essential
for combating such outbreaks, and power generation
and early-recovery projects are therefore critical.
The onset of winter will bring with it new challenges
in providing energy and ensuring the availability of
food and sanitation services, which will increase the
population’s dependence on the humanitarian assistance
that is essential for more than 6 million people in
extremely vulnerable situations, including displaced
persons, older persons, women and children.
Lastly, the entry into the north-west of the country
of the eighth cross-line convoy last weekend will benefit
56,000 people. That is a step in the right direction,
although it is clearly insufficient to cover all the needs
of the nearly 2.4 million people who benefit from aid
through the Bab Al-Hawa border crossing. Therefore,
we once again stress the need to renew the authorization.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I make this statement on the
political situation in Syria in my national capacity.
I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing.
Norway continues to give its full support to him and
his team. We are pleased to hear that he has continued
consultations with the relevant actors regarding the
step-for-step approach. Norway shares his view that
there are areas of shared interest in which it is possible
to find common ground, and there is certainly an urgent
need to implement confidence-building measures to
move the political process forward.

22-6517311/23

S/PV.9163

The situation in the Middle East

Progress relating to missing and arbitrarily
detained persons in Syria could be one such issue.
Some progress has been made following the Syrian
authorities’ announced amnesty. Still, strengthened
efforts by the Syrian authorities in implementing the
amnesty are needed.
With regard to the Constitutional Committee,
Norway will continue to urge the parties to get back to
the negotiating table and contribute constructively to
the process.
We are concerned about the recent violence in
northern Syria, including in Idlib. According to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, to which the Director for Operations
and Advocacy of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs also referred, at least 92 civilians
were killed in the period covering August to September.
Let me again highlight the need for a national ceasefire
and remind the parties of their obligation to protect
civilians and civilian infrastructure.
The lack of progress towards a political solution
also has a negative impact on the socioeconomic
situation. We are worried about the lack of economic
opportunities, the continued brain drain, the increased
recruitment and use of children by armed forces and
groups and the smuggling of drugs. Those negative
trends must be reversed.
In conclusion, we welcome the Women’s Advisory
Board’s meeting held earlier this month and its close
dialogue with the Special Envoy. The group plays a
vital role in providing key perspectives and input to the
political process and the work of the United Nations.
We are pleased to support its important work.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Brazil thanks
Mr. Pedersen and Ms. Ghelani for their briefings.
With more than half of the population needing
life-saving assistance and without a political solution
on the horizon, there is not much room for disagreement
on the importance of keeping the Security Council’s
attention on Syria. The cholera outbreak is just another
consequence of the precarious situation in the country
after 11 long years of conflict. New humanitarian crises
will arise as long as no action is taken to change the
situation on the ground.
We were glad to learn that early-recovery activities
increased and that 151 of the 350 projects contributed
to the provision of electricity to support basic services
12/23

25/10/2022

and household electricity. However, without a ceasefire
the sustainability of early-recovery projects will
remain elusive.
We remain very concerned about the consequences
of foreign intervention in Syria. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2022/775) concludes, the frequency
of attacks harming civilians points to a general lack of
compliance by all parties, who are under an obligation
to ensure respect for international humanitarian law.
The constant threat of terrorism must also be tackled as
a collective menace, with the cooperation of all parties.
Winter in Syria is approaching, and with it will
come the expiration of the authorization of resolution
2462 (2019) for cross-border operations. In less than
three months, we will have to decide on a way forward
on that issue. While pursuing a true humanitarian,
depoliticized approach, we should start working together
in order to reach common ground on the renewal of
the mandate. The figures show that, although initially
planned to be a temporary arrangement, cross-border
operations remain the mainstay of the humanitarian
assistance being provided in Syria. Cross-line numbers
have increased slightly; yet they remain far from the
goal of replacing cross-border operations.
Brazil supported the idea of a further debate on Syria
as an opportunity to analyse in depth what can be done
to unlock the debate on humanitarian assistance to the
country. The next informal dialogue should be used for
more transparent discussions on the challenges ahead
of us, including the humanitarian impact of sanctions.
In his report, the Secretary-General reminds us that,
as early as March 2020, he called for the waiving of
sanctions that might impede access to essential health
supplies and food to the Syrian population. Brazil
echoes his message of encouragement to all relevant
parties to find ways to address the challenges in that
regard and to facilitate humanitarian actors’ adequate
and reliable access to financial services.
The humanitarian situation in camps across Syria
is dire, with a large number of women and children in
need of assistance. Brazil agrees with the SecretaryGeneral that the arbitrary deprivation of liberty to many
people in camps, including children, based on unproven
links with terrorist groups, remains a key human rights
concern. The question of the whereabouts of missing
persons should also be addressed as a matter of priority.
Last week, we held an open debate to address the
resilience of women in armed conflict (see S/PV.9158).
22-65173

25/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Syrian women continue to be disproportionately
affected by the crisis, including through gender-based
violence, forced or early marriage and restricted access
to livelihood opportunities. Brazil calls on the Council
to commit to maintaining full access to education and
the workplace for girls and women, stressing that their
empowerment and protection are not just a moral and
ethical duty but also a necessity for economic prosperity.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that the low
levels of funding for Syrian humanitarian responses are
also a sign of the fatigue of international humanitarian
assistance capacity, with serious crises on several fronts.
The Syrian people do not want to live on humanitarian
aid forever, at home or abroad. It is essential to put the
needs of civilians first in a genuine search for a viable
solution to this terrible conflict.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank Mr. Pedersen and Ms. Ghelani for
their briefings.
As we say every month, the war in Syria is not
over. The clashes in north-west Syria in recent weeks
are further proof of that. Some 60 people, including a
dozen civilians, are said to have lost their lives in the
fighting, while more than 6,000 civilians fled as troops
from the terrorist group Hay’at Tahrir Al-Sham arrived
in the town of Afrin and its surroundings. The regime
and its allies are clearly allowing the situation to fester,
continuing to play into the hands of the terrorist groups
and holding hostage the Syrian people, who have been
yearning for a lasting peace for years. We reiterate our
call for a national ceasefire.
The work of the Constitutional Committee must
resume in Geneva, as agreed by the Syrian parties in
the terms of reference. Russia must stop obstructing
the process. Furthermore, France reiterates its support
for the Special Envoy’s step-for-step approach. For that
approach to bear fruit, all parties — and the regime
first and foremost — must commit to it in good faith.
It is delusional to believe that the use of force can
lead to a peace plan. Only the conditions set out in
the unanimously adopted resolution 2254 (2015) can
pave the way for a lasting peace based on a tangible
political process.
The civilian population continues to endure the
consequences of the war. As winter approaches and
the cholera epidemic spreads, the question of how to
help the millions of people in need of humanitarian
assistance is extremely worrying. The United Nations

S/PV.9163

estimates that there is a 30 per cent increase in needs
compared to 2021. It will be essential to ensure that the
cross-border mechanism is renewed for at least another
12 months. We know that the uncertainty is hampering
humanitarian actors in their efforts to save lives.
Syria’s neighbours have made enormous efforts
to host Syrian refugees on their territory, and the
international community has supported them since
the beginning of the conflict. For example, Europe
and its member States have allocated €25 billion in
response to the consequences of the Syrian crisis over
the past decade. While we believe that the future of
Syrians is in Syria, according to the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights only 1.7 per cent of
the region’s refugees want to return to Syria, due to
what is seen as a lack of adequate protection of their
rights and integrity, and despite the socioeconomic
difficulties they face in their host countries. The fact is
that security conditions have not been met, as several
Syrians who tried to return to their country have
testified. They have faced arbitrary arrests, torture,
confiscation of property and forced conscription at a
time when the regime claims that the war is over. By
maintaining the obstacles that it has created to their
return, the regime is filtering its nationals, thereby
continuing the policy of demographic engineering that
it has been carefully implementing since the beginning
of the conflict.
For those reasons, I reiterate that the conditions
for the dignified, safe and voluntary return of Syrian
refugees have not been met, and only the regime
can remove those obstacles to their return. France
is mobilizing in support of neighbouring countries
that are dealing with the consequences of that crisis.
Against that dramatic backdrop, the fight against
impunity remains our priority. Unfortunately, Syria
continues to record some of the darkest statistics in our
history. More than 100,000 people have disappeared,
an unprecedented number. That is why France will
continue to fight relentlessly for accountability.
Finally, in the absence of any progress on the
political process in Syria, the French and European
positions on the lifting of sanctions, on normalization
and on reconstruction will remain unchanged.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Special Envoy
Pedersen and Ms. Ghelani for their updates.
Little has changed in Syria since our previous
meeting on the issue (see S/PV.9130), except for renewed

22-6517313/23

S/PV.9163

The situation in the Middle East

and increased fighting. A human-made catastrophe
has entered its second decade, marked by continued
destruction, destitution and dehumanization — the
abhorrent work of a regime that clings to power by
suffocating the aspirations of the Syrian people for a
dignified life in their own country. The inability of
the Council to act has prolonged that brutality and
suffering, but that does not have to be the fate of the
Syrian people or of the Council.
In exactly six days, we will celebrate the twentysecond anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), the landmark resolution on women and peace
and security. But there is not much to celebrate in
Syria, where the reality is one of the continued and
increasing oppression of women. That oppression
has brought on them extreme poverty, malnutrition,
arbitrary detention, forced disappearances, sexual
violence and human trafficking. Despite all of that,
and in adversity and perilous circumstances, Syrian
women have refused to allow the Al-Assad regime to
relegate them to the role of nothing but victims. They
have paid a heavy toll, but they have resisted and are
still coping with enormous challenges in managing
their households and preserving their role in public and
political life. We applaud the efforts made by Special
Envoy Pedersen to never lose sight of the plight and role
of women in the Syrian conflict, as he reaffirmed in
his remarks today, as well as to ensure their legitimate
place in the political process in order to jointly shape
the future of Syria.
On the security front, violence continues
unabated. There is infighting in the north, and now,
as other speakers have already mentioned, Hay’at
Tahrir Al-Sham — a Security Council-listed terrorist
group — is expanding its activities and has been able
to reach Afrin. That is a clear sign that terrorism
remains a growing plague with the potential to spread
its violent activities and ideology further. The ongoing
deterioration of the security situation is serving only
to exacerbate the dire humanitarian and economic
situation in the country. Cholera has returned to Syria,
killing at least 70 people so far. That shows again how
urgent it is to restore the country’s health services
and water and sanitation facilities. The cross-border
mechanism therefore remains a crucial lifeline for
millions. Its renewal is vital because it is a matter of
saving human lives.
We see no progress whatsoever on the fate of
detainees and those who have been forcibly disappeared.
14/23

25/10/2022

When the so-called presidential amnesty was announced
in April, we expressed doubts. Now it is clear that it
was nothing more than a smokescreen for the regime
to distract the international community with an empty
gesture. After six months, there is still no information
about the release of detainees or their whereabouts. The
issue of detainees is a purely humanitarian issue, not
merchandise for political haggling, and the Council
should make it a priority. That is why Albania strongly
supports the recommendations of the landmark report
issued by the Secretary-General in August (A/76/890),
especially the need to create a new mechanism for the
disappeared in Syria, as well as a trust fund to help
those who have lost them.
I conclude with where everything should begin,
which is the political process — or as I have expressed
repeatedly here, the absence of a genuine political
process. The Al-Assad regime and its enablers take
turns to trade excuses to avoid participating in the
political process and effectively freeze even the
most minimal movement that could be noticed in the
Constitutional Committee. There seems to be no end
to the list of excuses to not move forward the political
process. We should not be fooled by smokescreens,
excuses and actions in bad faith. We should demand
transparent, tangible, precise and variable measures
to unlock the political process and ensure a political
transition in Syria.
There can be no chance for peace, prosperity or
justice in Syria without a due political transition that
should lead to a new, democratic Syria through a process
that is owned and led by the Syrians themselves. Syria
belongs to its people through their own free will, not to
one family through its repressive grip.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me thank
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Pedersen and
Ms. Ghelani for their briefings today.
I would like to make three points.
First, the United Kingdom supports the efforts of
Special Envoy Pedersen to advance the implementation
of resolution 2254 (2015) through the step-forstep initiative. We welcome the news of his recent
discussions in New York, Damascus and elsewhere. But
Russian and regime intransigence continues to preclude
progress, and we call for their participation in good
faith. We urge them to depoliticize the Constitutional
Committee. We are clear that the Committee should
22-65173

25/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East

reconvene in Geneva, as agreed, and begin to focus
fully on substance rather than process.
Secondly, the United Kingdom is appalled by the
human rights situation in Syria. Tens of thousands of
Syrians have been forcibly disappeared, detained and
tortured since the beginning of the conflict, including
in the notorious Sednaya prison, where, as civil society
representatives have told us repeatedly, detainees are
tortured and killed on a daily basis. We strongly condemn
those violations. We call for the full implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015), which includes the release of
those arbitrarily detained, together with a nationwide
ceasefire, unhindered aid access, conditions for safe,
voluntary and dignified refugee return and free and
fair elections, pursuant to a new constitution. The
United Kingdom is closely monitoring the escalation
of hostilities in north-west Syria. It is essential that all
parties to the conflict respect the ceasefire.
Lastly, as we have heard, the spreading cholera
outbreak highlights the frankly horrifying humanitarian
context and the need for a sustained response by the
humanitarian community. The United Nations is
stepping up its cross-line delivery where possible.
But cross-border delivery remains a vital lifeline
for many in the north-west. We look forward to the
Security Council renewing the cross-border mandate in
January, ensuring aid for millions of Syrians during the
winter months.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Pedersen
and Director Ghelani for their briefings.
With regard to report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/775) and the briefings we just heard, China
would like to emphasize the following four points.
First, we must continue to advance the Syrianled and Syrian-owned political process. For a period
of time, the Special Envoy and his team have travelled
extensively to meet with all parties and make positive
efforts to promote the political process in Syria, and
China welcomes this. We hope that all parties concerned
will remain constructively engaged with the Special
Envoy, strive to effectively resolve the substantive
differences concerning the session of the small body
of the Constitutional Committee and actively respond
to the Special Envoy’s step-for-step initiative to inject
impetus into the early resumption of the political
process in the country.

S/PV.9163

Secondly, we must fight terrorist forces in Syria
with resolve. Syria is faced by an increase in terrorist
threats, and Security Council-listed terrorist groups
have significantly expanded their control in the northwest part of the country. Terrorism is the common
enemy of humankind. The international community
should actively support the Syrian Government’s
counter-terrorism efforts and, in accordance with
international law and the relevant Council resolutions,
should adopt uniform norms to jointly fight all terrorist
organizations in Syria listed by the Council, completely
cut off their sources of weapons, personnel and funding
and cease abetting, shielding and using them for
political purposes.
Thirdly, efforts should be made to improve Syria’s
humanitarian situation. Resolution 2642 (2022),
which should be effectively implemented, provides
comprehensive and balanced arrangements for
improving the humanitarian situation in Syria. Over
the past two months, a significantly larger number of
early-recovery projects have been funded. The projects
to provide electricity, which are urgently needed by
the Government, account for a considerable portion
of them. China encourages the United Nations and
the international community to continue to increase
investment in early-recovery projects. Since the adoption
of resolution 2642 (2022), there have been only three
cross-line deliveries in north-western Syria, and their
efficiency and scale continue to require improvement.
In that regard, I would like to reiterate that crossborder assistance is only a temporary arrangement
made under special circumstances. The transition to
cross-line operations must be accelerated, and a clear
timetable should be set for the final termination of
cross-border delivery. The recent and rapid spread of
cholera in the country has resulted in a growing number
of confirmed and suspected cases and deaths. China is
deeply concerned about that. The fragile health system
is a weak link in response efforts. The international
community should actively support the recovery and
development of Syria’s medical and health-care system
and help the country overcome difficulties.
The water shortage is the underlying cause of
the outbreak. China calls on all parties concerned
to make concerted efforts to swiftly ensure a stable
supply of water throughout Syria and immediately stop
the deliberate destruction of water-supply facilities.
Unilateral sanctions have led to the serious deterioration
of the humanitarian situation in Syria and offset the

22-6517315/23

S/PV.9163

The situation in the Middle East

25/10/2022

humanitarian efforts of the international community.
They must end immediately.

positively contribute to the United Nations-facilitated
political process.

Fourthly, the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Syria must be safeguarded. Foreign military
intervention is the major cause of the protracted
Syrian crisis. Throughout the years, several countries
have carried out military operations in Syria without
the consent of the country’s Government, thereby
undermining its security and stability, exacerbating
the humanitarian situation and violating the country’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. Türkiye has
carried out four military operations in Syria since 2016,
and it recently stated that it would launch a new one
there. The Syrian Government has repeatedly opposed
and condemned such actions. China calls on Türkiye
to earnestly respect Syria’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity and engage in dialogue and cooperate with
Syria to resolve the relevant issues.

The threat of terrorism in Syria and the region
cannot be ignored. The listed terror entities, such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Hay’at Tahrir
al-Sham, have remained active in Syria, as is evident
from attacks across Deir ez-Zor, Al-Hasakah, eastern
rural Homs and Hama. The January Al-Hasakah
prison attack incident was another such instance. The
global fight against terrorism cannot and should not
be compromised for the sake of narrow political gains.
The international community should also display a
zero-tolerance approach towards terrorism.

Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I join others in thanking
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria and
the Director for Operations and Advocacy at the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs for their briefings.
I will focus my remarks on the political process,
terrorism and the humanitarian situation.
The stalemate in the political process has become
unsustainable, as made evident by the Special Envoy’s
briefing. There has been hardly any progress recently,
particularly with regard to the Constitutional Committee.
Since its previous meeting in Geneva in June, the small
body of the Constitutional Committee has not met, and
there is no clarity on the way forward. It has been three
years since the establishment of the Committee. It was
expected to build trust and confidence among all three
sides through its collaborative action. However, that
has not been the case thus far.
In that regard, we have noted the efforts made
by the Special Envoy, including his recent meetings
in Damascus. We continue to support his step-forstep approach and call on all sides to engage with the
Special Envoy in a constructive manner. India has been
consistent in calling for support for regional efforts
in finding a long-term solution to the conflict. The
improvement in Syria’s relations and engagement with
its Arab neighbours is a positive development. We hope
that the upcoming meeting of the League of Arab States
to be held Algiers and its members’ deliberations will
16/23

With regard to the security situation, we remain
concerned about the overall situation in Syria. There
is an urgent need for serious attempts to achieve a
comprehensive nationwide ceasefire. As mentioned
by the Secretary-General in his most recent report
(S/2022/775), Syria does not need more military
operations. We believe that the withdrawal of all
foreign forces is essential to realize that objective. We
also reiterate our strong commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
The humanitarian situation remains a matter
of concern. As we heard from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 14.6 million
people need humanitarian assistance, a 9 per cent
increase as compared to last year. Food insecurity has
reached historic highs. The economic situation has
become dire, further aggravating the situation. Low
funding levels for the Syrian humanitarian response
continue to be cause for concern.
We note the importance of the humanitarian
assistance provided to Syria under the United Nationsmandated mechanism. At the same time, humanitarian
assistance cannot be a matter of political expediency.
Linking humanitarian and development assistance with
progress in the political process will only exacerbate
human suffering and should be avoided. The focus
should also be on early-recovery projects and crossline operations.
Decisive progress on the political track in Syria
remains an urgent imperative to alleviate the suffering
of its people. To that end, all parties, particularly the
external players, need to demonstrate their commitment
in tangible terms to a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
22-65173

25/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East

United Nations-facilitated political process, in line
with resolution 2254 (2015).
In conclusion, let me underscore India’s sustained
commitment to extending development assistance and
human resource development support to Syria. Our
continued efforts to assist the people of Syria in their
endeavour to seek lasting peace and stability remains
steadfast and unwavering.
The President (spoke in French): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Gabon.
(spoke in English)
I have the honour to make this statement on behalf
of the three African members of the Security Council
(A3), namely, Ghana, Kenya and my country, Gabon.
We thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and the
Director of the Operations and Advocacy Division of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
Reena Ghelani, for their briefings on the most recent
political and humanitarian developments in Syria. We
also welcome the participation in this meeting of the
representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic, the Islamic
Republic of Iran and the Republic of Türkiye.
We note with regret that the security situation
in Syria remains volatile. Idlib, in the north-west of
the Syrian Arab Republic, is the scene of persistent
violence, air strikes, mutual bombardments and clashes.
According to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, during the period
under consideration 92 civilians, including two women
and 35 children, were killed as a result of the hostilities,
while at least 80 civilians were injured, including five
women and 38 children.
In addition to the countless deaths and injuries
caused by the war, air strikes and bombings continue to
interrupt the delivery of humanitarian aid that is vital
for the population. We are deeply concerned about the
security operation carried out at Al-Hol camp from
25 August to 17 September, which temporarily affected
the delivery of humanitarian services, and we call
on the parties to create a safe environment and grant
unimpeded access.
Furthermore, the conflict remains active, with
escalation along various axes in the north-west, northeast and south of Syria marked by the increased
frequency of attacks and the use of explosive weapons

S/PV.9163

in densely populated areas in disregard of international
humanitarian law, including the principles of
distinction, proportionality and precaution.
We are also concerned by the Security Councillisted terrorist groups, such as the Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham, expanding their territory in Syria. Any
expansion of listed terrorist groups will only exacerbate
the precarious security situation and continue to put
innocent civilian lives at risk. We therefore call for
concerted efforts to combat Security Council-listed
terrorist groups.
The A3 also calls on the parties to respect
international humanitarian law and spare civilians and
civilian objects.
The human cost of the conflict in Syria is
staggering. The country remains one of the most
complex humanitarian emergencies in the world, with
more than half of the population in need of life-saving
assistance. The daily life of Syrians is marked by
the difficulties of access to food, drinking water and
basic services.
In addition to the plethora of problems facing the
Syrian people, the outbreak of a cholera epidemic in 13 of
its 14 governorates is deeply troubling. But fortunately,
the United Nations and its partners are supporting the
response to, and the prevention of, the epidemic.
Meanwhile, the economic crisis continues to
negatively impact Syrians across the country because
of their reduced purchasing power. The fate of ordinary
Syrians is also compounded by the limited electricity
supply, which unfortunately impacts the functioning of
basic services.
We note that the United Nations continues to support
humanitarian assistance and recovery initiatives, as
well as humanitarian access, including cross-border
missions, throughout the country, in accordance with
resolution 2642 (2022).
The A3 shares the view that the massive crossborder operation supported by the United Nations
remains an indispensable platform for reaching many
people in need, and there is currently no substitute
on that scale. We are also in favour of extending the
mandate of the cross-border mechanism, which is due
to expire in January 2023.
We welcome the recent cross-line convoy deliveries
of food aid. We are pleased to note that the sixth and

22-6517317/23

S/PV.9163

The situation in the Middle East

25/10/2022

seventh convoys crossing the line, consisting of 14 and
16 trucks, respectively, provided food and non-food aid
to more than 43,000 people in north-west Syria. We
also commend the 12 consignments of cross-border
deliveries through the Bab Al-Hawa crossing point.
It is therefore critical that all modalities of aid to the
millions of people in need continue to be strengthened.

children, some of whom are exposed to the coronavirus
disease and cholera pandemics due to their poor prison
conditions, as well as by clarifying the status of missing
persons, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). The A3
therefore impresses upon the Government of Syria the
importance of making progress in that area, which would
lead to systematic releases in a coordinated manner.

However, we are very concerned about the low
levels of funding for the humanitarian response in
Syria, particularly as we approach the winter season,
when needs tend to increase. A total of 6 million people
in Syria are in urgent need of assistance this winter,
an increase of more than 30 per cent as compared to
last year. We therefore call for greater solidarity on
the part of the international community and increased
humanitarian funding, including for early-recovery and
livelihoods programmes.

We cannot emphasize enough that there is no
military solution to the Syrian crisis. The national
ceasefire therefore remains an imperative as a
precursor to the much-anticipated political solution.
The A3 therefore reiterates our call on the parties to
prioritize the needs of civilians, to exercise restraint
and to engage in serious negotiations.

The situation of women in Syria is another source
of concern for the A3. Women are disproportionately
affected by the crisis, including through violence, forced
and early marriages and limited access to livelihoods.
That is unacceptable.
Also, we encourage the Syrian Government to make
the necessary legislative and administrative reforms to
eliminate discrimination against women with a view to
achieving true equality between the sexes. Women have
displayed a determined resilience through this crisis and
should therefore be included in political engagements.
We therefore call for actions to mainstream the voices
of women in political efforts. In that regard, the A3
continues to commend the Special Envoy’s continuous
engagement with the widest spectrum of Syrian women
in pursuit of a political solution.
We welcome the holding of the first informal
interactive dialogue under the aegis of the SecretaryGeneral on 26 September, at which Member States
were able to discuss their essential role in ensuring the
full implementation of resolution 2642 (2022).
The A3 notes with interest the continued efforts of
the Special Envoy to urgently convene the ninth session
of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva. That will
be an opportunity to address substantive issues, in line
with resolution 2254 (2015).
Confidence-building can be enhanced through the
steps-for-steps model by addressing the situation of
detainees, including facilitating the release of detained
vulnerable groups, such as the elderly, women and
18/23

We support and encourage the efforts of Special
Envoy Pedersen, as well as those of regional and
international actors, to achieve political stability in
Syria, while respecting the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the country.
In conclusion, the A3 member States reiterate their
solidarity with the Syrian people in their quest for
lasting peace.
(spoke in French)
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, since this is the first time I take the floor under
Gabon’s presidency of the Security Council for this
month, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency and wish you every success
in discharging your tasks.
I listened attentively to the briefings of Mr. Geir
Pedersen and Ms. Reena Ghelani, and I would like to
make the following remarks.
First, the basic principle assured by all United
Nations resolutions on Syria is respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the Syrian Arab Republic. That is also the criterion for
any approach to the political or humanitarian situation
in Syria. Any illegal military presence on Syrian
territories is a violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law and must end immediately
and unconditionally. In addition, the fight against
terrorism in its various forms and its total eradication
22-65173

25/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East

can be achieved only through full cooperation and
coordination with the Syrian State.
In that regard, my delegation stresses its total
rejection of the White House announcement on
12 October to extend what it called the “national
emergency with respect to the situation in Syria”
and of the Turkish Foreign Ministry’s communiqué
on 13 October in response to that United States
announcement. My delegation believes that the
justifications in both statements are unacceptable
because they are issued by two parties that violate the
United Nations Charter and international law through
their occupation of Syrian territories, their interference
in Syria’s internal affairs, their squandering of the
national wealth of its people and their support for
separatist militias and terrorist groups. They therefore
have no right whatsoever to claim that they are eager to
bring peace and stability to the region.
Secondly, proceeding from the readiness of the
Syrian Government to meet all constitutional obligations
on time and despite all the harsh circumstances it has
gone through over the years of the terrorist war, Syria
has continued to take the necessary measures to enable
the Syrian people to exercise their rights and duties on all
entitlements. On 18 September, Syria held elections for
local municipalities, where 59,000 candidates competed
over 19,086 seats. That reflects the broad democratic
popular participation with the aim to promoting
decentralization and strengthening local governance in
every village, region, city and governorate.
Thirdly, local settlement and national reconciliation
is the approach taken by the Syrian Government as a
way to normalize the situation throughout the country,
promote national unity and ensure cohesion in Syrian
society. In that context, 21 general amnesty decrees
were issued, the latest of which was Legislative Decree
No. 7 of 2022, issued by the President of the Republic,
which reflected the progress in the State’s ongoing
efforts to establish national reconciliation, social
harmony and achieve sustainable stability. The Syrian
State will continue its efforts pursuant to that approach,
which has proven to be effective on the ground and has
led many Syrians to return to their normal lives.
In parallel, Syria has positively addressed all
efforts and initiatives related to the political track
and supported the meetings held according to the
Astana format, the latest of which was the Tehran
summit meeting. Syria welcomed its outcome. We

S/PV.9163

have maintained contact with Special Envoy Pedersen,
who visited Damascus a few days ago and met with
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates. The
Minister called on the United Nations to assume its
role, in line with its Charter, to put an end to violations
of Syrian sovereignty resulting from the United States
occupation of parts of north-eastern Syria and the
Turkish occupation of parts of northern and northwestern Syria, as well as from the continued Israeli
occupation of the Golan and its repeated attacks on
critical facilities and infrastructure in Syria, which
threaten peace and security in the region.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, Syria
used to be one of the most stable and prosperous
countries in the world. It was self-sufficient with regard
to food and provided all basic needs to its people in a
manner unmatched in the region. However, the terrorist
war waged against it since 2011 changed that situation
and led to a grave humanitarian crisis that has been
exacerbated by unilateral coercive measures and the
plundering of Syria’s national wealth.
Syria is continuing its tremendous efforts to
improve the humanitarian situation on the ground,
including by providing all facilities to the United
Nations to improve and promote the delivery
of humanitarian aid to those in need, as well as
implementing the early-recovery projects, as stipulated
in resolution 2642 (2022). Despite some reservations
on that resolution, we still look forward to it being an
additional step towards improving the humanitarian
situation in Syria if Western countries are committed
to the full implementation of its provisions, stop
politicizing humanitarian and development work in
Syria and cease setting up obstacles and restrictions,
especially by insisting on the imposition of unilateral
coercive measures.
Unfortunately, the first meeting of the informal
interactive dialogue on the review and follow-up
of the implementation of resolution 2642 (2022)
clearly showed that Western countries continue their
politicized approach and the imposition of formats
aimed at manipulating and distorting the management
of that dialogue so that it was no longer interactive. My
delegation therefore hopes that the next meeting will
be a genuine and interactive dialogue that contributes
to a real and serious discussion about defining the
obstructions and difficulties facing the implementation
of resolution 2642 (2022) and how to overcome them

22-6517319/23

S/PV.9163

The situation in the Middle East

before the resolution’s mandate ends at the beginning
of next year.
I would like to briefly mention some aspects of the
humanitarian suffering of the Syrian people.
First is the harm caused by the inhumane siege
imposed on the Syrian population by the United
States and other Western countries due to the ongoing
imposition, extension and expansion of the scope of
their illegal coercive measures. My delegation stresses
the need to immediately lift those measures, as they are
inhumane and immoral.
Secondly, the United States occupation forces
continue to plunder Syrian oil and wheat. Hundreds of
trucks recently transported oil and wheat to northern
Iraq through illegal border crossings, with the
cooperation of the Kassad separatist militia. In that
regard, I would like to respond to what was said by the
representative of the United States of America and to
draw the attention of Council members to the fact that
the main base of the United States occupation forces
in north-east Syria is in the Al-Omar oilfield, which is
the largest in north-east Syria. That is clear evidence
that United States forces seek to plunder Syrian oil. The
estimated direct and indirect losses of the oil and gas
sector up to mid-2022 have so far reached $107 billion.
My delegation stresses the need to immediately end
that illegal American presence without preconditions
and provide compensation for those losses.
Thirdly, the Turkish regime and its mercenaries
continued to halt the operations of the Allouk water
station for the third consecutive month, depriving
nearly 1 million citizens in Al-Hasakah city and its
vicinity from the only source of water in a situation
of increased thirst and serious health pandemics,
especially the spread of cholera. My delegation stresses
that the solutions proposed to resolve the issue of water
cuts are useless and that, if the international community
fails to take immediate action to stop and condemn such
practices, it will lead to increased suffering for civilians
and the deaths of children, women and the elderly.
Fourthly, the spread of the cholera epidemic,
which Syria eradicated decades ago, has unfortunately
returned to pose an additional threat to the lives of
Syrians. That is the result of the continued use of water
as a weapon against civilians and the vast damage
caused to the water and sanitation infrastructure due to
the terrorist war launched against Syria. In that context,
my delegation notes that the Syrian Government is
20/23

25/10/2022

making great efforts to limit and prevent the spread of
the epidemic by raising awareness and providing health
education regarding cholera and ways to prevent it.
We also follow up on all reported cases and provide
treatment, while ensuring the safety of water sources and
addressing other causes of the disease. In that context,
we cooperate with United Nations organizations and
specialized agencies and provide them with all the
necessary facilities for conducting field visits, the most
recent of which was the visit to Ras Al-Ayn town in
Al-Hasakah governorate. However, the international
efforts failed due to Western countries insisting on
continuing their policies, with no regard for the lives of
women, children and those with special needs.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Jalil Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
thank the briefers for their insightful briefings.
The Syrian people are still suffering. The
humanitarian situation remains difficult, causing a
significant impact on the Syrian people. More needs
to be done in many areas to alleviate their suffering.
Providing humanitarian aid to those in need is critical,
and ensuring safe, rapid and unhindered access to aid
for those in need throughout Syria must be a priority in
this situation.
Preserving the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Syria is also crucial. It must be accomplished
as soon as possible. That can be done by ending the
foreign aggression against Syria, as well as the
country’s occupation, dealing with terrorist threats and
lifting the cruel and illegal sanctions imposed on the
Syrian people.
We support the Syrian Government’s full
cooperation with the United Nations and humanitarian
organizations involved in delivering aid in Syria. In that
context, we applaud the Syrian Government’s efforts
to improve the humanitarian situation on the ground,
including by providing assistance to the United Nations
to enhance the delivery of humanitarian aid to those
in need and implement the early-recovery projects
mandated by resolution 2642 (2022). Moreover, the
ongoing efforts to effectively implement resolution
2642 (2022) must be accelerated and be focused on
the early-recovery projects essential to people, such
as electricity, water, sanitation, health, education
and shelter.
22-65173

25/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East

We urge all stakeholders and donors to support the
full implementation of the resolution, stop politicizing
humanitarian and development efforts and remove
obstacles in their way, particularly by refraining from
imposing unilateral coercive measures. We regard the
first session of the informal interactive dialogue, which
was held on 26 September, as an initial and significant
step to review and follow up on the implementation
of resolution 2642 (2022). However, we believe that
politicizing such a meeting will only undermine the
resolution’s goal and its implementation. We hope that
the next meeting will be a real interactive dialogue,
contributing to serious discussion about identifying the
obstacles and difficulties facing the implementation of
the resolution and how to overcome them before the
mandate of the resolution expires early next year.
The only way to improve the situation in Syria is
to achieve a political solution through a Syrian-owned
and -led political process facilitated by United Nations
efforts. To that end, we support the convening of the
next meeting of the Constitutional Committee, as its
ongoing work is critical to reaching a political solution.
Iran supports the constructive engagement of the
parties with the Special Envoy and with the political
process in order to effectively settle the differences
concerning the Constitutional Committee meetings. In
that regard, we welcomed the Special Envoy’s recent
visit to Damascus, particularly his meeting with Syria’s
Foreign Minister on 17 October. We are maintaining our
contact with the Syrian Government, the Special Envoy
and our Astana format partners in order to facilitate the
next Committee meeting as soon as possible, and we
support Mr. Pedersen’s efforts in that regard.
The free movement of terrorist groups within
Syria’s territory where foreign forces are illegally
present is a danger to Syria’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity, as well as regional peace and security. As has
been said repeatedly, the fight against terrorism must
not be used to violate Syria’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We emphasize the need to end the illegal
presence of foreign forces in parts of Syria, which has
created ideal conditions for terrorist activity.
The Israeli regime’s aggression against Syria’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity continues unabated,
despite the Syrian Arab Republic’s repeated requests
for the Security Council to clearly condemn it. The
Council’s silence has emboldened the Israeli regime
to carry out its aggression and crimes more openly
and broadly, especially its systematic and intentional

S/PV.9163

targeting of civilians and vital infrastructure in Syria,
which is a flagrant violation of international law,
including international humanitarian law.
Preserving the national sovereignty and territorial
integrity of United Nations Member States is a
cornerstone of the Charter of the United Nations, on
which the international legal order is built. The Security
Council must stop applying a double standard and
condemn Israel’s aggression unequivocally, holding
that lawless regime accountable for its crimes, which
jeopardize regional peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Türkiye): I too would like to thank
Mr. Pedersen and Ms. Ghelani for their briefings.
The international community needs to step up
its efforts in support of a political solution in Syria.
The Syrian crisis should not be a frozen conflict.
Treating it as such would be a great injustice not only
to regional stability but also to the millions of Syrian
refugees scattered all over the world, especially in
neighbouring countries. We hope that the ninth session
of the Constitutional Committee takes place as soon as
possible under United Nations facilitation.
The Syrian opposition has displayed a constructive
attitude since the very beginning. The regime should
reciprocate that approach, abandon its intransigence
and actively engage on the political track in order to
resolve the conflict. If the people of Syria are to have
a future, there must be a Syrian-led political solution.
Türkiye will never give up on our Syrian brothers and
sisters and will continue to support them in their pursuit
of their fundamental rights and freedoms.
I want to repeat once again in this Chamber that
the Kurdistan Workers’ Party/People’s Protection
Units (PKK/YPG) terrorist organization poses a grave
threat not only to the territorial integrity of Syria but
also to my country’s national security. The agreements
of October 2019 that we concluded with the United
States and the Russian Federation have so far not been
fully implemented. Apart from Tal Afar and Manbij,
the 30-kilometre zone along our border has not been
cleared of terrorist elements. The PKK/YPG and
the so-called Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) are
misguidedly supported by some because of their claim
that they are fighting Da’esh. In reality, however, the
PKK/YPG and the SDF continue to attack Syrian

22-6517321/23

S/PV.9163

The situation in the Middle East

civilians and target Türkiye’s borders with the very
weapons provided to them to fight Da’esh. On average,
the SDF carries out 100 terrorist attacks every month in
northern Syria. It does not even bother to cover up its
crimes, but rather openly claims responsibility for those
attacks, publishing them on its social media pages. I ask
those who still support that terrorist organization — or
express concerns about to Türkiye’s determination to
eliminate that terrorist separatist threat — how long
they will continue to ignore its crimes.
Turkish counter-terrorism operations are carried
out to combat all terrorist organizations that threaten
our nation’s security, in the exercise of our inherent right
of self-defence, as reflected in Article 51 of the Charter
of the United Nations and in accordance with Security
Council resolutions on the fight against terrorism. We
are determined to continue that fight. As we have done
in the past, Türkiye is taking every possible measure
both to achieve that objective and to prevent harm to
Syrian civilians in the region.
Since the adoption of resolution 2642 (2022) in
July, there have been monthly cross-line deliveries to
the north-west. But we continue to stress that security
conditions must be improved to enable more regular and
expanded cross-line shipments to Idlib. As happened in
September, this past weekend before the most recent
cross-line delivery there were reports of artillery
fire by the regime forces. It is crucial that we call for
increased cross-line access to the local populations
while at the same time combating attacks that endanger
the delivery of that assistance. It will not be possible to
regularize cross-line access if it is being facilitated only
by Türkiye, the Syrian interim Government and local
actors. It is essential that the regime and its supporters
adhere to the commitments they made regarding the
security conditions on the ground within the framework
of the ceasefire arrangement of 5 February 2020.
We would also like to take this opportunity to
reiterate the long-standing request of the Syrian interim
Government for the Ras Al-Ayn and Tel Abyad regions
to benefit from United Nations humanitarian assistance.
We are aware of the plans that the United Nations made
in January and May to ensure humanitarian access,
neither of which could be implemented owing to the
negative attitude of the regime and its supporters.
Now, after three years, UNICEF and the World Health
Organization are finally expected to deliver medicines
and assistance for leishmaniasis and cholera through
cross-line assistance to that region very soon.
22/23

25/10/2022

In Syria, waterborne diseases are most common
in the Ras Al-Ayn and Tel Abyad regions as a result
of the blocking by the regime and the PKK/YPG of
the electricity supply to that area. There has been no
electricity transmission to those regions from the south
since February. The humanitarian system simply cannot
ignore that fact when addressing the issue of electricity
in Syria. Let me once again set the record straight on
the Allouk water station — water can only be supplied
from Allouk to the south if a sufficient amount and
voltage of electricity is supplied to Allouk from the
Al-Darbasiyah transformer, which is under the control
of the PKK/YPG terrorist organization. No electricity
was supplied to the Allouk station for weeks between
the third week of August and 19 October, which is one
of the reasons for the spread of the cholera epidemic
in the region. Currently, 18 of the 24 wells, as well as
three of the 12 water pumps, are active in the station
and water is being supplied to the south from Allouk.
There are no access problems at the station either.
Maintenance and repair teams from the south have
had regular access to Allouk — a total of 107 times so
far this year, to be precise. We expect similar access
to be provided to other infrastructure in the region,
especially the Al-Darbasiyah transformer and the Ayn
Al-Bayda water station.
We encourage an appropriate review of United
Nations humanitarian aid to Syria, in accordance with
needs. In that regard, we support early-recovery and
resilience projects. It is crucial that all in Syria benefit
fairly from early-recovery and resilience projects,
based on the needs assessment to be made by the
United Nations. We cannot afford to turn our backs
on those furthest behind. We expect a detailed list of
needs, prepared by the Syrian interim Government and
submitted in a timely manner to the United Nations, to
be duly integrated in the early-recovery and resilience
planning of the Organization.
The Syrian people are once again caught
between violence and starvation and an unforgiving
winter. According to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2022/775), 6 million people are in urgent need of
winter assistance in Syria this year, which amounts to
an increase of more than 30 per cent compared to last
year. I wish to stress once again that the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council since 2014 have
affirmed the territorial integrity, sovereignty and
political unity of Syria. They establish the control,
oversight, transparency and accountability of United
22-65173

25/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Nations aid and allow the Security Council to monitor
the process.
We cannot change the events of the past, but we can
change the course of the coming winter to save the lives
of the Syrian people, who have no other option but to
rely on the United Nations to get them through winter.
We urge the Council to continue to do what is right
and to preserve the indispensable United Nations crossborder mechanism beyond January 2023, as foreseen in
resolution 2642 (2022).

S/PV.9163

With regard to the hallucinatory statement made
by the representative of the Syrian regime, I will not
honour his delusional accusations with a response.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

22-6517323/23
