United Nations

S/PV.6096

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6096th meeting
Friday, 20 March 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Dabbashi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Jurica
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Rugunda
Sir John Sawers
Ms. Rice
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-27501 (E)

*0927501*

S/PV.6096

The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of the Czech Republic and the Sudan,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abdelmannan
(Sudan) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Kaiser (Czech Republic) took the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Rashid Khalikov,
Director of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Khalikov to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Rashid Khalikov, Director of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. I now
give him the floor.
Mr. Khalikov: I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to brief the Council on the humanitarian
situation in the northern Sudan.
In the two and a half weeks since the Government
of the Sudan decided to suspend the operations of three

2

national and expel 13 international non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) from the northern Sudan, the
United Nations has continued to advocate at all levels
for a reversal of this decision. The needs of vulnerable
people continue to be the first and main consideration
of this effort. The Secretary-General has been in close
contact with Arab and African leaders and members of
this Council, all of whom have expressed their concern
about the plight of the vulnerable people across the
Sudan. We are equally concerned that the decision has
resulted in very harsh treatment in Darfur and
Khartoum of staff members and organizations that had
been invited as guests of the Government of the Sudan
to assist the Sudanese people.
While we continue to press for the reversal of this
decision and to underscore its impact on the lives of
the Sudanese population, the United Nations and the
Government of the Sudan agreed to complete a series
of rapid assessments in the three Darfur states. Teams
have been tasked to ascertain the gaps in four lifesaving sectors: food aid, health and nutrition, shelter
and, lastly, water and sanitation. The teams have also
assessed the capacity available to cover the immediate
life-threatening needs. The findings will be finalized
this weekend with Government counterparts in
Khartoum. We should be able to speak more next week
about their impact on the wider assistance effort in
Darfur.
Since Assistant Secretary-General Bragg briefed
the Security Council on 6 March, there have been
significant signs of an erosion of humanitarian
response capacity, with a concurrent impact on the
lives of people in Darfur. We see this particularly in the
camps, but we believe that gaps may also be opening
up in rural areas where there is no longer a
humanitarian presence. For example, in Zam Zam
camp, near El Fasher, the departure of two key NGOs
leaves the remaining, smaller agencies to cope with
more than 36,000 newly-arrived internally displaced
persons. It may be recalled that these people were
forced to flee after fighting in Muhajariya in the South
Sudan. These began with clashes between the Sudan
Liberation Army-Minnawi and the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM), and led to fighting between the
Sudan Armed Forces and JEM that included air attacks
in and around the town by the Sudanese air force in
January and February. The departure of Médecins sans
Frontières-France from Nertiti in West Darfur has left
the Ministry of Health, UNICEF and the World Health

09-27501

S/PV.6096

Organization without an implementing partner to carry
out vaccination campaigns and treatment for the
meningitis outbreak in Jebel Mara. The loss of partners
has led to a similar situation in Kalma and prevented
the mass immunization campaign that has been so
desperately needed.
Overall, it has become clear that the loss of the
support provided to local NGOs and Government line
ministries has eroded operational management capacity
in key sectors. It is also troubling that the Government
has continued to seize humanitarian assets. In one
particular case, the Government has still not returned
control of a United Nations warehouse, containing
shelter and other items, to the United Nations. We are
grateful that the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation (UNAMID) in Darfur has helped the
humanitarian community protect many essential
supplies in the past two weeks, but it is regrettable that
this continues to be necessary, especially in areas
controlled by the Government.
I should also note that the impact of the decision
is now being felt elsewhere, in particular in the three
protocol areas of Blue Nile, Southern Kordofan and
Abyei. The delivery of humanitarian and development
assistance in those areas is crucial to the successful
implementation of the already fragile Comprehensive
Peace Agreement.
The loss of operational capacity is not the only
challenge we are facing on the ground. Insecurity
affecting beneficiaries and aid workers alike has been
increasing for quite some time. The kidnapping of two
Sudanese and three expatriate staff members of
Médecins sans Frontières in North Darfur temporarily
halted all operations in rural areas of that state. We are
grateful for the work of the Sudanese authorities to
help secure their release.
Regrettably, this abduction is part of a wider
pattern. Over the past two weeks, three separate attacks
on UNAMID saw one peacekeeper killed and three
others injured. We urge the Government to minimize
its rhetoric against foreigners in the media and to
ensure the safety and security of all United Nations and
associated staff. We also urge armed groups in Darfur
to take active steps to ensure that United Nations and
NGO staff stay safe.
On 15 March, we noted with concern remarks by
President Al-Bashir referring to the possible departure
of all foreign humanitarian organizations in the Sudan

09-27501

in a year’s time. The Humanitarian Coordinator will
take this up further with the Government.
As the conflict continues, and as many parts of
Darfur continue to be unstable or are under the
influence of the rebel groups, the work of the United
Nations and its partners will continue to be vital in
helping Sudanese citizens affected by conflict receive
the aid to which they have the right. We urge all
leaders in Darfur — State and non-State — to facilitate
the provision of life-saving assistance to civilians in
need.
There is no doubt that our ability to help the
people of Darfur and northern Sudan has been
seriously compromised. The current atmosphere of fear
and uncertainty facing all aid organizations is affecting
the assistance available to the people of Darfur. The
hard-won partnership between the Government and aid
organizations has been cast aside in a way that raises
questions as to how this relationship can move
forward. We must find a way to decrease tensions and
ensure the timely and sustainable provision of
protection and humanitarian assistance, based on the
humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality and
impartiality.
We urge the Government of the Sudan to use the
mechanisms established explicitly for the purpose of
resolving disagreements. We also believe that the
provisions of Sudanese law and the agreements with
the international community, including the Joint
Communiqué on the facilitation of humanitarian
assistance in Darfur, should be respected and used. We
want to engage in a transparent and productive
dialogue with the Government based on these laws and
agreements.
The safety and security of all aid workers —
national and international — and of commodities and
assets, whether owned by NGOs, United Nations
agencies or Member States, must be assured. We look
forward to the results of the joint assessment missions,
which will be important to show the scale of the gaps
and the capacity needed to fill them.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Khalikov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.
Mr. Abdelmannan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on

3

S/PV.6096

your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month. I also welcome the interest that
your presidency has focused on the affairs of our
African continent, most recently with respect to
support for the African Union’s peacekeeping
capacities. This demonstrates the wisdom of your
brotherly country, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, as it
assumes the presidency of the African Union, the
United Nations principal partner in Darfur.
My delegation has closely followed the
circumstances that have prompted the convening of
today’s meeting of the Security Council at a time when
the Council’s programme includes consultations on
Darfur, scheduled for 26 March, at which the Joint
African Union-United Nations Chief Mediator for
Darfur, Mr. Djibril Bassolé, will give a comprehensive
briefing on the political process and other relevant
actions concerning the settlement of the Darfur
problem.
It seems to me that the political track is not a
priority for some people who are seeking to fan the
flames and invent crises in an open attempt to divert
the international community’s attention from the broad
international and regional rejection of the legally and
politically flawed approach adopted by the so-called
International Criminal Court (ICC) against the
Sudanese State, Government and people. These people
have sought to fabricate and inflate a problem with
respect to the decision of the Government of the Sudan
to expel a number of non-governmental organizations
that have crossed every red line and dared to prejudice
the sovereignty of the country and take advantage of
the kindness of the Sudanese people.
As we have heard, these organizations are the
guests of the Sudan — a fact that my country has taken
fully into account. However, guests are bound by the
rules of hospitality to remain in the places specifically
assigned to them and not to enter the private rooms of
their host.
The decision of the Government of the Sudan is a
legitimate sovereign decision that we will never
reverse. It is not up for discussion, especially since the
Government of the Sudan has not expelled every
organization working in my country. The organizations
that have been expelled number 13 out of a total of
some 118 and represent a mere 7 per cent of those
working in the Sudan. Thus, it is false to depict the
situation as if the Sudan had expelled all organizations.

4

The decision made by the President of the Sudan
to “Sudanize” volunteer work in the country should be
supported, rather than denigrated, by the United
Nations and the Security Council. The decision is
based on the premise that the State should assume its
full responsibility in this matter.
I must stress here in this Chamber that the
Government of the Sudan reiterates its full respect for
all the agreements and treaties it has signed with the
United Nations to facilitate humanitarian work in
Darfur, including with respect to the fast-track
provision of emergency relief to those in need.
However, we call on the Security Council to address
the situation in Darfur in a more comprehensive
manner that takes into consideration the fact that the
political approach represents the optimal way to
resolve the problem. All other aspects — humanitarian,
security and even justice — are merely being exploited
by some as pretexts for the current action of the ICC.
That action now represents the main threat to any
political settlement. We are all aware of the statements
issued by the various rebel groups following the ICC’s
decision and the ensuing lack of security and
abductions of humanitarian workers providing essential
assistance.
The ICC’s decision came at a time when the
political process was on the verge of bearing fruit. We
reiterate our call on the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities to work towards the establishment of
peace and security in the Sudan, rather than raise new
issues and fabricate and inflate new crises in my
country. We hope that the Council will act
appropriately. We seek its support and assistance, and
not further problems or violations in this matter.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I am
grateful for the convening of today’s meeting, which is
timely given the very widespread concerns that my
Government and others have about the future
humanitarian situation in the Sudan following recent
decisions by the Government of that country.
I should like to begin by thanking the Director of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, Mr. Khalikov, for his briefing on the situation
in the Sudan as he sees it now. What he said raises
substantial concerns in our minds about the prospects
for the people in need in the Sudan. It is important to
keep in mind that we are talking about the lives of
millions of vulnerable people who need our support

09-27501

S/PV.6096

and who have been receiving it in recent years. The
issues concerning the humanitarian situation should not
be mixed up with wider political questions.
The expulsion of the 13 international
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and the
closure of three Sudanese NGOs are completely
unacceptable. We join the Secretary-General and the
leaders of many United Nations Member States in
calling on the Government of the Sudan to reverse its
decision. As the Secretary-General has said, expulsions
will cause irrevocable damage to humanitarian
operations in the Sudan. They also violate both the
humanitarian communiqués signed by the Sudan with
the United Nations and the provisions of the recent
Doha agreement, which the Sudan signed only a few
weeks ago.
The representative of the Sudan has said that only
13 out of 118 NGOs have been expelled and claimed
that that represents only 7 per cent. The reality, as I
think we all know, is that some 40 to 50 per cent of
humanitarian capacity in Darfur has now been
removed. All but a few of the 237 international staff
who used to work for the expelled NGOs in Darfur
have left the Sudan. The local staff they have left
behind remain vulnerable to duress and are not in a
position to sustain the relief operations. Supplies of
critical fuel and medicine are not being distributed; nor
are new supplies being ordered, putting at risk the
populations that the NGOs have been supplying for
several years.
In Darfur, within a period of weeks, this will
inevitably mean increased risk of disease and
malnutrition. The lack of water, food and shelter could
increase insecurity, particularly in large, volatile camps
such as the Kalma and Muhajariya camps, in southern
Darfur. We cannot rule out the possibility of this
leading to civil disturbances and mass movements of
internally displaced people.
These decisions have consequences beyond
Darfur. These could include the displacement of
internally displaced people in the Sudan across the
border into Chad. The decision to expel these NGOs
has an even bigger impact in the southern regions of
Blue Nile, Southern Kordofan and Abyie, where the 13
NGOs affected provided the great bulk of humanitarian
assistance.
The United Kingdom is the second-largest
bilateral donor to the Sudan. We have pledged

09-27501

£36 million to the Common Humanitarian Fund for this
year. It is our single largest humanitarian effort
anywhere in the world. We remain committed to
helping the people of the Sudan. But the actions of the
Government of the Sudan have made it harder for us to
do so in conformity with internationally accepted
principles.
We look forward to receiving the assessment
report being prepared by the United Nations and
officials of the Government of the Sudan on the impact
of the expulsions on the delivery of humanitarian
assistance in the Sudan. The Security Council will need
to return to this issue when the report is available.
One thing is certain: the United Kingdom will
hold the Government of the Sudan responsible for the
suffering that its decision causes. The people of Darfur
have suffered enough from five years of war. It is
inexplicable why their Government would want to add
unnecessarily to their misery. We stand ready to work
with all concerned to find ways to ensure that
vulnerable people in Darfur and other parts of the
Sudan continue to receive the humanitarian assistance
they desperately need.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank Mr. Rashid Khalikov of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) for the information he has provided this
afternoon, which itself is justification for the holding
of this meeting.
The decision by the Government of the Sudan to
halt the operations of the 13 non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) concerned, which provide
humanitarian assistance in northern Sudan, including in
Darfur, is, to say the least, unfortunate. That decision
not only inappropriately links the humanitarian
situation with a decision by an international tribunal; it
also jeopardizes the lives of a considerable number of
people and opens the door to a crisis of major
proportions by creating obstacles to access for
international assistance. That jeopardizes the lives of
large parts of the population, in particular those of
vulnerable groups such as women and children.
Mexico is also concerned about the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel on the ground,
given the repeated incidents of intimidation and threats
reported by OCHA. Mexico unreservedly condemns
those incidents.

5

S/PV.6096

In order to address the situation in the Sudan as
comprehensively as possible, my delegation urgently
calls upon the Government of the Sudan to reverse its
decision, allow the return of the non-governmental
organizations that have been expelled and facilitate and
guarantee adequate access for humanitarian aid and
assistance to the civilian population, in line with the
norms of international humanitarian law.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I would
like to thank the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Assistance (OCHA) for its briefing this
afternoon.
We have all just heard a truly troubling report: a
depiction of a crisis created by one man that threatens
the lives more than one and a half million men, women
and children. The United States strongly condemns the
Government of Sudan’s expulsion of 13 international
aid organizations and its closure of three Sudanese aid
groups. By expelling aid groups, the Sudanese
Government is denying water, food, health care and
sanitation to people it drove out of their homes in the
first place, thereby exacerbating an already dire
humanitarian crisis in Darfur. Let me be clear: this is
not a made-up crisis, as the representative of Sudan
would have the Council believe. On the contrary, this is
a very real and urgent crisis of his Government’s own
making. President Al-Bashir and his Government are
responsible, and must be held accountable, for each
and every death caused by these callous and calculated
actions. The Sudanese Government made this decision
and owns its consequences, which will not only cost
lives but leave the Government locked deeper in an
isolation of its own making.
Surely, no person of conscience can remain
unmoved by the untold misery and death that this cutoff of desperately needed food, water and medicine
will inevitably inflict upon millions of innocents
already huddled in the camps of Darfur. Surely, we all
believe that this body must act on their behalf. And
surely, we all believe that we should speak with one
voice in the face of such suffering.
We urge the international community to press the
Government of Sudan to reverse its expulsion edict and
to ensure it does nothing to worsen an already grave
situation. President Al-Bashir created this crisis, and he
should rectify it immediately. The United States, for its
part, is working urgently, closely and intensively with
United Nations institutions and other Member States to

6

try to reverse the Government of Sudan’s expulsion
order. But today the Council heard the Sudanese
representative say that his Government would never
reverse this order.
The United States believes that Member States
and the Council must never stand by idly while over a
million people are at imminent risk of death. Time is of
the essence. The United Nations has already reported
that it has become significantly more difficult to
provide food to already malnourished Sudanese
children.
We also believe that the new shortfalls in water
have made meningitis more widespread in the Jebel
Marra area and in the Kalma camp. On top of that, the
lack of health care is preventing meningitis patients
from receiving proper treatment. When treated, the
death rate for those with meningitis can be one in ten
or lower. Left untreated, the death rate jumps to one in
two. We remain deeply concerned that meningitis and
other infectious diseases will continue to spread inside
camps and other areas that now lack reliable access to
water, food and basic medical services.
We are also facing a growing humanitarian crisis
in the Zam Zam camp, in north Darfur. Resources there
have already been stretched to the limit, and now the
camp is struggling to house more than 36,000
internally displaced people fleeing the recent fighting
in south Darfur between rebels and the Government.
We urge the Sudanese Government, in close
consultation
with
the
United
Nations
and
non-governmental organizations, to address water,
housing and other problems at Zam Zam and the other
camps across Darfur, before an already dire situation
deteriorates any further.
The United States supports the urgent efforts by
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), the World Food Programme and
others to provide relief now, including desperately
needed clean water. But make no mistake: these efforts
cannot even begin to fill the gap left by the expelled
aid groups.
With every passing day, President Al-Bashir has
used increasingly menacing rhetoric to further escalate
the crisis. By doing so, he has jeopardized the safety of
the remaining brave men and women from all across
the world who provide urgently needed aid to the
Sudanese people, and he has further jeopardized the

09-27501

S/PV.6096

lives of innocent civilians in the camps, who depend on
that aid.
Meanwhile, UNAMID continues to operate under
dangerous conditions. The 17 March ambush of
UNAMID peacekeepers in South Darfur, which left
one of them dead, only underscores the risks they
continue to run in Darfur. We offer our deepest
condolences to the peacekeeper’s family and to the
men and women of UNAMID. We reaffirm the
commitment of the United States to support them as
UNAMID implements its important mandate.
The United States will continue to work closely
with the United Nations, humanitarian aid groups and
others to relieve the suffering of the people of Darfur.
Since 2004, we have provided nearly $4 billion for
humanitarian programmes in Sudan and eastern Chad.
During fiscal year 2008 and thus far in fiscal year
2009, we have provided nearly $1.25 billion for the
people of Sudan.
We continue to be proud of the efforts of the
United States Agency for International Development
(USAID), which has provided more than $720 million
in humanitarian aid in Darfur in fiscal year 2008 and
thus far in 2009. But, at a stroke, the expulsions
eliminated some 54 per cent of USAID’s non-food
programmes in Darfur, cutting off life-saving efforts to
provide health, water and sanitation. The expulsions
also eliminated an estimated 40 per cent of the delivery
capacity of USAID’s main partner in providing food
aid in Darfur, the World Food Programme.
We sincerely hope that this body will finally
come together as one to protect the people of Darfur.
The United States is determined to pursue long-term
peace in the Darfur region, ensure that humanitarian
aid is delivered and spare innocent civilians from
further harm. We urge other members of the Council to
join us in this urgent work. There are things upon
which we can, and will, disagree. But, surely, saving
the lives of desperate and innocent civilians being
deliberately deprived of water, food and medicine is
not among them. The Government of Sudan created
this crisis. It now must act to end it.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I too would like to thank Mr. Khalikov for his
briefing on the humanitarian situation in Darfur, which
is without doubt one of the world’s greatest emergency
situations.

09-27501

I would like to associate myself with those who
have condemned the attacks against the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), including the one on 17 March in Nyala,
which resulted in the death of a Nigerian Blue Helmet,
and the one on 9 March on a UNAMID vehicle in
El Geneina, which injured four troops. We hope that
Sudanese officials will ensure that the perpetrators of
those attacks are arrested. We call upon all Sudanese
actors to cooperate fully with UNAMID, which is in
the Sudan to maintain peace and assist the most
vulnerable. We must ensure that UNAMID’s
deployment is completed quickly.
I would also like to call on all parties to
cooperate in order to prevent a worsening of the
humanitarian situation in Darfur. We once again
deplore the decision by the Government of the Sudan
to suspend the activities of several Sudanese
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and to expel
more than a dozen international NGOs that are carrying
out crucial humanitarian activities and which have an
international
reputation
for
seriousness
and
impartiality.
Along with the Secretary-General, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and
all the countries of the European Union, France hopes
that the Sudanese authorities will reverse their decision
and refrain for further expulsions. The operations of
the NGOs affected by the Government’s decision
account for more than half of the humanitarian effort in
Darfur. As OCHA’s representative has indicated, that
decision threatens to deprive more than 1 million
people of food, health care and drinking water. In that
connection, we look forward to the conclusions of the
joint assessment currently being carried by OCHA and
the Sudanese authorities to more precisely determine
all the consequences of that decision that once again
puts the people concerned in a situation of unbearable
deprivation.
In that regard, I would like to commend
UNAMID and the agencies of the United Nations
system — including the World Food Programme,
UNICEF, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the World Health
Organization — who are doing their best to avert an
even graver humanitarian tragedy.
We regret the abruptness and speed with which
Sudanese Government agencies have implemented the

7

S/PV.6096

expulsion order, including harassment and intimidation
against NGOs still on the ground. We consider it
essential to ensure the protection of the 6,000 people
who make up the national staff of the NGOs that have
been expelled. Clearly, it is also very important to
protect the property of the expelled NGOs.
The continuation of humanitarian efforts in
Darfur is essential for the nearly 4 million people who
depend upon them, in particular the 2.5 million
displaced persons. The challenge is to protect the
people of Darfur. That requires that all parties,
beginning with Sudanese officials, act responsibly
regardless of the circumstances. In that regard, I should
like to emphasize the crucial need for all parties to the
conflict, including the authorities in Khartoum, to
respect the binding norms of international
humanitarian law, in particular those relating to
humanitarian access to victims and the protection of
humanitarian staff.
The issue of humanitarian assistance and the
issue of international criminal justice must absolutely
be kept apart. France reaffirms its support for
international criminal justice and its independence, and
reiterates the Sudan’s obligation to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court, in accordance with
resolution 1593 (2005). To punish its own population is
certainly not the correct response. As the representative
of the Sudan has himself said, we too believe in the
value of dialogue and the need to provide a political
solution to this crisis. We also believe that combating
impunity cannot be delinked from the search for peace
in Darfur, or anywhere else in the world. We therefore
look forward to our 26 March discussion with Joint
Chief Negotiator Bassolé.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this afternoon’s meeting. We are also
grateful to the representative of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for the
update on humanitarian situation in the Sudan, and in
Darfur in particular.
We note with deep concern the grave
humanitarian situation in Darfur, particularly after the
decision of the Government of the Sudan to revoke the
registration and licences of major humanitarian
non-governmental organizations (NGOs). We have
already witnessed serious consequences since the
previous briefing, on 6 March, including the closing of
some medical facilities and a shortage of water in some

8

camps. It is clear that the damage will only increase.
We are also concerned about what the food situation
will be after the current stockpile is exhausted.
OCHA’s briefing has made it abundantly clear
that United Nations humanitarian programmes
themselves largely rely on those NGOs for the delivery
of assistance, and that the United Nations and the
remaining NGOs cannot replace the significant loss
caused by this decision. NGOs are the implementing
partners of the United Nations. It is impossible for the
United Nations to compensate for their absence and
replace the work that was done by the expelled NGOs.
We understand that it is the intention of the
Government of the Sudan to increase the presence of
national NGOs to replace their work, but that will take
a long time to implement, and the most vulnerable
affected persons need urgent assistance.
Japan is one of the major donors to the Sudan. On
8 March, just 12 days ago, Japan decided to extend
additional assistance, including a contribution of about
$34 million, to support the 2009 workplan for the
Sudan of the United Nations and its partners. To
implement this assistance, we need international and
national NGOs as partners. We strongly urge the
Government of the Sudan to reconsider its decision.
We are also concerned about the remark by the
Government of the Sudan about the so-called
Sudanizing of relief operations. Although we are not
clear yet about what it means, we cannot envisage
implementation of assistance at such a substantial scale
without the involvement and monitoring of the United
Nations.
The activities of humanitarian NGOs in the
Sudan are covered by the Joint Communiqué between
the Government and the United Nations on the
facilitation of humanitarian activities. The Security
Council, in its resolution 1828 (2008), demanded the
full implementation of the Joint Communiqué and also
that the Government and all armed groups ensure the
full, safe and unhindered access of humanitarian
organizations and relief personnel. I believe that it is
our common responsibility as members of the Security
Council to ensure the full implementation of its earlier
decisions. If we fail in fulfilling this function, we must
be accountable to the international community as to
why it is so and who is responsible for inaction.
There is no justification at all for the Government
of the Sudan to drastically curtail critical life-saving

09-27501

S/PV.6096

food, water and medical support to millions of its own
people. Such behaviour would make the least
convincing argument for supporting the position of the
Government. We appeal to the Government of the
Sudan to honour its commitment and act in a
responsible manner. We join the Secretary-General in
his call to the Government of the Sudan to immediately
take necessary actions to alleviate the situation.
The decision of the International Criminal Court
will not justify any change in the obligation of the
Government of the Sudan to comply with Security
Council resolutions, to avoid impeding humanitarian
assistance, as referred to in resolution 1828 (2008), and
to ensure the safety and security of civilians and
United Nations personnel. It is important that the
Government of the Sudan and all rebel movements
refrain from any action that would aggravate the
humanitarian and security situation on the ground.
The Security Council should continue to monitor
carefully future developments, including the peace
process, the deployment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the humanitarian
and security situation and the question of impunity.
The most important thing for us is that the Council
members make the utmost effort to address the issue
responsibly and to act in unison as much as possible.
We are carefully following the joint assessments
by the United Nations and the Government of the
Sudan of humanitarian needs in Darfur. We very much
look forward to receiving a briefing on the outcome of
the assessment next week.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Like others, I
would like to thank Mr. Rashid Khalikov for updating
us on the humanitarian situation in the Sudan.
The continued delivery of humanitarian
assistance in the Sudan is vital to the survival of a
significant part of the population of Darfur. Austria is
therefore deeply concerned by the decision of the
Government of the Sudan to expel 13 international
humanitarian non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
and to revoke the licenses of three Sudanese NGOS.
We are also gravely concerned by recent reports that
the Sudanese Government has called for all
international aid groups to leave the Sudan within one
year. We have already heard — and the point has
already been made — that the aid organizations
affected by these decisions are responsible for some
40 to 50 per cent of the aid provided to Darfur. These

09-27501

organizations therefore provide an
lifeline to many Sudanese civilians.

indispensable

The point has already been made that over
1 million civilians are immediately affected by the
decision to expel these NGOs. The United Nations
depends on the NGOs as its partners. The expulsions
leave behind life-threatening gaps in assistance for the
population in Darfur, particularly at a time when there
have been outbreaks of meningitis in Southern Darfur,
including in Kalma camp. Over time, the impact of the
expulsion of NGOs will be dramatic in such fields as
water and sanitation, health care and food distribution.
The loss of these vital aid services could lead to a
serious deterioration of the humanitarian situation and
to greater population movements throughout Darfur
and across the border to Chad.
In accordance with the call made by the European
Union just a few days ago, we therefore appeal to the
Government of the Sudan to urgently reconsider its
decision and to ensure that humanitarian assistance to
all people in need in the Sudan be guaranteed. We are
also sure that the United Nations will do everything in
its power to fill some of the gaps left behind by the
expelled NGOs, but we know that it is not possible at
this point for the Organization, as the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has made clear,
to fill all these gaps. In this situation, we believe that it
is essential to recall that it is the Government of the
Sudan that has the primary responsibility to ensure the
provision of basic services, in particular food, shelter
and health care, for its civilian population.
Other speakers have already referred to the
number of attacks on peacekeeping personnel and
humanitarian workers and to incidents of banditry that
have greatly increased in recent times. All parties to
the conflict need to show restraint in the current
situation. All sides must abide by their obligation to
protect the civilian population under applicable rules of
human rights and international humanitarian law. As
far as the Government of the Sudan is concerned, we
expect it to ensure the safety and security of all United
Nations personnel and humanitarian workers and to
refrain from any form of intimidation towards the
human rights community in the Sudan.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
We thank Mr. Rashid Khalikov, Director of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
for his briefing today. China has closely followed the

9

S/PV.6096

humanitarian situation in Darfur. We look forward to
the report to be submitted by the joint OCHAGovernment of the Sudan assessment teams, which
will give us a better understanding of the overall
humanitarian situation in Darfur. It is our hope that the
parties concerned will work together to seek and
achieve an early resolution of the crisis and thereby
ensure the unimpeded provision of humanitarian
assistance to Darfur.

We await an additional detailed assessment of the
situation in the country following the visit of the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. Holmes. All necessary humanitarian assistance
must be provided to the population of Darfur. The
complex humanitarian situation in Darfur is caused by
the armed confrontation between the Darfur opposition
and the Government of the Sudan, banditry and the
violence resulting from the actions of armed groups.

The issue of Darfur is multifaceted and complex.
It encompasses such areas as the political process, the
deployment of peacekeepers, humanitarian relief,
justice and economic reconstruction. All activities in
these fields are inextricably interrelated. Recent events
have shown that the issuance by the International
Criminal Court of an arrest warrant for the Sudanese
President has already adversely affected the situation in
Darfur. It is our hope that the parties concerned will
exercise restraint in order to prevent the escalation of
tensions and avoid a further negative impact on the
political process, the deployment of peacekeepers and
the provision of humanitarian assistance in Darfur.

It is necessary to ensure that the parties to the
conflict pursue all efforts to stabilize the situation.
Normalizing the humanitarian situation will be
impossible without a conclusive political solution
backed by the peacekeeping efforts of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
That is an integrated way to resolve the Darfur crisis,
and the international community must work together to
promote it.

We maintain that the Security Council should
have a comprehensive discussion of the issue of Darfur
in order to develop an integrated strategy and to
advance in a balanced manner in its work to find a
comprehensive solution to the issue.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today’s meeting of the Security Council is
very symptomatic. It was convened in haste and
without due preparation, and underscores the absence
of a coordinated strategy on Darfur on the part of the
international community and the Security Council that
would assiduously address the political solution,
peacekeeping and the search for justice. If what we are
witnessing here is the expression of a certain policy, it
is a dangerous one that will, unfortunately, lead first
and foremost to the suffering of the people of Darfur
and other regions of the Sudan.
We warmly welcome the efforts of the
humanitarian organizations and the United Nations in
Darfur to provide humanitarian assistance to civilians
who have suffered as a result of the conflict. As a result
of those efforts, we have been able to save thousands
of lives in Darfur. We believe that we should continue
dialogue with the Government of the Sudan regarding
activities of international non-governmental agencies
on that country’s territory.

10

Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
At the outset, we would like thank the Director of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for
the briefing that he has just given us. When the need
for a debate on the humanitarian situation in the Sudan
arose, we saw no objection to it, aware as we are of the
difficult humanitarian situation currently prevailing in
Darfur and of the need to find a rapid solution to it.
However, in order to take full stock of the
realities in the field, we felt that it would have been
better to wait until next week for a comprehensive
assessment of the difficulties of humanitarian
assistance in Darfur on the basis of the reliable
information that we await from the assessment mission,
including that which the Joint Chief Mediator, who is
shortly expected in New York, could give us. We hope
that those joint assessments will enable us to envisage
the most appropriate solutions to address the current
difficulties.
The lessons that we draw once again from the
humanitarian situation in Darfur are that the concern to
do justice must not create further suffering for the
civilian population. We must recognize that the
deplorable situation cannot be separated from the
decision of the International Criminal Court to
prosecute the President of the Sudan.
For its part, the Government of Burkina Faso,
which deeply deplores the expulsion of the
non-governmental organizations by the Sudanese
authorities, will continue to encourage and to urge the

09-27501

S/PV.6096

Government of the Sudan to find the ways and means
to satisfactorily respond to the humanitarian situation
in Darfur. We can affirm that contacts continue in that
direction, and of course we hope that they will be
successful. The main issue is to restore confidence
between the Sudan authorities and humanitarian actors
to alleviate the suffering of the population of Darfur.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I join my colleagues in
thanking Mr. Khalikov for the briefing that he has
given on behalf of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. It is also good that a
representative of the Government of the Sudan is
present to give us the Sudan’s point of view.
The humanitarian situation in the Sudan is clearly
very grave, given many years of strife and conflict, a
difficult terrain, an environment with an already weak
social infrastructure; and a situation that has been
further complicated by the recent indictment of
President Al-Bashir. That has obviously focused his
and his Government’s attention more on the issue of
the indictment and hence less on the humanitarian
crisis facing the country.
While that is going on, the situation has been
further worsened by the recent expulsion of the
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) that were
heavily involved in humanitarian work in the Sudan. It
is true that, because of the many years of strife, many
have been crowded into camps. When many people are
crowded into camps, the chances of the spread of
disease increase and hence mortality among children,
in particular, and among other vulnerable groups
heavily increases. It is therefore no wonder that we are
now seeing more deaths from meningitis, malnutrition,
dehydration and simple diseases that would have
otherwise been treated if we had reasonable medical
services on the ground.
I do not share the view of my colleague from the
Sudan that because only 13 NGOs have been
expelled — and that therefore only 7 per cent of the
NGO community has been affected — it is a negligible
matter. What we know is that the NGOs affected are
well known, big international organizations whose
capacity and effectiveness have been very well tested
in many trying situations. Thus, the fact that only 13
may have been expelled does not mean that their
contribution is small. In fact, we have received
information that the expulsion may have affected 50 to
60 per cent of the humanitarian work that is going on.

09-27501

Because of that difficult situation, I call on the
Government of the Sudan, in the interests of its own
people, who have suffered many, many years of war
and deprivation, to take urgent action to review the
decision to expel those humanitarian agencies in order
to ensure that the people who are in the camps, who are
on the ground and who are suffering have access to
water, food and basic health services.
I agree that we will have a more comprehensive
discussion of this matter next week. Nevertheless, the
principle of being kept regularly informed of the
humanitarian situation in the Sudan is welcome, and I
would like to call on my colleagues in the Sudan and
the Government of the Sudan to be responsive to the
concerns of the international community, which are
also the concerns of the people of the Sudan.
Mr. Jurica (Croatia): First of all, let me thank
Mr. Rashid Khalikov once again for his briefing on the
grave humanitarian situation on the ground in Darfur.
Yet again and after only a short period of time, we are
meeting to hear about things going from bad to worse
in Darfur. After hearing the news about four
peacekeepers being wounded near El Geneina last
week, now we are also informed of a peacekeeper’s
death near Nyala. All of this is taking place in the
midst of the latest humanitarian crisis created by the
Government of the Sudan, which happened when they
decided to expel 13 major foreign aid agencies and
three Sudanese agencies, leaving more than 1 million
people out in the open, vulnerable to hunger, disease
and other perils. This is completely unacceptable.
Moreover, we fear that this could lead to further
difficulties in neighbouring Chad by causing a possible
fresh influx of refugees from Darfur. We keenly await
the assessment reports from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs which we expect
to be presented next week.
Again, instead of opting for a political solution
and working with the international community on
finding long-lasting solutions for a sustainable peace,
Mr. Al-Bashir and his Government, regrettably, did not
heed the calls for peace, instead opting for a worsening
of the already destabilized situation.
The Government of the Sudan has a
responsibility to protect not only its people but also the
international peacekeepers and humanitarian workers
who are in the Sudan to help the people of the Sudan.
There must be accountability for gross violations of

11

S/PV.6096

international humanitarian law, and impunity cannot be
tolerated. The Government of the Sudan must revoke
its inhumane and unacceptable decision.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): We thank the Secretariat for
its interim briefing on the humanitarian situation in
Darfur.
Like all other members of the Council and of the
international community, Turkey is concerned about
the humanitarian situation in that troubled region.
Owing to circumstances not of their own making,
millions of innocent people in Darfur have been
displaced and are in constant need of humanitarian aid
in almost every conceivable form. That is a huge
undertaking, and one that must continue unhindered as
delays and disruptions in the effective flow of
humanitarian aid can potentially have very serious
consequences.
That is why Turkey believes that we must all
continue to urge the Sudanese Government to reinstate
the licences of the non-governmental organizations in
question. We very much hope that this can be possible
without any delay, for the present situation is
extremely grave and cannot wait. Meanwhile, as we
discussed during our most recent consultations on this
subject, the Secretariat must have developed a plan that
addresses the critical question of how the gap that has
been created by the decision of the Sudanese
Government can be filled in the short term. In that
regard, we look forward to receiving a comprehensive
briefing from the Secretariat with more precise
information and recommendations, once the joint
assessment that is ongoing between the United Nations
and the Sudanese authorities is completed. Turkey
believes that the Council will be in a better position to
appraise the evolving humanitarian situation in Darfur
once all the information from the Secretariat team on
the ground has been received and analysed.
Turkey places great emphasis on the humanitarian
dimension of the Darfur crisis. For its part, Turkey
extends
significant
bilateral
and
multilateral
humanitarian assistance to the Sudanese people, and
we will continue to do so. We will also continue to
support the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan in every way we can.
We must also accept the fact that the
humanitarian situation cannot realistically be
decoupled from the political and regional realities. As

12

we have said on a number of occasions before, the
Council must be able to take a holistic and strategic
approach to this very sensitive question. We have to be
able to address all the dynamics that are in play. Thus,
we look forward to our meeting with the Joint Chief
Negotiator, Mr. Bassolé, next week.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): We thank
Mr. Rashid Khalikov of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs for his briefing.
We are concerned about the worsening
humanitarian situation and rising security threats in
Darfur, in the Sudan. In conflict areas, civilians
become the most vulnerable group, whether in
Afghanistan, Gaza, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo or elsewhere. Viet Nam has always maintained
that the protection of civilians and their livelihood
must be a priority that all parties concerned must take
into careful consideration.
While the fact that 13 non-governmental
organizations operating in the Sudan have to leave the
country is regrettable, it cannot be denied that the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation and the
political process in Darfur and in the Sudan in general,
has come about as a result of the decision of the
International Criminal Court to indict the President of
the Sudan. In the course of the Council’s deliberations
on the Sudan situation in general, and that of Darfur in
particular, Viet Nam, together with many other
delegations, reflecting the view of many United
Nations Member States, has warned the Council about
this unfortunate, but otherwise well-predicted, negative
development.
Viet Nam has been a consistent and strong
supporter of the struggle against impunity. We have
always maintained that those committing crimes,
especially the most serious crimes such as the crime of
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity,
must be duly punished — rather sooner than later. At
the same time, concerning the situation in the Sudan in
general and in Darfur in particular, we have pointed to
the need to maintain a balance between promoting the
political process and waging the fight against impunity,
in the interest of long-term peace and security for the
Sudan and for Darfur and in the interest of the very
survival and livelihood of millions of Sudanese,
including those in Darfur, suffering as a result of the
protracted hostilities and the worsening humanitarian
situation.

09-27501

S/PV.6096

In the face of the worsening situation, we call
upon all parties concerned to exercise restraint and
refrain from any action that may lead to further
complications. We call upon them to cooperate to
improve the humanitarian situation; ensure the safety
of the civilian population, personnel of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
United Nations staff, as well as those doing lofty
humanitarian work in the country; and resume the
peace process, with a view to achieving a
comprehensive political solution to the issue of the
Sudan and Darfur, in the best interest of the people of
the Sudan and Darfur, and of peace and stability in the
region.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
too wish to thank Mr. Rashid Khalikov for his briefing
this afternoon.
My country welcomes the convening of this
meeting. We are not seeking to punish a regime that is
sinking in its own errors and needs no one’s help to do
so. The only purpose of this meeting is to ensure
visibility for a humanitarian crisis of great
magnitude — for a humanitarian situation that is
endangering the health and very lives of hundreds of
thousands of human beings. Through this meeting we
are calling upon the international community and upon
world public opinion to mobilize in order to prevent
the future growth of what is already a significant crisis
and the future implications of actions taken in response
to judicial circumstances that have nothing whatsoever
to do with the lives of these hundreds of thousands of
people, whose very existence is now under threat.
The magnitude of the crisis has yet to be seen,
thanks to the effectiveness of the efforts of the
humanitarian organizations that have now been
expelled. Tomorrow, malnutrition, hunger, disease and
the deaths of many of these people will bring home to
us the true scope of this crisis.
On 8 March, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs estimated that 1.5 million people
no longer had access to food or health services; that
drinking water, basic sanitation and hygiene services
would no longer be provided to 1.16 million; that food
would no longer be distributed to 1.1 million; and that
4,000 children would no longer receive assistance to
address malnutrition.
The expulsion of 13 humanitarian organizations
that were providing services in the country has paved

09-27501

the way for a great collective tragedy through the
intentional abandonment of many people. Preventing
those people’s access to humanitarian assistance could
result in their deaths, which could constitute another
violation of international humanitarian law. The Sudan
must remember that it is obliged to protect its
population, that it must honour the commitments it has
made and that it must consider revoking the decision to
expel international humanitarian organizations. The
Sudanization of relief is not credible. Replacing the
assistance provided by nearly 8,000 humanitarian
workers organized to do so is no easy task.
Finally, I am grateful for the efforts of the United
Nations, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and the World Food Programme,
which are exploring ways to meet the urgent
humanitarian needs in the Sudan and to prevent further
damage.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Chairperson of the
African Union.
We would have preferred to defer the briefing by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) until the completion of the joint missions
carried out by the Government of the Sudan and the
United Nations to assess the humanitarian situation in
Darfur, so that we might have a fuller picture of the
situation. Furthermore, if the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs were here, all delegations
would have had the opportunity to ask him questions
and receive direct responses. We also wish that those
Council members who insisted that this meeting be
held had been as enthusiastic and persistent when
aircraft were bombing civilians in Gaza, who were
deprived of food and medicine as a result of a blockade
during that aggression and for as long as two years
before it.
My country, as a neighbour of the Sudan and as
current Chair of the African Union, is closely following
developments in the humanitarian situation in Darfur.
While we regret the decision by the Government of the
Sudan to expel a number of humanitarian
organizations, we understand the circumstances in
which that decision was made. We realize the
importance of cooperation in Darfur among the United
Nations, the Government of the Sudan, the African
Union, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid

13

S/PV.6096

Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the League of
Arab States to facilitate the safe and unhindered
delivery of humanitarian assistance to those in need.
We hope that the Government’s decision, which has
caused a number of humanitarian organizations to
suspend their activities, will not affect the people and
that those organizations will be replaced by others —
possibly national ones — as soon as possible. We are
confident that the Government will take care of its
people in Darfur, who are Sudanese citizens, not — as
some here are attempting to imply — citizens of any
member of the Council.
Like others, we are awaiting the results of the
joint assessment missions by the United Nations and
the Government of the Sudan, and we hope that we will
receive their report as soon as possible. Regrettably,
OCHA itself, which we had hoped would be
represented at today’s meeting, is also awaiting those
results. We believe that the Government’s decision
concerning a number of humanitarian organizations is
one of the expected negative effects of the decision by
the International Criminal Court to issue an arrest
warrant against Sudanese President Omer Al-Bashir.
We cannot separate the two issues, and we have no
doubt that the Court’s decision has created a new
reality in the Sudan. As we have stated before,
imposing the Court’s procedures at the expense of the
peace process will neither do justice nor put an end to
the conflict in Darfur; however, it could threaten the
stability of the Sudan and the entire region and
undermine the whole political process, both in Darfur
and in South Sudan.
While that does not mean that we do not want
those responsible for crimes to be brought to justice,
we believe it is essential to create an atmosphere
conducive to achieving peace. Rather than taking
measures such as the Court’s decision, which, under
the pretext of doing justice, could complicate peace
efforts and increase instability, we merely seek to
support the political process through other means. That
is what why the African Union, a major partner of the
United Nations, has taken a number of decisions —
including, most recently, at its summit in Addis
Ababa — highlighting the need to invoke article 16 of
the Rome Statute.
Regrettably, the Council has yet to respond to
those and other decisions taken at the regional level,
including by the League of Arab States. The Sudan
needs international efforts that are in consonance

14

with — and not in contradiction of — its national
efforts and the efforts of the African Union to avert the
negative effects of the lack of security and the current
instability in the country.
We do not believe that the Security Council needs
more affirmations of the possible negative
consequences for the stability of Sudan. Does it need
more evidence of the repercussions that the decision of
the Pre-Trial Chamber of the International Criminal
Court has had? We have all heard the statements by
certain rebel groups in the Sudan. They in themselves
constitute a warning to us here in the Security Council.
It is indeed urgent that the Security Council
respond to the various national and regional concerns
and act to invoke article 16 of the Rome Statute in
response to the decision of the African Union that was
adopted at its most recent summit and the recent
decision of the League of Arab States.
We know that the relations of some members of
this Council with the Sudan are tense. This is quite
normal in international relations and indeed acceptable,
but what is neither natural nor normal is that the
Security Council be used as a forum to settle accounts
with the Government of the Sudan or any other
Government. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya calls on all
member States to refrain from such actions so that they
do not further damage the credibility of this Council.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council. The next speaker is the representative
of the Czech Republic, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Kaiser (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). First
of all, I would like to thank Mr. Rashid Khalikov of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for
his comprehensive briefing.
Allow me to inform the Council that on
16 March, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
European Union met in Brussels and adopted
conclusions in which they called upon the Government
of the Sudan to urgently reconsider its decision to
expel 13 international humanitarian non-governmental
organizations (NGOs)and revoke the licences of three
local NGOs. The Ministers also called on the
Government of the Sudan to ensure that humanitarian
assistance to the most vulnerable people in the Sudan
be continuously guaranteed, guided by the principles of
human rights and international humanitarian law.

09-27501

S/PV.6096

Moreover, the Ministers recalled the declaration by the
Presidency on behalf of the European Union. In this
declaration, the EU expresses its belief that the
continued delivery of humanitarian assistance to the
Sudan is of the highest importance to saving lives and
is crucial to creating an environment conducive to the
implementation of all peace processes in the Sudan,
which the European Union will continue to support
strongly.
The decision by the Government of the Sudan to
expel 13 international NGOs from the Sudan and to
revoke the licences of three local NGOs is a direct and
immediate threat to the continuity of international
humanitarian assistance in Darfur and damages eight
operations in the rest of the northern Sudan. These
NGOs provide a vital service to millions of vulnerable
Sudanese civilians, guided by the principles of human
rights and international humanitarian law.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The
representative of the Sudan has asked for the floor once
again, and I now give him the floor.
Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I asked
for the floor to very briefly clarify a few facts
regarding, first, the incomplete description of the
situation in Darfur and the Sudan in general. Such a
description will neither advance political settlement
nor help our people in Darfur, the people of the Sudan
in general or the continent as a whole. Talking about
the Sudan and its leadership as if decisions are being
taken by an individual is a flagrant violation of
diplomatic norms and indeed a deviation from the
Charter of this Organization.

Decisions in the Sudan are taken by institutions.
The Sudan is not a failed State. It is a country that has
institutions, and the competent institutions responsible
for non-governmental organizations in the Sudan
carefully studied the situation and made their decision
after having obtained evidence that established beyond
a reasonable doubt that those organizations had crossed
the line, as my colleague stated earlier.
We expected this Council to deliberate today on
the extent to which those non-governmental
organizations violated the resolutions of the General
Assembly that regulate humanitarian work, most
notably resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991. This
Council knows that encroaching on the sovereignty of
Member States is a violation of the Charter. That is the
first issue.
The second issue is that the statements of all the
member States here reached one conclusion. All of
them are waiting for the conclusion of the joint
evaluation mission, which is composed of
representatives of the United Nations and the Sudan
and is still conducting its investigation in Darfur. What,
then, is behind all this hurry and commotion? Why is
the Council meeting today, before the relevant
committee comes back with its report? We can only
deduce that the non-governmental organizations that
are the source of all this commotion are not normal
organizations. These are organizations that have
crossed the line, and this is the irrevocable decision of
the Government of the Sudan.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

09-27501

15
