United Nations

S/PV.6054

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

6054th meeting
Friday, 19 December 2008, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jurica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Croatia)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Grauls
Mr. Koudougou
Mr. Zhou Zhe
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Arias
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Kumalo
Mr. Quarrey
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the deployment of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2008/781)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-66225 (E)

*0866225*

S/PV.6054

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
deployment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(S/2008/781)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Sudan in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mohamad
(Sudan) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Le Roy to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Susana Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support.
It is so decided.
I invite Ms. Malcorra to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is

2

meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members have before them the report of the
Secretary-General on the deployment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), contained in document S/2008/781.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, and Ms. Susana
Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for Field Support. I
now give the floor to Mr. Le Roy.
Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2008/781), which is before the
Council, aims at providing a comprehensive picture of
the situation in Darfur over the past 60 days. I will
therefore limit my briefing today to developments
affecting the security and humanitarian situation in
Darfur, the status of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and progress
made in the political process. Under-Secretary-General
Malcorra will then highlight some key issues relating
to the deployment of UNAMID and some of the major
challenges that we continue to face in this area.
It has been almost one year since the transfer of
authority from the African Union Mission in the Sudan
to UNAMID. This milestone provides an opportunity
for reflection on the efforts made to date to resolve the
conflict in Darfur.
While some progress has been made in various
areas over the past year, it has been much too slow in
providing real improvements for ordinary citizens in
Darfur and inadequate in resolving the Darfur crisis. As
the conflict enters its sixth year, over 2.5 million
people continue to live in internally displaced persons
camps, completely dependent on humanitarian
assistance. The situation has not improved. Over the
past six months, nearly 100,000 more people have been
displaced.
As Council members heard recently from UnderSecretary-General John Holmes, the humanitarian
community continues to struggle with issues of
security and humanitarian access, with the hope that
the situation will improve over the coming year. It is of
grave concern that, year after year, the security
situation remains volatile and unpredictable. The past
two months have been no exception. Attacks on
UNAMID and humanitarian workers, intertribal

08-66225

S/PV.6054

violence and clashes between the Government and the
armed movements have even intensified.
In the first year of its operation, UNAMID lost 21
personnel. Most recently, on 29 October, a UNAMID
soldier was killed and another injured during an attack
while guarding a water point near the Kassab camp, in
Northern Darfur. On 9 November, another UNAMID
soldier was injured during an ambush of a UNAMID
convoy travelling on the El-Jeneina road.
During the past year inter-ethnic fighting has also
claimed many lives. In October alone, seven separate
armed tribal clashes reportedly took place, killing at
least 41 men and several children and injuring many
more. Several women were raped during the clashes.
Many parcels of cultivated land were burned and
livestock was stolen. Just this past week, inter-ethnic
clashes in Southern Darfur claimed another 75 lives,
including those of members of the Sudanese police,
who tried to intervene.
Despite the unilateral declaration by the
Government of the Sudan of a ceasefire on
12 November, aerial bombardments and armed clashes
between the Government and the rebel movements
have continued. In particular, during the period from
12 to 25 November, UNAMID received unconfirmed
information about significant military incidents in
several locations across Darfur. Five of these incidents
were related to aerial bombardments.
UNAMID deployed patrols to verify these
reports. In Southern Darfur, UNAMID found visible
evidence of air strikes, including four bomb craters and
unexploded ordnance near the village of Abu Dangal,
in Southern Darfur. UNAMID dispatched another
verification patrol to Abu Shouk, in Northern Darfur,
but it was twice stopped at Government checkpoints
and was not allowed to proceed to the site. On
13 December, a UNAMID patrol was eventually
allowed access to the area and observed six craters left
from aerial bombardments in the village of Korbia, 90
kilometres northwest of Kutum.
The Government of the Sudan has justified the
bombings in Abu Shouk by the need to clear the road
of bandits so convoys from the Sudanese Armed Forces
could pass safely. However, the United Nations has
emphasized to the Government that the pretext for
those aerial bombardment cannot be accepted in any
way and that the Government should honour its own
commitment to the cessation of hostilities.

08-66225

The violence between the parties was not limited
to aerial bombardments. Rebels also have a lot to
answer for. In November, Government authorities were
targeted by armed groups. Clashes between
Government forces and the Abdul Wahid faction of the
Sudan Liberation Army also took place over several
days in November near Kutum in Northern Darfur.
(spoke in English)
Amid continuing violence and in this complex
operating environment, UNAMID has been trying to
implement its mandate even as it continues to deploy.
Over the past year, the frequency of the Mission’s
patrols have drastically increased, in order to facilitate
humanitarian access and provide convoy protection,
but also as a confidence-building measure and to
investigate security incidents. The 24/7 presence of
UNAMID police in Kalma camp has been welcome by
camp residents and has strengthened the relationship
between UNAMID, the humanitarian community and
the internally displaced persons. Several requests have
been made for UNAMID to replicate this initiative in
other camps, but so far limited resources, especially the
absence of more formed police units, continue to hold
the Mission back.
Earlier this month, UNAMID played a central role
in preventing a major crisis following clashes between
nomads and internally displaced persons in Hassa Hissa
camp, in Western Darfur, near the town of Zalingei.
UNAMID intervened with camp leadership and local
sheikhs to stabilize the situation. It then deployed troops
to the area to prevent further escalation, and through
coordination with the Government liaison officer,
Government forces were deployed to restore order at the
camp. UNAMID forces — police and civilian
components — worked together with the community
and local government officials to negotiate a settlement
and to ensure a speedy resolution to the conflict.
As its numbers and its capabilities increase, the
Mission will be able to do much more of this good
work. We will need continued Government cooperation
and sustained international support to reach this
objective. In this context, we will continue to work
with Member States to fill key gaps in the Mission’s
force composition. As Council members are fully
aware, for over a year we have been requesting pledges
for a multi-role logistics unit, a medium transport unit,
a heavy transport unit, an aerial reconnaissance unit,
light tactical helicopters and 18 medium-utility

3

S/PV.6054

helicopters. Pledges for these resources have been and
still are outstanding. I reiterate my appeal to Council
members to urge troop- and police-contributing
countries in a position to provide those capabilities to
do so without any further delay.
Deploying UNAMID to its authorized strength as
it endeavours to undertake its mandate activities has
been and remains our priority. Recent cooperation with
the Government of the Sudan on the facilitation of
UNAMID deployment has gone a long way in
complementing our efforts. Under-Secretary-General
Malcorra will provide additional details on this issue.
As we have emphasized many times before, even
when fully deployed and at full capacity, UNAMID
cannot, by itself, bring peace to Darfur. Only a political
settlement between the parties will be able to bring an
end to the conflict. It is therefore deeply regrettable
that another year has passed while the parties continue
to engage in military action rather than investing
themselves fully in political negotiations.
The multiparty Sudan People’s Forum, launched
in October, takes a step in the right direction. Progress
was made in the discussion at the national level on the
issues of most concern to Darfurians: disarmament of
militias, compensation, Darfur as a region, political
representation and socio-economic development. The
Government has pledged that the recommendation of
this forum will serve as a basis for discussion, for
direct dialogue with the armed movements and towards
a final political settlement. For the Sudan People’s
Forum to make a difference, it is critical that quick
action be taken to implement its recommendations.
Violations of the ceasefire declared unilaterally by
President Al-Bashir at the conclusion of the Sudan
People’s Forum, of course, have not helped promote a
climate of trust between the parties.
Joint Chief Mediator Djibril Bassolé has been
working closely with the parties over the past several
months, urging them to cease hostilities, take steps to
demonstrate their seriousness towards the settlements
and engage in meaningful dialogue about the future of
Darfur. He continues to work with the Government and
movements in an effort to adopt a framework
agreement that includes the cessation of hostilities and
defines the modalities of and specific topics for direct
negotiation.
With the help of the Government of Qatar and
other stakeholders, there has been some progress this

4

past month in beginning these discussions in Doha.
Many issues still remain outstanding, and Mr. Bassolé
has been engaged intensively to bring the parties’
positions closer together. During his interaction with
the armed movements, Mr. Bassolé has been urging the
groups to resolve the question of their participation and
representation at future peace talks. Now the rebels
should be called on to conclude these issues rapidly.
They have a sober obligation to do all they can to allow
meaningful talks to begin.
The 14 July application by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for an arrest
warrant against President Al-Bashir, may also have an
impact on peace and security in Darfur. So far, we have
received mixed signals from the Government on this
issue. On the one hand, we have been given
reassurances that there will be no impact on UNAMID
and the United Nations Mission in Sudan (UNMIS) if
the ICC agrees to the Prosecutor’s request for an arrest
warrant for the President. However, some public
statements made by Government officials have
contradicted that position.
Our peacekeeping missions and our humanitarian
and development work in Sudan will continue to
conduct their operations in an impartial manner,
cooperating in good faith with all partners to further
the goal of peace and stability in the country. We trust
that the Government will continue to fulfil its
commitments towards peace in Darfur and cooperate
with United Nations efforts towards that end.
In the meantime, priorities from our perspective
are clear: the violence must stop, the parties must
commit to dialogue and the United Nations-African
Union mediation efforts must receive all required
support. On the peacekeeping side, we must redouble
our efforts with troop-contributing countries to
accelerate deployment. Additionally, we must get the
most out of the UNAMID units that are already
deployed in the areas of protection of civilians and
facilitation of humanitarian assistance.
At the same time, the fundamental responsibility
for making real progress lies with the parties. It is the
Government of the Sudan and armed rebel movements
which must cease hostilities and agree to dialogue
under the auspices of Chief Mediator Bassolé. It is the
Government which must take concrete action to
demonstrate its seriousness with respect to the
outcomes of the Sudan People’s Forum and the

08-66225

S/PV.6054

associated ceasefire. In addition, it is critical for
regional stability and lasting peace in Darfur that the
Governments of Chad and the Sudan implement the
Dakar Agreement.

destination. Improved road conditions since the end of
the rainy season, strengthened land transport capacity,
rail transport and additional air capacity have helped in
ensuring that the backlog at El Obeid is clear.

A year ago, my predecessor cautioned that the
longer this issue went unresolved, the greater the risks
that UNAMID would fail to implement the mandate
given to it by the Council. It is my hope that in one
year’s time, I can appear in this Chamber with better
news.

The mission is also working to enhance its
engineering capacity, including through the expedited
employment of military engineers, partnership with the
United Nations Office for Project Services and the
recruitment of local contractors. As a result,
engineering work for the Nyala supercamp is scheduled
to be completed by the end of 2008 and the El Fasher
and El Geneina supercamps are scheduled to be
completed by the end of January 2009.

The President:
Ms. Susana Malcorra.

I

now

give

the

floor

to

Ms. Malcorra: I am glad to be here today to
provide the Council with a detailed overview of our
efforts to work with troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Government of the Sudan to
accelerate the deployment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
The report before the Council (S/2008/781)
provides a full picture the status of our deployment
efforts, the challenges which we have been able to
overcome since the last time I briefed the Council and
obstacles that we must overcome in order to meet our
full objectives. As Council members received the
report only yesterday, I will take this opportunity to
provide a summary of the main highlights and to
update our efforts since the report was finalized.
As indicated in the report, I am pleased to inform
Council members that, with a little less than two weeks
to go, we are moving towards our target of achieving
60 per cent deployment of the mission’s uniformed
personnel by the end of the year. Achievement of this
goal comes as a result of our efforts to accelerate the
movement of equipment into Darfur, enhance
engineering capabilities and improve cooperation with
the Government of the Sudan. While we still have a
long way to go to achieve our ultimate goal of full
deployment of UNAMID, I would like to take a
moment to acknowledge the troop- and policecontributing countries that have worked so hard with
us to reach this initial target, as well as colleagues in
UNAMID who have applied themselves, tirelessly, to
meeting this challenging goal.
As detailed in the Secretary-General’s report, the
Department of Safety and Security and UNAMID put
in place special measures to improve the rate at which
contingent owned equipment reaches its final

08-66225

That will be a major improvement in the
mission’s ability to accept and accommodate
personnel. In addition, even with its limited resources,
the mission has significantly increased reserves of
essential supplies, including rations and water, to
ensure that we are prepared to operate in a security
Phase IV environment.
Improvements in the movement of equipment and
the enhancement of our engineering work have been
complemented by good levels of cooperation with the
Government of the Sudan with respect to deployment. I
travelled to Khartoum on 16 November for the second
meeting of the Tripartite Committee, during which I
was reassured by Government officials that every effort
would be made to facilitate the deployment of
UNAMID. Progress was a noted on all topics raised in
our first Tripartite Committee meeting on 7 October,
and we agreed that continued cooperation of this kind
will be essential to the deployment of UNAMID. We
will meet again in early 2009 in Addis Ababa to follow
up further.
We are moving equipment more quickly,
preparing to receive troops more efficiently and
working with the Government on deployment matters
more effectively.
These are all positive developments, but I must
stress that we are making these gains in a volatile
security environment. I mentioned earlier that ongoing
insecurity has made it necessary for the SecretaryGeneral to designate Darfur as a phase four security
zone. The practical implication of this designation is
that we must work to ensure that our mission is able to
function, even if the situation deteriorates, and we must
also of course take all measures to ensure the safety of
our personnel. One concrete result of this phase four

5

S/PV.6054

situation is that we are forced to delay the deployment
of approximately two hundred unarmed United Nations
police officers to Darfur, until we are able to ensure
that provisions have been put in place for their overall
security. Under normal circumstances, these police
officers could deploy and they are ready in their
capitals to do so. But, given the security situation in
Darfur today, they will not be able to do their work
until the minimum number of armed formed police
units (FPUs) is in place, since the armed units provide
direct operational support to United Nations police,
including by securing their working environment. This
is only one of the many challenges we face, but I am
drawing it to your attention, because if we fall short of
the 60 per cent target by approximately one per cent, it
will because deployment of these United Nations
police officers has been temporarily delayed until we
have a combination of an improved security situation
and more formal police units on the ground.
With our year’s end deadline only days away, we
are already working hard to achieve the best possible
deployment results for the rest of 2009. As the Council
is aware, we have set ourselves a deadline of achieving
80 per cent deployment by the end of March, and the
challenges we face in reaching this goal are well
known to all. We will build on our efforts to further
strengthen the specific measures we have put in place
to move equipment and prepare sites more effectively.
We will also, of course, be completely transparent with
the Council about our progress. In this regard, I would
like to state that the readiness of troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) and police-contributing countries
(PCCs) to deploy military and formed police units will
be a particularly important factor in our collective
efforts to finally bring UNAMID to its authorized
strength.
Given that the timelines required to organize and
implement these strategic movements are quite fixed
and irreducible, it is critical for us that TCCs and PCCs
undertake the range of pre-deployment preparations as
rapidly as possible. Two days ago, we met with TCC
and PCC representatives to stress this point. This is no
small task and we are placing a significant burden on
troop- and police-contributing countries. The
equipment and capabilities required to work in Darfur
are considerable and the environment is highly
demanding. They must therefore be meticulous in their
preparations to ensure that the units they deploy are

6

ready to face the enormous challenges associated with
deploying into Darfur.
Our top priority continues to be the full
deployment of UNAMID and the pursuit of peace in
Darfur. We look forward to continued cooperation from
the Government in this regard, and I will need the
sustained support of this Council and the continued
collaboration of troop- and police-contributing and
partner countries as we work together to achieve this
goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month, which should be a source of pride four your
friendly country. I would like to thank Mr. Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and Ms. Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for Field
Support, for their briefings to the Council on the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).
These deliberations of the Council come towards
the end of 2008, as we are preparing to receive a new
year and the Sudan is looking forward with
determination to put an end to the conflict in Darfur as
soon as possible, especially as we have a
comprehensive and integrated national plan based on
the decisions and recommendations of the Sudan
People’s Forum. This, as I have assured the Council
before, is not an isolated effort nor is it parallel to the
regional or international efforts. It is indeed a
translation of a common national Sudanese position,
shared by all the opposition political parties and the
Government in the Sudan. It also forms a basis for the
promising regional efforts presented in the ArabAfrican initiative led by the brotherly State of Qatar, as
well as the mandate of the Joint Chief Mediator
Mr. Djibril Bassolé, namely, to arrive at an early peace
next year, if all these initiatives can be heeded by those
armed groups that reject the option of peace.
I would like to inform this Council that the
normalization of relations with the neighbouring State
of Chad is moving forward smoothly, and it will have
its positive impacts regarding lasting peace and
stability in Darfur. Needless to say, the Security
Council is expected to support these efforts and to
provide prompt movement and serious action with

08-66225

S/PV.6054

regard to the leaders of the armed groups. It is our hope
that the Council will invite Mr. Bassolé to New York in
the near future to review his work during the past
month and what he intends to do in the future. It is our
hope that Mr. Bassolé will come and brief this Council
on efforts towards the peaceful settlement of the crisis
in Darfur.
The third section of the report before us, which
deals with UNAMID deployment in Darfur, clearly and
decisively shows that the Government of Sudan has
fulfilled all of its obligations regarding cooperation and
facilitation of UNAMID deployment in Darfur. During
its previous deliberations on the issue and at this
meeting the Council has been briefed on the great
efforts that are being made to facilitate the deployment
of the operation, whereby we have agreed to establish a
UNAMID liaison office in Al-Fashir headed by a highlevel official and including all Government institutions
and agencies to ensure the flow, speed of all
procedures and the implementation of what was agreed
upon. That was decided by the tripartite mechanism
that Ms. Malcorra talked about and where we have on
all the necessary arrangements to follow up and
implement the decisions of the previous meeting,
including preparations to deploy light tactical
helicopters. This leaves no room for any allegations
that the Government of the Sudan is complicating the
deployment of the operation. I would like to assure you
that my Government is fully committed to continued
cooperation with the United Nations in order to
implement 60 per cent of the development by the end
of this year and 80 per cent by March 2009.
We would like to assure this Council that our
country is fully committed to the ceasefire declared by
the President of the Republic and to pushing it forward;
we reiterate our country’s commitment to that ceasefire
declaration here today. Some movements, gangs and
thieves have carried out a series of bandit attacks on
police units since the ceasefire was announced. That
was an attempt to provoke the Government.
It is our hope that the Security Council will play
its role by putting pressure on armed groups to accept
the ceasefire and that they will thus respect Security
Council statements and resolutions.
As for the humanitarian aspect, we thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,

08-66225

John Holmes, for his direct and clear briefing the
Council on 3 December. He stated that the armed
groups in Darfur have started targeting humanitarian
convoys and have, on a regular basis, been hijacking
cars and stealing other items and taking them across
the border to sell them. Thus any talk about obstacles
impeding humanitarian activities must take into
consideration these practices, which have become a
lucrative business for armed groups.
We appreciate the fact that the report of the
Secretary-General before you welcomes, in paragraph
42, the 18 November declaration of the Government of
the Sudan allowing for the extension of the provision
of humanitarian assistance until 31 January 2010.
I refer to the progress report presented by the
Government of the Sudan on the workshop, which
included the United Nations and the donor community,
last November, a report that we deposited with the
Council and which reflects the effort of the Sudan
regarding the humanitarian aspect.
The several positive developments on all tracks
and the full cooperation of the Government of the
Sudan in recent months must be supported and
appreciated by this Council. This Council should
protect the peace process from any threats or
irresponsible adventures like those of the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court. This Council must
recognize that this matter has also been raised by the
African Union, the principal partner of the United
Nations in Darfur. Other regional and international
organizations have also declared that the peace process
should be spared such adventures.
While we, once again, call your attention to our
cooperation with the Security Council, we hope that
the Council will record for history that it will side with
peace and stability in the Sudan and that it is possible
to make 2009 a year for peace and stability in the
Sudan and the entire region.
The President: There are no more speakers
inscribed on my list. In conformity with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I now invite Council members to
informal consultations in order to continue our
discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

7
