THE SITUATION IN CAMBODIA161

mission should be sent to Cambodia. TI1ey had agreed to
recommend the dispatch of such a mission which would begin
the process of prcparing for the military aspects :,f the United
Nations Transitional Authonty in Cambodia and could consider
how the Secretary-Genera1 could use his good offices to help
maintam the unlimiteJ informa] cease-fire in effect. 111e
Secretary-General wishcd to inform the Council that it was his
inkntion to proceed with the necessary arrangements for the
dispatch of a survey mission to Camhodia as soon as possible.

Decision~

In a letter dated 8 August 199 i ""' acidresSt:d to the
President of the Security Council. the Secretary-General drew
attention to some recent devclopmcnts relating to the sitnation
in Cambodia. He recalled tlrnt Prince N0rodom Sihanc,uk had
oonvened a meeting of the Supreme National Council of
Cambodia in Pattaya, Thailand, from 24 to 26 June 1991 16\ and
that the Co--Cbairmen of the Paris Conferenœ ,m Camb,.,'ldia
and the Secretary-Gencrars Spccial Representative, Mr.
Rafeeuddin Ahmed, had been invitcd to attend as observers. At
that meeting, a number of important dec1sions had been taken;
in particular, the Supreme National Council had unanirnously
agreed to an immediate and unlim1ted cease-fire and to
undertake to stop receiving outs1de mi1it3ry assistance. The
Secretary-General recalled that, 0•1 16 and 17 July 1991, an
infonnal meeting of the Supreme National Council had been
convened in Beijing by Prince Sihanouk/ 66 and the Co-Chairmen of the Paris Conferenœ o~ Cambodia and the SccretaryGeneral's Special Representative had agmn participated as
observers. At that meeting. the Supreme Nafü:inal Council had
unanimously elected Prince Sihanouk to bt its President. TI1e
Supreme National Council had aJso rciternted its acceptance of
the 28 August 1990 frarnework for a comprehensive political
seulement of the Can1bocha confüd/ 67 in ilè, cntirety. In that
connection, the Supreme. National Council ha<l unanimously
decided to request the United Nations to dispatch a su1vey
team to Cambodia. The Secretary-Gentral infonned the
Council that, in a letter dated 16 July 1991 addressed to the
Secretary-General by Prince Sihanouk on behalf of the
Supreme National Council, it was stated that the Supreme
National Council had decided to request the United Nations to
send a survey mission in order to evaluatc, the modalities of
control and an appropriate number of United Nations personnel to control the cease-fire and the cessation of foreign
military aid in cooperation with the Suprcme National Cmmcil
Military Working Group. On 17 acd 18 July 1991, ::i meeting of
the Co-Olainnen of the Paris Confoœnce on Cambodia and the
five permanent members of the Security O:,uncil had bcen held
in Beijing, in the presence of :he Secrern.ry-Gcne.ral's Special
Representative. The final communiqué of that meeting, 168
addressing the results of the twe rece11t Supreme National
Council meetings, had stated that the five and Inèonesia
welcomed the decision of the Supreme National Council to
implement an unlimited cease-firt:. They had also welcomed its
decision to stop receiving foreign mi!itary assistance, stated that
they would respect this decision themselves and called upon ail
concemed countries to do likewise. ·n1e tive and Indonesia had
also expressed the hope that the countries neighbouring
Cambodia would prohibit the delivery of military equipment to
any of the Cambodian parties from their territory. They had
also reiterated that the withdrawal of foreign mihtary forces.
the cease-fire and the cessation of outside military assistance
had to be effectively verified and suptivised by the United
Nations. To that end, they had welcomed the proposa] made by
the Supreme National Coum:il that a llnited Nations survey

ln a letter dated J4 August 1991. 169 the President of the
Securit:y Couneil inforrned the Secretary-General as follows:

"I have the honour to infonn you that your letter
dated 8 August 1991 164 conceming the dispatch of a survey
mission to Camlxxlia has hcen hrought to the attention of
th,, members of the Security Council. They agrec with the
proposa] contained in your Jetter."
At its 3014th meeting, on 16 Oetober 1991, the Council
discussed the item entitlcd "The situation in Camlxxlia: report
of the Secretary-General (S/23097 and Add. J)". 22

Re.."IOlution 717 (1991)
of 16 October 1991

The Security Council.
Recalling its resolution 668 (1990) of 20 Septembcr 1990,
by which it endorsed the framework for a comprehensive
political settlernent of the Cambodia conflict of 28 August

1990,167
Taking note of the draft agreements for a comprehensive
po!itical settlement of the Carnbodia <'.Onflict/70
Welcoming the very significant progress made, on the basis
of those draft agreements, towards a comprehensive political
settlement which would enable the Camlxx:lian people to
exercise its inalienable right to seif-determination through free
and fair elections organized and conducted by the United
Nations,
Welcoming in particular the election of His Royal Highncss
Prince Norodom Sihanouk as the Chairrnan of the Supreme
National Council of Cambodia.
Noting with satisfaction the other decisions taken by the
Supreme National Council ofCambodia,conceming in particular the implementation of a voluntary cease-firc and the
renunciation of foreign military assistance, and underlinmg the
need for the full cooperation of the C3.lllbodian parties,
Considering that such progress bas opened the way to an
early re,-:onvening oftht> P3ris Ccnference on Carn!x,di11 at the

39

ministerial level and the sigrnng of the agreements for a
comprehensive political settlernent hased on the framework
document of 28 August 1990, and welcoming the preparations
being made by the Cn-Chairrnen of the Conference in that
regard,
Convinced that such a comprehensive political settlement
can offer at last a peaceful, just and d1Jrable solution tu the
Cambodia conflict,

Taking note of the rcqucst hy His Royal Highnes Prince
Norodom Sihanouk for United Nations pe~onnel to be sent to
Cambodia at the earliest possihk moment. 1 ''
Underlining the necessity of a United Nations presence in
Cambodia irnmediate!y after the signing of the agreements for
a cornprehensive political settlemcnt of the Cambodia conflict,
pending the in1plementation of the arrangements set out in
those agreements,
Having considered, to this end, the report of the SecretaryC'.JCneral of 30 Septembcr 1991 172 proposing the establishment
of a United Nation:; Advancc Mi;;sion m Cambodia,
1. Approves the report of tbe Sccretary-General of 30
September 1991;172

2. Decides to establish, under its authority, a Unikd
Nations Advance Mission in Cambodia immediately after the
signing of the agreements for a ,;omprehensive political
settlement of the Cambodia conflict and in accordance with the
report of the Secretary-Gcneral. with members of the Mission
to be sent to Cambodia immcdiatcly alter the signing;

3. CalL<1 upon the S~preme National Council ofCambodia, and the Cambodian parties for their part, to coopcrate fülly
with the Mission and with the preparations for the implementation of the arrangements sel out in ,'1c agreements for a
cornprehensive political settlement;
Welcomes the proposa! of the co-chairrnen of the Paris
Conference on Cambodia 10 reconvene the Conference at an
early date at the ministerial level to sign the agreements for a
cornprehensive political seulement of the Cambodia conflict;
4.

adopted by th~ Coriference on 23 October 1991 which had been
circulated in t.he anne"X to a letter dated 30 October 1991 from
the representatives -if France and Indonesia io the United
Nations, 114 or: hehalf of the Co-Chairmen of the Conference.
ln a Jetter date,j 29 October 1')91 175 addressed to the
President of the Se..:unty Council for the attention of the
memben- of the CouociJ. the Secretary-General referred to
resolution 117 (1991) of16 October 1991, bywhich the Council
had decided to estahlish a United Nations Advance Mission in

C:ambodia immediately after the signing of the agreements for
a comprehensive political settlement of the Cambodia contlict,
and stated that these agreements had been signed in Paris on
23 October 1991. Having complcted the nccessary consultations,
the Secrctary-(1cneral proposed that the rnilitary elements of
the Mission he composed of contingents from the following
Member States, all of whom had expressed their readiness in
principle to make the necessary personnel available: Algeria,
Argentina, Austra!ia, Belgium, Canada, China, France, Germany. Ghana, India, Ind0nesia, lreland, Malaysia, New
Zealand, Pakistan, Poland, Senegal, Tunisia, the Union of
Soviet Sociahst Rcpuhlics. the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northem freland, the United States of America and
Uruguay. He added that he was awaiting a reply frorn one
othcr Member State which had been infonnally approached,
and be would revert to the Securîty ('.,ouncil when be had an
indication of whethcr it also was ready in principle to contributc military personnel to the Mission.
In a letter dated 31 October 1991, 176 the President of the
Security Council infonncd the Secretary-General as follows:

"I have the honour to inform you that your Jetter
dated 29 Octoœr 1991 175 concerning the composition of
lhe rnilitary elernents of the United Nations Advance
Mission in Cambodia bas been bruught to the attention of
the Council members. They agree with the propœal
contained in ymJT letter."
At its 3015th meeting, on 31 O"-tober 1991, the Council
d1scussed the item emitled:

"'The situation in '.::'.amlxxiia:

Requests the Secrctary-General to report to the
Security Council by 15 November 1991 on the implementation

"Letter dated 30 October 1991 from the representatives of
France and of InJonesia to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-Geueral (S/23177); 27

of the present resolution and to 1<cep the Council fully
informed of further development~.

"Note by the Secretary-C'..eneral (S/23179)". 27

5.

AdopleJ wumimausly al rite 3014th
1,1œling.

Decisions

In a note dated 30 October 1991.,1-r:i the Secretary-General,
in accordance with the requcst addressed to him in paragraph
12 of the Final Act of the Paris Conference on Cambodia, drew
the attention of the Security Council tn the instruments

Resolution 718 (1991)

or 31 October 1991
The Security Cou11âl.
Recalling 1ts resoJutions 668 (1990) of 20 September 1990
and 717 (199!) üf 16 Oc:ober 1991,
