A/RES/72/168

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
25 January 2018

Seventy-second session
Agenda item 72 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 19 December 2017
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/72/439/Add.2)]

72/168.

Human rights and unilateral coercive measures
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on this subject, the most recent of which
was resolution 71/193 of 19 December 2016, and Human Rights Council decision
18/120 of 30 September 2011 1 and resolutions 24/14 of 27 September 2013, 2 27/21
of 26 September 2014, 3 30/2 of 1 October 2015 4 and 36/10 of 28 September 2017, 5
as well as previous resolutions of the Council and the Commission on Human
Rights,
Reaffirming the pertinent principles and provisions contained in the Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States proclaimed by the General Assembly in its
resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, in particular article 32 thereof, in
which it declared that no State may use or encourage the use of economic, political
or any other type of measures to coerce another State in order to obtain from it the
subordination of the exercise of its sovereign rights,
Taking note of the reports of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights
Council on the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures on the enjoyment of
human rights, submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 71/193 6 and to
Human Rights Council resolutions 27/21 and 30/2, 7 and recalling the reports of the

__________________
1

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and
corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and A/66/53/Add.1/Corr.1), chap. III.
2
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
3
Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigenda (A/69/53/Add.1,
A/69/53/Add.1/Corr.1 and A/69/53/Add.1/Corr.2), chap. IV, sect. A.
4
Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/70/53/Add.1), chap. III.
5
Ibid., Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/72/53/Add.1), chap. III.
6
A/72/370.
7
A/HRC/33/48.

17-22979 (9)

300118

*172297*

A/RES/72/168

Human rights and unilateral coercive measures

Secretary-General on the implementation of Assembly resolutions 52/120 of
12 December 1997 8 and 55/110 of 4 December 2000, 9
Stressing that unilateral coercive measures and legislation are contrary to
international law, international humanitarian law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the norms and principles governing peaceful relations among States,
Recognizing the universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated
character of all human rights, and in this regard reaffirming the right to development
as an integral part of all human rights,
Recalling the Final Document of the Sixteenth Ministerial Conference and
Commemorative Meeting of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Bali,
Indonesia, from 23 to 27 May 2011, 10 the Final Document of the Seventeenth
Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held on
Margarita Island, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, from 13 to 1 8 September 2016,
and the documents adopted at previous summits and conferences, in which States
members of the Movement agreed to oppose and condemn unilateral coercive
measures and their continued application, persevere with efforts to effectively
reverse them, urge other States to do likewise, as called for by the General
Assembly and other organs of the United Nations, and request States applying those
measures or laws to revoke them fully and immediately,
Recalling also that, at the World Conference on Human Rights, held in Vienna
from 14 to 25 June 1993, States were called upon to refrain from any unilateral
measure not in accordance with international law and the Charter that creates
obstacles to trade relations among States and impedes the full realization of all
human rights 11 and also severely threatens the freedom of trade,
Bearing in mind all the references to this question in the Copenhagen
Declaration on Social Development, adopted by the World Summit for Social
Development on 12 March 1995, 12 the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,
adopted by the Fourth World Conference on Women on 15 September 1995, 13 the
Quito Declaration on Sustainable Cities and Human Settlements for All and the
Quito implementation plan for the New Urban Agenda, adopted by the United
Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III)
on 20 October 2016, 14 and in the outcome document of the United Nations summit
for the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda, the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled
“Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which
States are strongly urged to refrain from promulgating and applying any unilateral
economic, financial or trade measures not in accordance with international law and
the Charter of the United Nations that impede the full achievement of economic and
social development, particularly in developing countries,
Expressing concern about the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures
on international relations, trade, investment and cooperation,
__________________
8

A/53/293 and A/53/293/Add.1.
A/56/207 and A/56/207/Add.1.
10
A/65/896-S/2011/407, annex I.
11
See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
12
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6 –12 March 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
13
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4 –15 September 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
14
Resolution 71/256, annex.
9

2/6

17-22979

Human rights and unilateral coercive measures

A/RES/72/168

Expressing grave concern that, in some countries, the situation of children is
adversely affected by unilateral coercive measures not in accordance with
international law and the Charter that create obstacles to trade relations among
States, impede the full realization of social and economic development and hinder
the well-being of the population in the affected countries, with particular
consequences for women, children, including adolescents, the elderly and persons
with disabilities,
Deeply concerned that, despite the recommendations adopted on this question
by the General Assembly, the Human Rights Council, the Commission on Human
Rights and recent major United Nations conferences, and contrary to general
international law and the Charter, unilateral coercive measures continue to be
promulgated and implemented, with all their negative implications for the social
humanitarian activities and economic and social development of developing
countries, including their extraterritorial effects, thereby creating additional
obstacles to the full enjoyment of all human rights by peoples and individuals under
the jurisdiction of other States,
Bearing in mind all the extraterritorial effects of any unilateral legislative,
administrative and economic measures, policies and practices of a coercive nature
against the development process and the enhancement of human rights in
developing countries, which create obstacles to the full reali zation of all human
rights,
Reaffirming that unilateral coercive measures are a major obstacle to the
implementation of the Declaration on the Right to Development, 15
Recalling article 1, paragraph 2, common to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights 16 and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, 16 which provides, inter alia, that in no case may a people be
deprived of its own means of subsistence,
Noting the continuing efforts of the open-ended Working Group on the Right
to Development of the Human Rights Council, and reaffirming in particular its
criteria, according to which unilateral coercive measures are one of the obstacles to
the implementation of the Declaration on the Right to Development,
1.
Urges all States to cease adopting or implementing any unilateral
measures not in accordance with international law, international humanitarian law,
the Charter of the United Nations and the norms and principles governing peaceful
relations among States, in particular those of a coercive nature, with all their
extraterritorial effects, which create obstacles to trade relations among States, thus
impeding the full realization of the rights set forth in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights 17 and other international human rights instruments, in particular the
right of individuals and peoples to development;
2.
Strongly urges States to refrain from promulgating and applying any
unilateral economic, financial or trade measures not in accordance with
international law and the Charter that impede the full achievement of sustainable
economic and social development, particularly in developing countries;
3.
Condemns the inclusion of Member States in unilateral lists under false
pretexts, which are contrary to international law and the Charter, including false
allegations of terrorism sponsorship, considering such lists as instruments for
__________________
15

Resolution 41/128, annex.
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
17
Resolution 217 A (III).
16

17-22979

3/6

A/RES/72/168

Human rights and unilateral coercive measures

political or economic pressure against Member States, particularly developing
countries;
4.
Urges all States not to adopt any unilateral measures not in accordance
with international law and the Charter that impede the full achievement of economic
and social development by the population of the affected countries, in particular
children and women, that hinder their well-being and that create obstacles to the full
enjoyment of their human rights, including the right of everyone to a standard of
living adequate for his or her health and well-being and his or her right to food,
medical care and education and the necessary social services, as well as to ensure
that food and medicine are not used as tools for political pressure;
5.
Strongly objects to the extraterritorial nature of those measures which, in
addition, threaten the sovereignty of States, and in this context calls upon all
Member States neither to recognize those measures nor to apply them, as well as to
take administrative or legislative measures, as appropriate, to counteract the
extraterritorial applications or effects of unilateral coercive measures;
6.
Condemns the continuing unilateral application and enforcement by
certain Powers of unilateral coercive measures, and rejects those measures, with all
their extraterritorial effects, as being tools for political or economic pressure against
any country, in particular against developing countries, adopted with a view to
preventing those countries from exercising their right to decide, of their own free
will, their own political, economic and social systems, and because of the negative
effects of those measures on the realization of all the human rights of vast sectors of
their populations, in particular children, women, the elderly and persons with
disabilities;
7.
Expresses grave concern that, in some countries, the situation of children
is adversely affected by unilateral coercive measures not in accordance with
international law and the Charter that create obstacles to trade relations among
States, impede the full realization of social and economic development and hinder
the well-being of the population in the affected countries, with particular
consequences for women, children, including adolescents, the elderly and persons
with disabilities;
8.
Reaffirms that essential goods such as food and medicines should not be
used as tools for political coercion and that under no circumstances should people
be deprived of their own means of subsistence and development;
9.
Calls upon Member States that have initiated such measures to abide by
the principles of international law, the Charter, the declarations of the United
Nations and world conferences and relevant resolutions and to commit themselves
to their obligations and responsibilities arising from the international human rights
instruments to which they are parties by revoking such measures at the earliest
possible time;
10. Reaffirms, in this context, the right of all peoples to self-determination,
by virtue of which they freely determine their political status and freely pursue their
economic, social and cultural development;
11. Recalls that, according to the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, contained in the annex to General Assembly
resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, and the relevant principles and
provisions contained in the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
proclaimed by the Assembly in its resolution 3281 (XXIX), in particular article 32
thereof, no State may use or encourage the use of economic, political or any other

4/6

17-22979

Human rights and unilateral coercive measures

A/RES/72/168

type of measures to coerce another State in order to obtain from it the subordination
of the exercise of its sovereign rights and to secure from it advantages of any kind;
12. Rejects all attempts to introduce unilateral coercive measures, and urges
the Human Rights Council to take fully into account the negative impact of those
measures, including through the enactment and extraterritorial application of
national laws that are not in conformity with international law, in its task concerning
the implementation of the right to development;
13. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in
discharging his functions relating to the promotion, realization and protection of the
right to development and bearing in mind the continuing impact of unilateral
coercive measures on the population of developing countries, to give priority to the
present resolution in his annual report to the General Assembly;
14. Underlines the fact that unilateral coercive measures are one of the major
obstacles to the implementation of the Declaration on the Right to Development, 15
and in this regard calls upon all States to avoid the unilateral imposition of
economic coercive measures and the extraterritorial applicat ion of national laws that
run counter to the principles of free trade and hamper the development of
developing countries, as recognized by the open-ended Working Group on the Right
to Development of the Human Rights Council;
15. Recognizes that, in the Declaration of Principles adopted at the first
phase of the World Summit on the Information Society, held in Geneva from 10 to
12 December 2003, 18 States were strongly urged to avoid and refrain from any
unilateral measure not in accordance with internationa l law and the Charter of the
United Nations in building the information society;
16. Reaffirms paragraph 30 of the outcome document of the United Nations
summit for the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda, entitled
“Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, 19 in
which States are strongly urged to refrain from promulgating and applying any
unilateral economic, financial or trade measures not in accordance with
international law and the Charter of the United Nations that impede the full
achievement of economic and social development, particularly in developing
countries;
17. Recalls the decision of the Human Rights Council, in its resolution
27/21,3 to appoint a Special Rapporteur on the negative impact of unilateral
coercive measures on the enjoyment of human rights, and welcomes the work done
in delivering his mandate;
18. Welcomes the decision taken by the Human Rights Council, in its
resolution 36/10,5 to extend, for a period of three years, the mandate of the Special
Rapporteur as set out in Council resolution 27/21;
19. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to provide all the human and financial resources
necessary for the effective fulfilment of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur, a nd
also requests them, in discharging their functions in relation to the promotion and
protection of human rights, to pay due attention and to give urgent consideration to
the present resolution;
20. Recalls that the Human Rights Council took note of the research-based
progress report of its Advisory Committee containing recommendations on
__________________
18
19

17-22979

A/C.2/59/3, annex, chap. I, sect. A.
Resolution 70/1.
5/6

A/RES/72/168

Human rights and unilateral coercive measures

mechanisms to assess the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures on the
enjoyment of human rights and to promote accountability; 20
21. Takes note of the contribution of the first biennial panel discussion on the
issue of unilateral coercive measures and human rights organized by the Human
Rights Council in 2015 to increase awareness of the negative impact that unilateral
coercive measures have on the enjoyment of human rights in the targeted and
non-targeted countries, and invites the Council to follow up on the discussion at the
second biennial panel in 2017;
22. Invites the Human Rights Council and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights to continue paying attention and explore
ways to address the negative impact of the application of unilateral coercive
measures;
23. Reiterates its support for the invitation of the Human Rights Council to
all special rapporteurs and existing thematic mechanisms of the Council in the field
of economic, social and cultural rights to pay due attention, within the scope of their
respective mandates, to the negative impact and consequences of unilateral coercive
measures;
24. Takes note with interest of the proposals contained in the report of the
Special Rapporteur on the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures on the
enjoyment of human rights, 6 and requests the Special Rapporteur to include in his
report to the General Assembly at its seventy-third session more information on the
process regarding the discussions of his proposals at the Human Rights Council;
25. Reaffirms the request of the Human Rights Council that the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights organize a workshop on the
impact of the application of unilateral coercive measures on the enjoyment of
human rights by the affected populations, in particular their soc ioeconomic impact
on women and children, in the States targeted;
26. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-third session a report on the implementation of the present resolution and
on the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures on the full enjoyment of
human rights;
27. Invites Governments to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur in
the fulfilment of his mandate through, inter alia, the submission of comments and
suggestions on the implications and negative effects of unilateral coercive measures
on the full enjoyment of human rights;
28. Decides to examine the question on a priority basis at its seventy-third
session under the sub-item entitled “Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms” of the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.
73rd plenary meeting
19 December 2017

__________________
20

6/6

A/HRC/28/74.
17-22979
