m.

Resolutions adopted cm the repons of tbe F1nt Committee

3. Notes also that the report indicates a wide measure of agreement in respect of land-mines and booby
traps, and that there was a further conver$ence of views
in relation to the prohibition or restriction of use of
incendiary weapons;
4. Takes note of the progress made by the Conference Working Group on a General Treaty entrusted
with the preparation of the text of a convention to which
optional protocols or clauses embodying prohibitions or
restrictions of use of certain conventional weapons,
deemed to be excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects, would be attached;
5. Takes note also of the resolution of the Conference concerning the development of small calibre
weapon systems, 85 in which, inter alia, the Conference
stressed the need to exercise the utmost care in their
development so as to avoid an unnecessary escalation
of the mjurious effects of such systems;
6. Endorses the recommendation of the Conference
to hold another session at Geneva for a period of up to
four weeks, starting on 15 September 1980, with a view
to completing negotiations in conformity with General
Assembly resolutions 32/152 and 33/70;
7. Takes note of the understanding of the Conference that issues on which agreement has already been
achieved should not be reopened at the forthcoming session, so that all efforts may be concentrated on working
out agreement on outstanding issues;
8. Invites States to continue to participate actively
in the Conference and to be r~presented, in so far as
possible, by the required legal, military and medical
expertise;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to provide necessary assistance to the Conference;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "United Nations
Conference on Prohibitions or Restrictions of Use of
Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed
to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate
Effects: report of the Conference".
97 th plenary meeting
11 December 1979
34 I 83.

Review of the implementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted by the
General Assembly at its tenth special session

A
DISARMAMENT AND INTERNATIONAL SECURITY

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the United Nations
under the Charter for the maintenance of international
peace and security,
Reaffirming also that the United Nations has a central
role and primary responsibility in the sphere of disarmament,
Recognizing that genuine and lasting peace can be
created only through the effective implementation of the
security system provided for in the Charter of the United
Nations and through the speedy and substantial reduction of arms and armed forces by international agreement and mutual example, leading ultimately to general
and complete disarmament under effective international
control,
85 lbid., annex III.

S3

Convinced that disarmament, relaxation of international tension, respect for the right to self-determination
and national independence, the peaceful settlement of
disputes in accordance with the Charter and the strengthening of international peace and security are directly
related to each other,
Recalling its resolutions 32/87 C of 12 December
1977, S-10/2 of 30 June 1978 and 33/91 I of 16
December 1978,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
entitled "Study on the relationship between disarmament
and international security";86
2. Considers that the halting of the arms race, particularly the nuclear arms race, should be the first step
in the implementation of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly;87
3. Calls upon all States to eliminate tensions and
conflicts in their relations and proceed towards effective
collective measures under the Charter of the United
Nations for a system of international order, security and
peace, concurrently with efforts at disarmament
measures;
4. Also calls upon all States to pursue policies to
strengthen international peace and security and to build
confidence among States;
5. Requests the organs of the United Nations to
initiate or accelerate work on developing and strengthening institutions for maintaining peace and security,
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter.
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979
B
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Expressing its satisfaction at the establishment, in accordance with the agreement reached at the tenth special
session, of the Committee on Disarmament and the fact
that the Committee held its first session in the course of
1979,
Noting with appreciation the valuable results of the
work of the Committee on Disarmament concerning its
organization and procedures,
Deploring the fact that negotiations on priority tasks
in the field of disarmament have not thus far yielded any
concrete results, in spite of the repeated appeals of the
General Assembly,
Convinced that the Committee on Disarmament, as the
single multilateral negotiating body on disarmament,
should become urgently and most directly involved in
substantive negotiations on priority questions of disarmament and play the central role in the implementation of the Programme of Action set forth in section III
of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of
the General Assembly, 88
Stressing that negotiations on specific disarmament
issues conducted outside the Committee on Disarmament should not in any way constitute an impediment to
the negotiations on such questions in the Committee,
Having considered the first r.eport of the Committee
on Disarmament, 89
88 A/34/465 and Corr.I.
87 Resolution S-10/2.
88 Ibid.
89 Official Records of

the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/34/27 and Corr.I).

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

54

1. Urges the Committee on Disarmament to proceed, without any further delay, to substantive negotiations on the priority questions of disarmament on its
agenda, in accordance with the provisions of the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session and the other
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly on those
questions;
2. Invites the members of the Committee on Disarmament involved in separate negotiations on specific
priority questions of disarmament to make every effort to
achieve a positive conclusion of those negotiations without further delay for submission to the Committee and,
failing this, to submit to the Committee a full report on
the status of their separate negotiations and results
achieved thus far in order to contribute most directly to
the negotiations in the Committee in accordance with
paragraph t above;
3. Requests the Committee on Disarmament, at its
session in 1980, to initiate negotiations on the comprehensive programme of disarmament, with a view to
completing its elaboration before the second special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament,
in 1982, and, in doing so, to take as a basis the recommendations adopted by the Disarmament Commission;
4. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to submit a report on its work to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fifth session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Report of the
Committee on Disarmament".
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979

C
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS AND
DECISIONS OF THE TENTH SPECIAL SESSION

The General Assembly,
Having reviewed the implementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted at the tenth special
session,
Recalling that disarmament has become an imperative
and most urgent task facing the international community
and that all the peoples of the world have a vital interest
in the success of disarmament negotiations,
Calling attention to the measures qualified in the Programme of Action set forth in section III of the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly' 0 as being most urgent and feasible witJ:rin a
short period of time and to the task of bringing about
effective agreements,
Expressing its satisfaction at the fact that the tenth
special session greatly stimulated the involvement of all
countries and set in motion a number of new initiatives
in the field of disarmament,
Noting with satisfaction that some initial results in
the implementation of the recommendations and decisions of the tenth special session have been achieved,
primarily in the field of active involvement of the United
Nations and in a considerable revitalization of the multilateral disarmament machinery,
Deeply concerned about the continued arms race and
the alarming increase in expenditures on armaments,
Considering that it is necessary to make sustained
progress in all negotiations dealing with disarmament
and arms limitation issues,

,o Resolution S-10/2.

Noting with concern that most negotiations on priority
tasks in the field of disarmament have not thus far yielded
concrete results, in spite of the repeated appeals of the
General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that negotiations have not as yet
started on a number of issues which are contained in the
Programme of Action,
Determined to encourage the adoption of urgent measures in order to secure the implementation of the recommendations and decisions endorsed by Member States
in the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session and
aimed at halting and reversing the arms race, particularly the nuclear arms race, and to proceed to
disarmament,

1. Expresses its deep concern about the continued
arms race, nuclear as well as conventional, and about
constantly growing military budgets which bear negative
consequences and pose a growing threat to international
peace and security and also to the unhampered development of countries, particularly developing countries;
2. Urgently calls upon all States, in particular
nuclear-weapon States and other major military Powers,
immediately to take steps leading to effective halting and
reversing of the arms race and to disarmament and, to
this end:
(a) To make every effort to bring to a successful
end the negotiations which are currently going on in the
Committee on Disarmament and in a limited or regional
framework on effective international agreements according to the priorities of the Programme of Action set forth
in section III of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session;
(b) To resume or undertake as soon as possible
negotiations on a bilateral, regional or multilateral basis
on measures which were agreed upon by consensus at
the tenth special session, taking into consideration all
relevant proposals;
3. Invites all States which are engaged in bilateral,
regional or multilateral disarmament or arms limitation
negotiations outside the United Nations framework to
keep the General Assembly informed of the results of
such negotiations in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Implementation
of the recommendations and decisions of the tenth
special session".
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979

D
UNITED NATIONS PROGRAMME OF FELLOWSHIPS
ON DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision, taken at the tenth special session, to establish a programme of fellowships on disarmament, 41
Recalling also its resolution 33/71 E of 14 December
1978, by which it approved the guidelines prepared by
the Secretary-General for the programme,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of the United Nations programme of fellowships on disarmament for 1979, •2
para. 108.
A/34/640.

41 fbid.,
•2

m.

1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations programme
of fellowships on disarmament;
2. Decides to continue the programme;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to make adequate
arrangements relating to the programme for 1980 in accordance with the guidelines approved by the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session;
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session a report
on the implementation of the programme.
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979

E
MONITORING OF DISARMAMENT AGREEMENTS AND
STRENGTHENING OF INTERNATIONAL SECURITY

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/71 J of 14 December 1978,
in which it requested the Secretary-General to undertake,
with the assistance of a group of qualified governmental
experts, a study on the technical, legal and financial
implications of establishing an international satellite
monitoring agency,
Reaffirming the essential role to be played by appropriate monitoring measures, satisfactory to all interested
parties, in establishing and implementing disarmament
agreements and in strengthening international security
and confidence,
Considering the important contribution which earth
observation satellite technology can make in this field,
Noting the views expressed by Member States, as
compiled by the Secretary-General, on the proposal to
establish an international satellite monitoring agency,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution
33/71 J, 0
Taking into consideration the report of the SecretaryGeneral," to which are annexed the preliminary conclusions of the study that he has undertaken, with the
assistance of qualified governmental experts, of the
technical, legal and financial implications of establishing
such an agency,
Considering it necessary, in the light of the recommendations made by the Group of Governmental Experts on the Question of the Establishment of an
International Satellite Monitoring Agency in its preliminary conclusions, 45 that the study should be continued
in depth,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to carry out such
an in-depth study with the assistance of the Group of
Governmental Experts on the Question of the Establishment of an International Satellite Monitoring Agency
previously constituted;
2. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a
comprehensive report on the subject in time for the
General Assembly to take a decision at its second special session devoted to disarmament, in 1982;
3. Draws the attention of the Secretary-General to
the fact that, in pursuance of paragraph 2 above, the
study should be submitted no later than June 1981 to
" A/34/374.
" A/34/540.
45 Ibid., annex.

55

Resolutions adopted on the raporu of the First Committee

the preparatory committee for the second special session
of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament.
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979

F
FREEZING AND REDUCTION OF MILITARY BUDGETS

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of paragraph 89 of the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly, 46 according to which gradual reduction of
military budgets on a mutually agreed basis, for example, in absolute figures or in terms of percentage points,
particularly by nuclear-weapon States and other militarily significant States, would be a measure that would
contribute to curbing the arms race and would increase
the possibilities of reallocation of resources currently
being used for military purposes to economic and social
development, particularly for the benefit of the developing countries,
Recalling also its decision, taken at the tenth special
session, to continue to consider what concrete steps
should be taken to facilitate the reduction of military
budgets, 47
Reaffirming that it is possible to achieve reductions
in military budgets without affecting the military balance
to the detriment of the national security of any State,
Recognizing the need for the availability of a satisfactory instrument for standardized reporting on the
military expenditures of Member States, such as the one
currently being tested within the framework of the
United Nations,
Aware of the proposals submitted to date by States
and of the activities carried out thus far within the framework of the United Nations in the field of the reduction
of military budgets,
Taking into account the fact that world military expenditures continue to grow at an alarming rate, in stark
contrast with the acute development needs of States, in
particular those of developing countries,
1. Considers that, in the light of the above-mentioned
provisions of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session, a new impetus should be given to endeavours to
achieve agreements to freeze, reduce or otherwise restrain, in a balanced manner, military expenditures, including adequate measures of verification satisfactory
to all parties concerned;
2. Requests, to this end, the Disarmament Commission to undertake during 1980 to examine and identify
effective ways and means of achieving such agreements;
3. Appeals to all States, in particular the most
heavily armed States, pending the conclusion of agreements on the reduction of military expenditures, to exercise self-restraint in their military expenditures with a
view to reallocating the funds thus saved to economic
and social development, particularly for the benefit of
developing countries;
4. Decides to consider at its thirty-fifth session,
under the item entitled "Reduction of military budgets"
to be included in its provisional agenda in pursuance of
its resolution 33/67 of 14 December 1978, the most
48
41

Resolution S-10/2.
Ibid., para. 90.

General Aaembly-Thlrty.fourtb Session

56

effective ways and means of adopting practical measures
in this field.
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979

G
NON-USE OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS AND PREVENTION
OF NUCLEAR WAR

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/71 B of 14 December
1978, in which, inter alia, it called for prohibition of the
use of nuclear weapons, pending nuclear disant1ament,
Taking into account proposals submitted by States
concerning the non-use of nuclear weapons, prevention
of nuclear war and related matters, 48
1. Decides to transmit to the Committee on Disarmament the views of States concerning the non-use of
nuclear weapons, avoidance of nuclear war and related
matters;
2. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to take
those views into appropriate consideration and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979

4. Further requests the Disarmament Commission
to submit a report on its work and its recommendations
on paragraph 2 above to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fifth session;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Disarmament Commission the report of the Committee
on Disarmament, 52 together with all the official records
of the thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly relating to disarmament matters, and to render all the
assistance that it may require for implementing the
present resolution;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the Committee on Disarmament the report and
the recommendations of the Disarmament Commission
on the elements of a comprehensive programme of
disarmament;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Report of the Disarmament Commission".
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979

I
DISARMAMENT WEEK

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Disarmament
Commission, 49
Emphasizing again the importance of an effective
follow-up to the relevant recommendations and decisions
adopted at the tenth special session,
Welcoming the recommendations of the Disarmament
Commission adopted by consensus concerning the elements of a comprehensive programme of disarmament, 50
Considering the important role that the Disarmament
Commission can play and the important contribution it
can make in examining and submitting recommendations
on various problems in the field of disarmament and in
the promotion of the implementation of the relevant
decisions of the tenth special session,
Recalling section II of its resolution 33/71 H of
14 December 1978,
1. Endorses the report of the Disarmament Commission and the recommendations contained therein on the
elements of a comprehensive programme of disarmament;
2. Requests the Disarmament Commission to continue its work in accordance with its mandate, as set
forth in paragraph 118 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,n and,
to that end, to meet for a period not exceeding four
weeks during 1980, beginning on 12 May 1980;
3. Also requests the Disarmament Commission to
continue the consideration of the agenda items contained
in section II of resolution 33/71 H, with the aim of
elaborating, within the framework and in accordance
with the priorities established at the tenth special session, a ~eneral approach to negotiations on nuclear and
conventional disarmament;

The General Assembly,
Gravely concerned about the continuing arms race,
Emphasizing the urgent need for and the importance
of wide and continued mobilization of world public
opinion in support of halting and reversing the arms race,
especially the nuclear arms race in all its aspects,
Noting with satisfaction the broad and active support
of Governments, international and national organizations for the decision taken by the General Assembly at
its tenth special session to proclaim the week starting
24 October, the day of the founding of the United Nations, a week devoted to fostering the objectives of
disarmament, 58
Recalling its resolutions 33/71 D and G of 14 December 1978,
Recognizing the need for active involvement of the
relevant specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, within their areas of competence, in promoting the cause of disarmament and, in
particular, in holding Disarmament Week,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the reports of the
Secretary-General on measures taken by governmental
and non-governmental organizations to foster the objectives of Disarmament Weeks. and on elements of a model
programme for Disarmament Week; 58
2. Invites all States that so desire, in carrying out
appropriate measures at the local level on the occasion
of Disarmament Week, to take into account the elements
of the model programme prepared by the SecretaryGeneral;
·
3. Invites the relevant specialized agencies and
the International Atomic Energy Agency to intensify
activities, within their areas of competence, to disseminate information on the consequences of the arms
race and requests them to inform the Secretary-General
accordingly;
4. Invites Governments, in accordance with its resolution 33/71 D, to inform the Secretary-General of

•s See A/34/456 and Add.1.
49 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/34/42).
50 Ibid., para. 19.
n Resolution S-10/2.

52 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Seuion, Supplement No. 27 (A/34/27 and Corr.I).
58 Resolution S-10/2, para. 102.
54 A/34/457 and Add. 1 and 2.
55 A/34/436.

H
REPORT OF THE DISARMAMENT COMMISSION

m. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
activities undertaken to promote the objectives of Disarmament Week;
5. Invites international non-governmental organizations to take an active part in holding Disarmament
Week and to inform the Secretary-General of the activities undertaken;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance
with paragraph 4 of resolution 33/71 D, to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session a report
containing the information referred to in paragraphs 3
and 4 above.

97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979
J
NUCLEAR WEAPONS IN ALL ASPECTS

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that nuclear weapons pose the most serious threat to mankind and its survival and that it is
therefore essential to proceed with nuclear disarmament
and the complete elimination of nuclear weapons,
Reaffirming also that all the nuclear-weapon States,
in particular those which possess the most important
nuclear arsenals, bear a special responsibility for the fulfilment of the task of achieving the goals of nuclear
disarmament,
Stressing again that priority in disarmament negotiations should be given to nuclear weapons, and referring
to paragraphs 49 and 54 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 56
Recalling its resolution 33/71 H of 14 December 1978,
Noting with satisfaction that in 1979 the Committee
on Disarmament started to consider the substance of the
item entitled "Nuclear weapons in all aspects",
Noting also the proposals and statements made in the
Committee on Disarmament on the cessation of the nuclear arms race and nuclear disarmament, 57
Convinced that the Committee on Disarmament is the
most suitable forum for the preparation and conduct of
the negotiations on nuclear disarmament,
1. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to continue, at the beginning of its session in 1980, consideration of the item entitled "Nuclear weapons in all aspects"
and to undertake preparatory consultations on the negotiations referred to in paragraph 2 below;
2. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to
initiate neJotiations, as a matter of high priority, with
the participation of all nuclear-weapon States, on the
question of the cessation of the nuclear arms race and
nuclear disarmament, in accordance with the provisions
of paragraph 50 of the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session;58
3. Further requests the Committee on Disarmament
to report on the results of those negotiations to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979
Resolution S-10/2.
67 See Official Records q/ the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/34/27 and Corr.I), paras. 41-43.
68 Resolution S-10/2.
58

57

K
STUDY ON THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN DISARMAMENT
AND DEVELOPMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of paragraphs 94 and 95 of
the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the
General Assembly'· 0 concerning the relationship between
disarmament and development,
Recalling further its resolution 33/71 M of 14 December 1978, in which it took note of the organizational
report of the Group of Governmental Experts on the
Relationship between Disarmament and Deyelo~men~, 59
appointed by the Secretary-General to assist him with
the study on the relationship between disarmament and
development, and its resolution 33/71 I of the same dat_e
in which it requested the Secretary-General to transmit
to the Group of Governmental Experts, for its consideration, the proposal to establish an international disarmament fund for development,
Re-emphasizing that one of the principal aims of the
study should be to produce results that could effectively
guide the formulation of practical measures,
1. Takes note of the interim report of the SecretaryGeneral with respect to the above-mentioned study;00
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate action to provide the resources and expertise
necessary to complete successfully the study in accordance with paragraph 23 of the interim report;
3. Appeals to Governments to make available data
and information relevant to a meaningful completion of
the above-mentioned study;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-sixth session an item entitled "Study on the relationship· between disarmament and development: report of the Secretary-General".
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979

L
COMMITTEE ON DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling paragraph 120 of the Final Document of
the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 61
Having considered the report of the Committee on
Disarmament, 62
Stressing once again that considerable and urgent
work remains to be accomplished by the Committee on
Disarmament,
Noting that the Committee on Disarmament adopted
its rules of procedure, 68 which contain detailed arrangements on all aspects relating to its work,
Noting also that rule 17 of the rules of procedure of
the Committee on Disarmament states that the SecretaryGeneral will be requested to provide the staff as well as
the necessary assistance and services needed by the Committee and any subsidiary bodies which it may establish,
Requests, accordingly, the Secretary-General to provide the staff as well as the necessary assistance and
A/33/317, annex.
A/34/534.
61 Resolution S-10/2.
62
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/34/27 and Corr.I).
os Ibid., appendix I.
59
60

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

58

· services needed by the Committee on Disarmament and
any subsidiary bodies which it may establish, in accordance with the arrangements contained in its rules of
procedure.
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979
M
PROGRAMME OF RESEARCH AND STUDIES
ON DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Referring to its resolution 33/71 K of 14 December
1978, in which it requested the Secretary-General to
report to it at its thirty-fourth session on possible ways
of establishing, operating and financing an international
institute for disarmament research, under the auspices
of the United Nations,
1. Takes note of the information relevant to the
matter contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the programme of research and studies on
disarmament; 64
2. Welcomes the recommendations concerning the
United Nations institute for disarmament research submitted by the Advisory Board on Disarmament Studies
and set forth in the report of the Secretary-General; 05
3. Notes that, under those recommendations, the
United Nations institute for disarmament research would
be set up within the framework of the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research as an interim arrangement, for the period until the second special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament,
in 1982;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to hold consultations with the United Nations Institute on Training and
Research regard.ing the establishment of the United Nations institute for disarmament research;
5. Expresses the hope that appropriate steps will be
taken as soon as possible with a view to implementing
the recommendations set forth in the report of the Secretary-General;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979
34 / 84.

Conclusion of an international convention on
the strengthening of guarantees of the security
of non-nuclear-weapon States

The General Assembly,
Convinced of the need to take effective measures for
the strengthening of the security of States and prompted
by the desire shared by all nations to eliminate war and
prevent a nuclear holocaust,
Taking into account the principle of the non-use of
force or threat of force enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations and reaffirmed in a number of United
NatioQs declarations and resolutions,
Noting with satisfaction the desire of States in various
regions to prevent nuclear weapons from being introduced into their territories, including through the estab8' A/34/589.
&& Ibid.,

para. 7.

lishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones, on the basis of
arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the
region concerned, and being anxious to contribute to
this objective,
Considering that, until nuclear disarmament is
achieved on a universal basis, it is imperative for the
international community to develop, as appropriate,
effective measures to ensure the security of non-nuclearweapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons from any quarter,
Recognizing that effective measures to assure the nonnuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons can constitute a positive contribution
to the prevention of the spread of nuclear weapons,
Mindful of the statements and observations made by
various States on the strengthening of the security of
non-nuclear-weapon States,
Desirous of promoting the implementation of paragraph 59 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, 00 in which it urged the
nuclear-weapon States to pursue efforts to conclude, as
appropriate, effective arrangements to assure nonnuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons,
Recalling its resolution 33/72 of 14 December 1978,
Welcoming the in-depth consideration of the item entitled "Effective international arrangements to assure
non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons" by the Committee on Disarmament and the establishment of an ad hoe working group
open to all States members of the Committee to conduct
negotiations on the subject, 67
Noting with satisfaction that, under that item, drafts
of an international convention were submitted to the
Committee on Disarmament,
Taking note of the report of the Committee on Disarmament, including the report of the ad hoe Working Group, 08
Noting with satisfaction that the idea of a convention
has gained broad international support,
Desirous of promoting an early and successful completion of the negotiations on the elaboration of the
convention,
1. Welcomes the conclusion of the Committee on
Disarmament that it is urgent to reach agreement on
effective international arrangements to assure nonnuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use
of nuclear weapons;
2. Notes with satisfaction that in the Committee on
Disarmament there is no objection, in principle, to the
idea of such an international convention;
3. Commends the decision of the Committee on
Disarmament to continue the negotiations on this subject
at the beginning of its session in 1980;
4. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to continue the negotiations on this subject on a priority basis
during its session in 1980 with a view to their early conclusion with the elaboration of a convention to assure
non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-fifth session an item entitled "Conclusion of an
international convention on the strengthening of the
60

Resolution S-10/2.

61 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth

Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/34/27 and Corr.1), paras. 44-51.
6& Ibid., appendix II.
