S/PV.7954

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7954th meeting

Tuesday, 30 May 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rosselli. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uruguay)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Fesko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Klein

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-15192 (E)
*1715192*

S/PV.7954

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

The shelling of civilian areas and civilian infrastructure
is a serious violation of international humanitarian law.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen; Mr. Stephen O’Brien, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator; and Ms. Radhya Al-Mutawakel, of
the Mwatana Organization For Human Rights.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed.
Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed (spoke in Arabic): I
thank you very much, Sir, for the opportunity to brief
the Council on the latest developments in the Yemeni
peace process.
Tragically, the violence continues on numerous
fronts, deepening the suffering of the Yemeni
people. Much of the violence has focused on the
western coastline of Taiz governorate, where proGovernment forces are attempting to make progress
from Al-Dhubab and Al-Mokha towards Hudaydah
port and inland towards Taiz city. An assessment
mission carried out by humanitarian agencies in early
April found that Al-Dhubab town was largely empty
due to widespread destruction of infrastructure and
contamination by unexploded ordnance and landmines.
In Al-Mokha town, an estimated 40 per cent of houses
and infrastructure have been damaged by the fighting.
Violence has also continued in Hajjah governorate
and the border area between Yemen and Saudi Arabia.
There has been a significant escalation of violence in
Taiz, including intensified shelling from 21 to 23 May by
forces allied with Ansar Allah and Ali Abdullah Saleh,
leading to the deaths and injury of tens of civilians and
significant damage to civilian infrastructure in the city.
2/13

30/05/2017

Air strikes have hit numerous other locations
in the country. On 29 March, an air strike in Saada
governorate reportedly killed 12 civilians, including
several children. In addition, ballistic missiles were
fired into Saudi territory. The persistent military action
is leading to an increased militarization of the Yemeni
population, the extensive proliferation of weapons
and widespread use of deadly landmines. The terrible
scenes witnessed on the west coast and other areas of the
country show yet again how the conflict is laying waste
to the civilian population, its homes and livelihoods.
The parties must urgently come together to prevent the
deepening of the catastrophic situation.
I will not hide the fact that we are nowhere close
to reaching a comprehensive agreement from the
Council. The reluctance of the key parties to embrace
the concessions needed for peace, or even discuss them,
remains extremely troubling. Yemenis are paying a
price for their needless delay.
As the holy month of Ramadan begins, we must
remember that 7 million Yemenis are at risk of famine
unless the conflict ends. A quarter of Yemenis cannot
afford food on the local market. Half of Yemen’s
population lacks access to clean water, sanitation
and hygiene services, thereby increasing the risk
of infectious diseases. The most recent outbreak of
cholera has led to more than 500 deaths and over 60,000
suspected cases in 19 governorates. The rapid spread
of the disease has been aggravated by an inadequate
health-care system. Fewer than 45 per cent of medical
facilities are functioning and medicines for diabetes,
hypertension, cancer and other chronic diseases are
in short supply. As the World Health Organization has
underlined, Yemenis are dying not just from violence;
the violence, lack of salaries and the loss of their
livelihoods prevents them from receiving the basic
treatment they need to survive.
So far, we have managed to avert military action
in Al Hudaydah. The spread of fighting to the city
would lead to a devastating loss of civilian life and
infrastructure. It would threaten the flow of food and
medical supplies through the port and bring further
suffering to the Yemeni people. I made it clear to the
parties during my recent meetings with the Government
of Yemen and with political leaders in Sana’a that
they must reach a compromise on the situation in Al
17-15192

30/05/2017

The situation in the Middle East

Hudaydah, in order to prevent such a horrific scenario.
I regret that the delegation of Ansar Allah and the
General People’s Congress in Sana’a did not meet with
me to discuss the framework for such an agreement.
My proposal, which includes security, economic
and humanitarian elements, would allow for the
continued flow of commercial and humanitarian
supplies and ensure the end of any diversion of customs
revenues and taxes so that they could be used to support
salaries and services rather than the war or for personal
benefit. Agreement between the parties on those
issues will safeguard the population of Al Hudaydah
against further harm and preserve commercial and
humanitarian supply chains and the payment of salaries.
I have proposed an agreement that would prevent
military clashes in Al Hudaydah and should be
negotiated in parallel with an agreement to ensure
the resumption of salary payments nationally to
all civil servants. The lack of salary payments is
driving millions of Yemenis into destitution. Such an
agreement would require mechanisms to ensure that
all State revenues, whether collected in Al Hudaydah,
Sana’a, or elsewhere, are used in support of salary
payments and the preservation of essential Government
services in all areas of the country. I call on all parties
to engage with me, without delay, on the basis of my
proposal. Salary payments are possible only through
an agreement between the Yemeni parties. It requires
cooperation and negotiations about the use of existing
resources in the country rather, than the scapegoating
of the United Nations.
In parallel with efforts to avoid destructive
conflict, we must also preserve systems that can serve
the Yemeni people now and in the future. I am grateful
to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the World Bank
for organizing a conference to discuss urgent measures
to support Yemen’s economy and State institutions, as
well as its longer-term recovery and reconstruction. I
praise the work of the World Bank, UNICEF and local
Yemeni institutions in restarting cash assistance to the
poorest families through existing distribution social
safety mechanisms. Such mechanisms will be a vital
boost for household purchasing power and will help
millions of Yemenis keep their children out of the
growing ranks of the malnourished.
Commercial importers currently lack access to
the financing required to sustain imports of essential
goods, in particular during the holy month of Ramadan.

S/PV.7954

I welcome efforts to create a trade finance facility that
will allow commercial importers access to the hard
currency that they need in order to pay for imports.
That will ensure the continued availability of key
commodities in Yemeni markets and will prevent the
degradation of supply chains, allowing for more rapid
economic recovery in the long term. That effort is
just a part of a dynamic and innovative collaboration
between the World Bank and the United Nations, which
is unprecedented in scale and in the rapidity of its
deployment. I am confident that it is having a positive
impact today on the lives of Yemenis and will help
to ensure a more rapid and stable recovery following
the conflict.
The prospect of economic recovery and stability
is still a distant prospect for most Yemenis and the
country continues to be fertile ground for extremist
groups. Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula operations
have persisted in several governorates, including
Hadramout, Aden, Al-Dhali, Ma’reb and Shabwa. The
absence of stability, economic opportunity and rule of
law means that Yemen will continue to be a haven for
such groups unless there is lasting peace.
I would like to express my deep concern regarding
recent reports from Yemen of efforts to suppress and
undermine the work of journalists, human rights
activists and civil society, including harassment,
beatings, arbitrary detention and trials without due
process. I am particularly worried by the sentencing
to death of Yahya Al-Jubayhi, a prominent Yemeni
journalist, by a court run by the Houthis and General
People’s Congress on 12 April. I am also concerned
by the arbitrary arrest and threats to the safety of
members of the Baha’i community. The parties must
uphold their obligation to respect the integrity of civil
society and allow such actors to carry out their valuable
work without fear of threat or intimidation. They must
also allow religious minorities to live without fear
of persecution.
I must highlight the important and effective role that
Yemeni women continue to play in resolving conflict
and in contributing to the vision for lasting peace and
reconciliation, despite the atmosphere of violence and
increasing risks to their safety. During my visit to
Sana’a, I had the pleasure of meeting representatives of
the Yemeni Women Pact for Peace and Security, which
brings together Yemeni women from different political
parties, as well as independent members of civil
society. The meetings, which were convened by UN-

17-151923/13

S/PV.7954

The situation in the Middle East

Women, discussed issues that are central to the current
conflict in Yemen, including the economic crisis,
political deadlock and the possibility of preventing an
attack against Al Hudaydah. The members discussed
mechanisms to increase women’s inclusion in the peace
negotiations and the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).
Yemeni women, civil society and political leaders
have also been meeting regularly in discussions on
the peace process and the future of the transition. I
am very grateful for the efforts of Germany and the
Berghof Foundation for hosting the events that will help
Yemenis build consensus on their way to a return to a
peaceful, orderly transition that meets the aspirations
of Yemen’s people.
During the past two months, the demands of the
southern governorates for greater autonomy have
become more prominent. Such calls demonstrate once
again the urgent need for a peace agreement so that
Yemenis can engage in discussions to finalize the
Constitution, agree on a framework for addressing past
injustices and prepare for the election of a Government
that puts the country on the path towards recovery and
prosperity. Yemenis across the country have been worn
out by the conflict.
My meeting with an inspiring group of youth
activists in Sana’a last week reminded me of the great
Yemeni hopes for political transition before the war. The
hopes of those young women and men for the resolution
of issues have been ignored for too long. We discussed
the political and security challenges facing Yemen, as
well as the cholera outbreak. In my discussions with
those members of civil society, women and youth groups
proposed very practical ideas, including opening the
Sana’a airport for civilian flights and urgent demands
for the thousands of students and Yemenis requiring
urgent medical treatment throughout the country.
The demands of those young people are just, logical,
inspiring and practical.
I very much regret to inform the Council that the
call for peace from Yemeni women, civil society and
the international community is still falling on deaf
ears. An agreement on Al Hudaydah and salaries should
represent a first step towards a national cessation of
hostilities and renewed discussions on a comprehensive
agreement. Yet, serious negotiations on those first steps
have been slow to start.
4/13

30/05/2017

I am deeply concerned by the attack on my convoy
while traveling from the airport to the United Nations
compound on 22 May. Such an incident cannot be
ignored, and I call on the local authorities to conduct
a full and transparent investigation into the attack and
hold those responsible for the attack to account. Despite
its gravity, it has increased my determination to continue
with my efforts to fmd a negotiated political settlement
that best serves the interests of the Yemeni people.
I urge the Council to strongly convey to the
parties that they need to engage immediately with
the United Nations to agree on steps to avoid further
bloodshed, halt the slide towards famine and recommit
to a peaceful end to the war. The humanitarian crisis
and the threat of famine are entirely man-made. If the
conflict stops, then Yemenis and their partners in the
international community will have the capacity and the
will to rebuild the country. With the unified backing
of the international community, the path towards peace
has been clearly laid out for the parties involved.
I take this opportunity to remind this Council of
the thousands of Yemenis who have lost their lives
for no other reason than paying the price of a war
between their leaders. I would also like to remind the
Council of the millions of Yemeni victims affected
by man-made hunger, violence and famine. I appeal
to the parties to stop fighting for power and instead
to strive to build a country that respects the rights
of all its citizens — a country with a prosperous
economy and strong institutions for all Yemenis just as
Yemenis deserve.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Ahmed for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen for his briefing, with which I completely align.
The people of Yemen are being subjected to
deprivation, disease and death as the world watches.
That is not an unforeseen or coincidental result of
forces beyond our control. It is a direct consequence
of actions of the parties and supporters of the conflict.
It is also sadly a result of inaction, due to inability or
indifference, by the international community.
As I have previously briefed the Council in recent
months, urgent action is required in order to end the
suffering. Yet, based on facts and, as ever, in complete
17-15192

30/05/2017

The situation in the Middle East

candour, I return to the Council to report that the
situation on the ground has continued to spiral towards
total social, economic and institutional collapse.
Yemen now has the ignominy of being the world’s
largest food security crisis, with more than 17 million
people who are food insecure, 6.8 million of whom are
one step away from famine. Crisis is not coming. It is
not looming. It is here today, on our watch. Ordinary
people are paying the price.
Worse still, the threat of famine is driven and
exacerbated by conflict. Yemen is not facing a drought.
If there were no conflict in Yemen, there would be
no descent into famine, misery, disease and death. A
famine would certainly be avoidable and averted. We
all know that there will be no military solution. And
for as long as it takes until a political solution is found,
we will continue as humanitarians to do everything
in our power in order to avert the famine in Yemen,
despite the challenges to our operations by all sides and
their supporters.
While the United Nations Verification and
Inspection Mechanism has facilitated the transfer of
over 7.6 million metric tons of goods through Yemen’s
Red Sea ports, of which 3.8 million metric tons were
food, people’s ability to buy food is diminishing. We
are working hard to enhance the Mechanism and get
it funded. In particular, governorates in which active
fighting and airstrikes continue, such as Taiz, Hajjah,
Sa’ada, Al-Jawf and Marib, remain affected by high
and rising prices of commodities. The prices of red
beans and wheat flour were 59 per cent and 29 per cent
higher in April than they were pre-crisis. The economy
is collapsing, employment has all but disappeared, food
and fuel prices have skyrocketed and severe disruptions
to fishing and agricultural production continue.
The bottom line is that what food there is is largely
unaffordable to the vast majority of the population,
especially the most vulnerable, such as the 2 million
people who remain internally displaced.
It is not just the food security situation. The
institutional capacity of Yemen to respond to the basic
needs of the population is crumbling, exacerbated by
the failure of the Central Bank, following its move
from Sanna’a to Aden, to operate in the interests of the
people it is intended to serve. All parties to the conflict
in Yemen have proven their continued inability to put
the genuine needs of the Yemeni people first. The
health-care system is a shell of what it once was, with
half of all health facilities now closed. People are dying

S/PV.7954

because even basic medical treatment, which we would
take for granted, is no longer available. By the time I
finish my statement to the Council today, another child
in Yemen will have died from a preventable disease.
Over 1 million civil servants have not been paid for
months, which has affected more than 8 million people
and pushed more and more families towards poverty
and starvation. Families are increasingly marrying
off their young daughters in order to have someone
else care for them. They often use the dowry to pay
for basic necessities. While humanitarians have been
working to assist the poorest of the poor, it is now
also professionals, such as university professors, who
are asking for food assistance. As the crisis continues,
pressure on already scarce humanitarian resources will
increase and survival for Yemenis will become harder.
It will be difficult for Yemen to recover.
The strain being placed upon the all-too-fragile
Yemeni system became all too evident in the past month,
with the extensive, desperate resurgence of cholera. The
debilitated health system took longer to detect cholera
warning signs because the health workers who would
normally have been maintaining disease surveillance
systems were not paid. Water and sanitation systems
were not functioning, owing to lack of fuel and basic
maintenance, leaving more than 8 million people
without access to safe drinking water and sanitation.
The combination of the rainy season and the
uncollected rubbish that has piled up in the streets
of large cities has created the perfect conditions for
the rapid spread of communicable and water-borne
diseases. In the past month alone, twice as many people
are suspected of being cholera cases compared to
those in the last six months combined, and one third
of them are children. It is important to bear in mind
that malnutrition and cholera are interconnected,
because weakened and hungry people are more likely
to contract cholera and less able to survive it. Estimates
are projecting 150,000 cases over the next six months,
in addition to the roughly 60,000 current suspected
cases since April, with 500 associated deaths.
As well as being depressingly predictable, the scale
of the latest outbreak is a direct consequence of the
conflict. Had the parties to the conflict cared, it would
have been avoidable. Nonetheless, I should praise the
extraordinary speed and courage of the United Nations
and its humanitarian partners, including international
and national aid workers from non-governmental

17-151925/13

S/PV.7954

The situation in the Middle East

organizations, who are doing all they can under
the strong leadership of Humanitarian Coordinator
Jamie McGoldrick.
The United Nations and its partners are working
tirelessly to help authorities on all sides meet the
challenge posed by this cholera outbreak, from Aden
to Sa’ada and from Hudaydah to Taiz. We have
worked urgently to scale up assistance, quadrupling
the number of diarrhoea treatment centres in the past
month and establishing 136 oral-rehydration corners.
Synchronized water, sanitation and health efforts,
including a nationwide awareness campaign, are in
place with a view to ensuring a comprehensive and
holistic response. Some 1.6 million people have already
been supported through those interventions and we
will not cease our efforts until the scourge of cholera
is contained. I salute the local health and sanitation
workers, who are trying to support all and taking no
sides regardless of the warring parties’ contemptible
attempts to get them to do so. Together with the United
Nations and other partners, they are providing roundthe-clock assistance, and I would also like to thank
those who have provided financial support, including
from the region, to make that happen.
The humanitarian response to the cholera outbreak
is one part of a much larger effort. In all, humanitarians
have reached 5.8 million people this year with food
assistance, including at least 3 million people every
month. As the needs mount, we will need more
resources, but our ability to respond is dependent on
sustained and predictable funding. As the Council is
aware, on 25 April the Secretary-General, together
with the Foreign Ministers of Sweden and Switzerland,
co-hosted a high-level pledging conference for Yemen
to respond to the increasingly acute needs in the
country. The conference generated $1.1 billion in very
generous pledges.
We are grateful to all the donors who have made
good on their pledges in full and encourage others
to do the same. As of last night, 56 per cent, about
$612 million of the pledges, had been paid both within
and outside the humanitarian-response plan. That
means that the overall humanitarian strategy and plan is
only 24 per cent funded, with $489 million received of
the $2.1 billion required. I strongly urge that we ensure
that funding is provided in support of the humanitarian
strategy and plan, since it is the most effective, neutral
and impartial way to reach those most in need. With
escalating needs, we will need more resources.
6/13

30/05/2017

Let me now turn to the issue of access. Hudaydah
port is a lifeline for Yemen, being the primary point
of entry for commercial and humanitarian imports into
the country, which has historically been between 80
and 90 per cent dependent on imported food staples.
Hudaydah is also the only port in Yemen that can handle
fuel, bulk and containerized cargo at scale. Yet vessels
have only intermittent access to it, owing to diversions
and clearance delays imposed by the coalition, which,
coupled with the risk of attacks on the port, has sapped
traders’ confidence. Where it has normally taken a week
to get into the Red Sea ports, it now often takes five
times as long. Given the rising costs, major shipping
companies are now simply avoiding the ports, thereby
depriving the Yemeni people of desperately needed
food and fuel.
I appeal to Member States to ensure that every effort
is made to keep Hudaydah port open and operating. An
attack on it is not in the interests of any party, as it will
directly and irrevocably drive the Yemeni population
further into starvation and famine. In that regard, we
continue to support the efforts of the Special Envoy
to develop a sustainable solution for the protection of
the port as critical civilian infrastructure. In addition,
bringing in the United Nations mobile cranes that have
been stuck for the last four months in Dubai would be an
investment in Hudaydah port’s civilian character, and
would help to get food and fuel to those most in need.
Aside from Hudaydah, the parties must commit to
ensuring that all other ports and land routes are open
for both humanitarian and commercial imports, as
humanitarian action alone cannot meet the needs of
a population of 27 million people. Access across the
country, including in Taiz governorate, must be safe,
consistent and unimpeded, and commercial goods must
be allowed to reach Yemen’s ports without artificial
delays and corrupt exactions. It is also imperative
that commercial flights to Sana’a resume in order to
enable civilians to seek medical treatment and families
to reunite.
Time is running out. The Yemeni people face a triple
threat of armed conflict, famine and deadly disease
that has already killed, injured, displaced or otherwise
affected millions, and it will spare no one if it continues
unchecked. The cruel irony, as I said at the beginning,
is that these threats are man-made and could easily
have been prevented. The international community, in
concert with those parties to the conflict, now has an
urgent duty to address those threats and bring Yemen
17-15192

30/05/2017

The situation in the Middle East

and its people on all sides of the fighting lines back
from the brink of complete disaster.
As humanitarians, we will continue to do our
job, but the Yemeni people also need the international
community to do its job. A sustainable political
agreement is the only long-term solution, and if it is
to be achieved, there must be a reduction in violence,
an end to violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law, and unimpeded access to those in
need. The parties to the conflict and the international
community, especially the Security Council, cannot
allow the deadly combination of violence, inaction
and indifference to condemn the Yemeni people to a
bleak obituary.
I call on the international community to
immediately undertake the following actions to avoid
irreversible consequences that will have a generational
impact on Yemen and the wider region. The first is to
ensure the protection of the Yemeni people. For as long
as military actions continue, all parties must comply
with international humanitarian and human rights law,
and all States must exert their influence to ensure that
the parties do so. The second is to ensure that all ports
and land routes remain open for both humanitarian
and commercial imports, including working to avoid
attacks on Hudaydah and to reopen Sana’a airport.
We need the mobile cranes at the port. The third is to
preserve essential Yemeni institutions and ensure that
civil servants are paid. This is no longer just a question
of politics or economics; it is about basic humanity,
human dignity and, indeed, survival.
Cholera is spreading at an unprecedented rate and
famine is knocking at the door of millions tonight. The
parties to this conflict and their allies, as well other
countries in the region and across the globe, must
set aside politics and self-interest and respond at the
most humane level, facilitating access and mobilizing
resources to treat the cholera outbreak and ensure that
food gets to those in need. In that spirit, I urge the
parties, with the support of the international community,
to redouble their efforts to reach a sustainable political
settlement, ensuring that the people’s protection,
dignity and well-being are at the heart of any agreement.
Working together, we can end one of the world’s great
humanitarian tragedies and put Yemen back on a path
to survival and a future. The time is now.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.

S/PV.7954

I now give the floor to Ms. Al-Mutawakel.
Ms. Al-Mutawakel: I would first like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to bring the voice of
civil society to the Security Council. Many Yemenis
hope that the Council can have a positive impact on
their war-weary lives.
I have come here from forgotten Yemen,
overburdened by bearing witness to the grave human
suffering that millions of Yemenis have endured as a
result of the war. My country is in a state of total collapse.
On my shoulders, I bear the weight of the stories
that have been gathered over the last three years by the
Mwatana Organization for Human Rights. Mwatana
operates across Yemen in extremely difficult and
complicated conditions, and we do everything possible
to document and give voice to the victims and survivors
of human rights violations that are happening daily by
all parties to the conflict in all parts of the country. One
of Mwatana’s goals is to build a human rights memory
that will provide the foundation for future justice and
accountability for the people of Yemen. Most Yemenis
are not involved in the war and do not have anything to
do with military activity. The most common refrain we
hear from people in our field work is “We hate war. We
want to live.”
War in Yemen did not happen suddenly. It is the
result of accumulated mistakes by all parties over the
past years. However, there are real opportunities to end
this war and achieve a fair settlement that puts Yemenis
on track to build a State grounded in the rule of law.
For those who counted on war to bring solutions, what
has war achieved except thousands of civilians killed
and injured, many of them women and children? War
has destroyed the basic and limited infrastructure
that Yemen took decades to assemble. War led to the
collapse of the health system. War is stopping hundreds
of thousands of Yemeni children from going to school,
undermining the development of an entire generation.
Hundreds of children are forcibly recruited to serve
in the front lines. War has led to a humanitarian crisis
that is so acute that famine is imminent. Millions are
invisibly internally displaced, and recently an outbreak
of cholera has infected thousands of Yemenis.
If we put a lens closer on Yemen, we could easily
catch the terrifying absence of State institutions in
areas controlled by de facto authority of the Houthi
Ansar Allah armed group and its ally, former President
Saleh, as well as in areas controlled by the authority

17-151927/13

S/PV.7954

The situation in the Middle East

of President Hadi and parties and armed groups allied
with him. Yemenis aspire to a strong Administration
capable of providing security and basic services.
Instead, they have only found armed groups engaged in
conflict over power at their expense. War is providing
an ideal environment for extremist groups to take hold
and flourish. These groups have been working tirelessly
through the war to consolidate their power at the local
level. They are virtual landmines in Yemen’s future
and they cannot be weakened unless a state of law and
order exists.
Yemenis today need the international community
and the Security Council to fulfil their responsibilities
to protect them. Throughout the past three years of
war, all parties to the conflict have committed grave
violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. This cannot be allowed
to continue unchecked.
The Mwatana Organization for Human Rights
has documented grave violations by the Saudi and
Emirates-led coalition that has brought about the
killing of thousands of civilians, mostly women
and children. This coalition has struck residential
compounds, public markets, cultural and heritage sites,
hospitals, schools, bridges and factories. We have also
documented extensive violations by Ansar Allah armed
groups and their ally former President Saleh, especially
in Taiz, including the use of landmines in different
areas in Yemen. Furthermore, we have documented
violations, including extrajudicial executions by the
forces of President Hadi and parties and armed groups
allied with him. Both sides share responsibility for the
indiscriminate shelling of civilians and civilian facilities,
recruitment of children, denial of humanitarian access,
arbitrary detention, enforced disappearance, torture,
violations of freedom of speech and the disappearance
of a free press, harassing minorities, such as Bahais,
and other grave violations.
This war is taking the greatest toll on Yemeni
women, who have become prime civilian targets for
all warring parties. They have lost their breadwinners,
forcing them to suffer an even greater level of poverty
than was evident before the conflict. Women are living
an increasingly dangerous and insecure situation that
restricts their movement and ability to fight poverty.
Scenes of mothers, wives and daughters running from
one prison to another in hope of hearing something
about their detained and forcibly disappeared loved
ones has been one of the hardest things to witness in
8/13

30/05/2017

this war. The people of Yemen look to the international
community to ensure accountability for these serious
violations of international law. Yemenis expect to see
serious steps taken to restore their confidence in the
capacity of the United Nations to maintain peace and
security and promote justice.
During war, peacebuilding becomes an act of
courage and bravery. I call on the Security Council to
come together to revive the peace talks so there can
be an end of this senseless war. I call on the Security
Council to support the Special Envoy for Yemen to be
strong in the face of warring parties and to impress an
inclusive peace plan that is not biased by the vision of
one party alone. I call for the comprehensive inclusion
of all Yemeni parties in the peace talks and to give
ample space for the participation of civil society,
women and youth. I call on Security Council members
to stand beside Yemenis, halt support for any party to
the conflict and stop transferring arms to any warring
party in the country.
The suffering of Yemenis cannot come to an end
unless war ends. Long-term commitments are needed
to promote peace. The Security Council also needs to
take urgent concrete action to immediately mitigate
suffering. These actions will require the Security
Council to show courage, commitment and resolve.
The Security Council should urgently establish an
international independent commission of inquiry to
investigate violations by all parties to the conflict, stop
the sale of weapons to parties involved in human rights
violations in Yemen, demand an end to the targeting of
civilians and civilian objects through aerial and ground
attacks, ensure the release of civilian detainees who are
arbitrarily held and those forcibly disappeared under
the authority of the Houthi-Saleh alliance or under the
Government of President Hadi and his allies, demand
that there be unhindered humanitarian access to all areas
and all people in need, ensure that Sana’a International
Airport is reopened, insist upon immediate agreement
among the parties for a mechanism to pay salaries to
public sector employees, protect Hodeida port from
the armed conflict and ensure that it is restored to full
functionality so it can better meet the needs of millions
of Yemenis, and demand that the restrictions on the
operation of civil-society organizations are lifted, press
freedoms restored and all detained journalists released,
especially those who are under Houthi authority.
We have before us an opportunity for the Security
Council to take action to protect the people of Yemen
17-15192

30/05/2017

The situation in the Middle East

and support us in finding the path to a sustainable
peace. Despite the difficulty of the situation on the
ground, it is still possible to turn around and chart a path
towards peace, democracy and economic development.
However, as the war continues, we need to keep in
mind that what is possible today might not be possible
tomorrow. Urgent action is therefore crucial.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to those Council members who wish to
make statements.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to thank the
United Nations Special Envoy for Yemen, Mr. Ismail
Ould Cheikh Ahmed, and the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Stephen O’Brien, to
whom we express our support for all the efforts he
has made to fulfil his mandate, for their briefings. I
would also particularly like to thank Ms. Radhiya
Al-Mutawakel for her poignant statement that has
showed us the face of the grave situation in Yemen.
While the matter that we have come to discuss is an
update on the establishment of the peace negotiations as
a response to the conflict, we must acknowledge that the
situation of the Yemeni people is becoming increasingly
alarming and precarious owing to the many elements
that are coming together and exacerbating their living
conditions. The situation in Yemen is critical and the
figures are distressing.
As Mr. O’Brien has been pointing out and as he
underscored once again, the total population of Yemen
is 27.4 million, more than 18 million of whom require
humanitarian assistance and, among them, more than
10 million need extremely urgent assistance. There is
also a shortage of food for more than 17 million people
who are living in food insecurity, of which 6.8 million
are at risk of famine.
Unfortunately, the situation continues to deterioate
and the Yemeni people now has to deal with an outbreak
of cholera, which according to the 18 May report of the
World Health Organization, has led to 361 deaths in April
and May and has spread to 19 of the 22 provinces that
make up Yemen. According to the 24 May communiqué
of the Humanitarian Coordinator in Yemen, more than
35,000 cases of possible contagion have been recorded.
We are therefore very concerned that the humanitarian
assistance deployed in Yemen continues to be seriously
affected by the imposition of random restrictions by the
parties to the conflict, as well as by the constant threat

S/PV.7954

of air attacks on civilian infrastructure, which limits
the distribution of humanitarian supplies, which the
Yemeni people desperately need.
In the same vein, we regret and condemn the
22 May attack in Sana’a on a humanitarian convoy
in which the Special Envoy was also travelling. We
remind the parties to the conflict that they must provide
unconditional and unrestricted access to humanitarian
assistance and ensure that it is secure and not identify
humanitarian convoys as military targets for any
reason. We also reiterate to the regional actors involved
in the conflict that they have the obligation to respect
the provisions of resolution 2140 (2014) and that they
must do everything possible to commit themselves to
establishing a sustainable process for dialogue that
will lead to a peaceful, inclusive and orderly political
transition that is led by the Yemeni people and that will
meet their legitimate rights and aspirations, as well as
fully respect Yemen’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity.
We feel it is important to refer to the words of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra’ad
Zeid Al Hussein, who last May in a press conference in
Geneva said,
“The United Nations is concerned about the
humanitarian repercussions of such an attack in
terms of inflaming the humanitarian crisis even
further, let alone our concerns about loss of civilian
life were there to be a large-scale attack on port”.
We believe that the Council should maintain a
unanimous position in speaking out against these
belligerent acts and campaigns and against any action
that defends the use of violence or weapons as an
option to solve this or any other conflict, especially
when these war tactics run counter to the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, which the Security
Council stands for. We unequivocally reiterate that the
Security Council must send out a clear, quick message
with regard to humanitarian assistance and with regard
to the port of Hudaydah, which is the only entrance
possible for humanitarian assistance for civilian
victims who must now deal with not only a food crisis,
but also a health crisis which could get worse if these
attacks continue.
In conclusion, Bolivia would like to reiterate the
three requests made in this meeting by Mr. O’Brien.
We listened carefully to what he just said and I picked
up on the following. Yemen has been forgotten, as can

17-151929/13

S/PV.7954

The situation in the Middle East

be seen in the famine, war, collapsed economy, deadly
diseases and attacks on civilians which plague the
country. Yemen today is one of the greatest failures of
the Council and of our Organization.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Uruguay.
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Cheikh
Ahmed, Mr. O’Brien, and Ms. Al-Mutawakel for their
briefings. We reiterate our support for the work being
carried out by the Special Envoy and we thank him for
his ongoing efforts to find a solution to the conflict.
Uruguay firmly condemns the attack that he
suffered during his transfer from the Sana’a airport on
22 May during his official visit to Yemen. An attack
on his person is an attack on the United Nations and is
therefore unacceptable and must be condemned in the
strongest terms. We also extend our deepest gratitude
and recognition to the humanitarian agents and
institutions in Yemen for their arduous work to bring
hope to the civilian population who have been victims
of this armed conflict for more than two years.
This open Security Council briefing on the situation
in Yemen is not only a forum to address the issue, but
it also seeks to give shed light on the cruel reality that
the country is suffering and provide an opportunity to
express to the thousands of Yemeni men, women and
children that they have not been forgotten.
Uruguay supports the peaceful settlement of the
conflict in Yemen. The negotiation process and the peace
talks are the only way out of the crisis. Uruguay regrets
the prolonged stagnation in the peace process, which
has not been able to bring about positive results until
now. We are most concerned about the fact that none of
the parties is demonstrating sustained commitment or
interest in achieving a political settlement that would
put an end to the conflict. The United Nations and
the international community can and must promote
peace, but it is the Yemenis themselves who must
make their own decisions in order to achieve peace.
The stakeholders must acknowledge that they have to
make concessions. Uruguay reiterates its call on the
parties to resume the dialogue and to fully respect
the commitment to a cessation of hostilities, which is
fundamental step for the establishment of peace.
To achieve stability in Yemen, actors in the region
and those countries that have influence on the parties
10/13

30/05/2017

must commit to working together towards a peaceful
settlement of the conflict. Yemen has been witness to
generalized violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law committed by all the
warring parties. These violations have been documented
in several case studies by groups of experts on Yemen.
We congratulate them on their work and we encourage
them to continue their work. The parties involved have
shown that they are completely unwilling to investigate
these horrendous acts. We therefore believe that it is
up to the Security Council to establish impartial and
transparent investigative mechanisms on international
humanitarian law violations that have taken place
in Yemen by both parties to the conflict. That is an
necessary and essential step to ensuring accountability.
Last week, during the open debate on the protection
of civilians and health care in armed conflict (see
S/PV.7951), we stressed that civilians continue to pay
the highest cost of war. In Yemen, the indiscriminate
attacks are creating a real catastrophe. The bombing
against civil infrastructure require our full attention
and the condemnation of the international community.
Those responsible for these aberrant atrocities and
their accomplices must be held accountable for those
crimes. The traffic and trade in weapons to the warring
parties must cease because this directly contributes to
the massacre of civilians. The ongoing violence and
the dismantling of Yemeni institutions is also enabling
terrorism to spread. As has been seen, groups, such
as Da’esh and Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula,
are actively benefiting from the changing political
environment and the vacuum in governance to recruit
new members and organize new attacks.
With regard to the humanitarian situation,
Uruguay is also concerned by the humanitarian crisis
in Yemen, in particular the serious situation for the
most vulnerable people, such as women and children.
The appalling situation and the seriousness of the
humanitarian situation for the Yemeni people requires
immediate and unhindered access for humanitarian
assistance to the civilian population, including through
the port of Hudaydah. Access to that port is essential
as it is the primary access route for food imports to
the country.
Finally, I want to stress that we all share the
responsibility of maximizing efforts to bring about
peace and to alleviate the suffering of millions of
people. We call on all States that can bring influence to
17-15192

30/05/2017

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7954

bear upon the parties, to collaborate in the pursuit of a
peaceful solution to the conflict.

to the support of the international community, Yemen
had eradicated cholera in past years.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

Today, Yemen is a terrifying scene out of Dante’s
Divine Comedy, where death prevails in all of its
colours and human suffering is the major headline.
That is all due to the coup leaders holding on to stolen
power and stealing the scarce resources of the Yemeni
people. The head of that criminal coup d’état, AbdulMalik Badreddin Al-Houthi, is sitting in his cave,
alleging the holy right to rule while the international
community combating terrorism is facing another
pretender, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, who has established
the State of death and terrorism and wrongfully called
it the Islamic State.

I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your outstanding leadership of the work of the Security
Council this month. We thank you sincerely for allowing
us to address the Council.
I begin my statement by pledging the full support
of the Government and the people of Yemen for the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed. We strongly condemn
the assassination attempt against him in the occupied
capital of Yemen by the Houthi militias allied to the
former President’s followers. On Monday, 22 May, the
Government of Yemen issued its condemnation of that
criminal act targeting the Special Envoy. The group of
18, which sponsors the political operation in Yemen,
has also issued a statement strongly condemning that
criminal act and calling upon the leaders of the coup to
undertake a full investigation of the crime. It came at a
time when the Special Envoy carried new proposals to
resume peace efforts, including a truce during the holy
month of Ramadan, as well as arrangements to hand
over the city of Hudaydah to the legitimate Government
and the exit of the Houthi militias from the city as a first
step towards resuming peace negotiations in Kuwait
and signing such understandings.
The Government of Yemen has expressed its initial
acceptance of the peace proposals carried by the Special
Envoy and its desire to put an end to Yemeni bloodshed.
Regretfully, the recent visit of the Special Envoy was
met with the intransigence and aggression of the leaders
of the coup. Today, on the fourth day of the holy month
of Ramadan, we are facing a lost opportunity, with the
increasing suffering of the Yemeni people, who are at
the mercy of the militias of death.
After more than two years of a coup d’état led
by the Houthi militias, in association with the former
President, and with the support and incitement of
Iran, Yemen is experiencing one of the most horrific
humanitarian tragedies. The victims of the coup are on
the rise, Yemenis have been displaced to the four corners
of the planet, famine has spread as have diseases — the
last of which was the dreadful cholera outbreak. Thanks

The terrorism of the Houthi movement, Da’esh, or
Al-Qaida, which is controlled by hidden hands in the
Iranian intelligence, is turning our lives into a nightmare.
They have actually put an end to the dream of Yemenis
with the result of the national dialogue conference
to establish a democratic federal State. This war has
never been the choice of the Yemeni Government, led
by President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour. It was
imposed upon us after all other peaceful options were
exhausted and after we had reached many compromises
so as to not endure an indiscriminate war, where the
first and last loser would be the great Yemeni people.
Nevertheless, we extend a peaceful hand for a
just and comprehensive solution based on the agreed
instruments. Locally, regionally and internationally,
those are the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative and
its implementation mechanism and the resolutions of
the Security Council — the latest of which is resolution
2216 (2015). That solution would bring genuine peace,
instead of temporary peace that would lead to further
wars for coup leaders, terrorists and gangs to violate
our national sovereignty.
The catastrophic humanitarian situation that
my country has been enduring since the rogue coup
d’état of the Houthi militias and the followers of the
former President requires further attention from
the international community. Those gangs, which
have forcefully taken power, have brought increased
humanitarian suffering and the spread of famine and
disease — most recently cholera — which have led to
the death of many people.
In that connection, I would like to refer to the
excellent outcome of the Geneva Conference of
25 April — under the sponsorship of the Secretary-

17-1519211/13

S/PV.7954

The situation in the Middle East

General and the Governments of Switzerland and
Sweden — aimed at supporting the humanitarian
response plan in Yemen for 2017. It raised approximately
$1.1 million. In that regard, we call upon all countries
that pledged funds to follow through so that we can
use the money to combat the cholera and famine in
Yemen. So far, only 65 per cent of the pledges have
been honoured.
The Government of Yemen, under the leadership
of the President, welcomes the Arab and international
efforts to combat cholera. I would also like to express
my gratitude to the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques,
King Salman bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, who has order the
King Salman Center for Humanitarian Aid and Relief
to make every effort to prevent the spread of cholera,
especially since most of the areas where cholera is
spread are under the control of the coup d’état forces.
They have also provided facilities and medications for
50,000 people and signed an $8 million with the World
Health Organization to address the cholera outbreak. It
is regrettable and painful that the arrival of the Special
Envoy to Sana’a coincided with massacres by the Houthi
militias in Taiz, which has been under blockade for
two years. It led to the death of 50 innocent civilians,
most of them women and children, as well as five
journalists — which was met by the appalling silence
of the international community.
This is the picture of six-year-old Eliyas Aklan,
who was killed by a Houthi-launched missile in
Taiz on 23 May. His innocent tears will chase the
criminals until justice prevails for him and all innocent
children. Eliyas reminds us of another child, Fareed
Al-Tharabi, five-years-old, who was killed in another
Houthi massacre by a missile launched in Taiz on
13 October 2015. He died crying and pleading with
his doctors not to bury him. His story was referred to
by the former Permanent Representative of the United
States, Ms. Samantha Power.
Taiz continues to experience horrors after two years
of an appalling war and the collective punishment of its
children and adults, who have rejected the coup d’état.
The blockade imposed under the coup d’état has led to
further displacement and the daily killing of children,
women and the elderly, as well as the indiscriminate
bombing of hospitals and residential areas that lack all
water, food and medicine.
I call on the human conscience of Council
members, in the name of the Government of Yemen, to
12/13

30/05/2017

condemn and criminalize the massacres committed by
the Houthi militias and Saleh, as well as the blockade
imposed on the city of Taiz and its villages. Day after
day, the militia set burn and shell the houses of citizens,
forcefully displacing them from their villages. We have
never yet heard a call for an end to the blockade.
As the number of child victims climbs, the number
of detainees and the forcible disappeared is also on
the rise. All the forcibly displaced and detainees are
now in the prisons of the coup masters. How many
victims, children, detainees and forcibly disappeared
does the Council, the United Nations, the SecretaryGeneral and the Special Envoy need before they
respond to the suffering of our people and condemn the
Houthi killers? How many messages have I sent to the
Secretary-General concerning the detainees without a
single response? It is as if international humanitarian
law has nothing to do with what is being perpetrated by
that criminal gang.
The ongoing efforts of the Government of Yemen
are focused on rebuilding the liberated zones and
pursuing its efforts to get rid of the terrorist gangs, in
cooperation with the Saudi-led coalition, the United
Arab Emirates and the international community, led by
the United States of America. We are striving jointly
with the international community and the specialized
United Nations agencies to speed the recovery and
transition, from the humanitarian-relief stage through
reconstruction. The Special Envoy referred to the
meeting that was convened in Riyadh by the World
Bank and the Government of Saudi Arabia.
We call for assistance to the Government of Yemen
in implementing its economic recovery plan in the areas
under its control, which constitute 80 per cent of the
total territory of Yemen. It is no surprise that the first
responder to the calls of His Excellency President Hadi
Mansour has been the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which
has pledged $10 million, $8 million of which support
construction projects in the liberated areas, while the
other $2 million are earmarked for the Central Bank
of Yemen to prevent the devaluation of the national
currency.
In line with efforts to address the deteriorating
humanitarian situation, the Government is still working
hard to provide salaries to all Government employees,
who have not been paid for eight months thanks to
the militias, which have stolen all the money from
the Central Bank and its reserves. We have provided
17-15192

30/05/2017

The situation in the Middle East

salaries in some liberated areas and allocated some
funds to areas under the control of the coup d’état.
However, the militias have stolen 581 billion rials
from the tax revenues and refuse to pay the salaries
of those under their control. This has redoubled the
humanitarian suffering of the people and made it harder
for the Government to remain current in the payment of
the salaries of its employees.
To conclude, we reaffirm the Yemeni Government’s
strong belief that a genuine, effective and sustainable
solution to the deteriorating humanitarian and
economic situation in Yemen requires efforts to
overturn the coup d’état, restore legitimacy and State
institutions, and return to normal life. In that regard,
we commend the efforts of the Security Council and

S/PV.7954

the Ambassadors of the group of 18 to achieve security
and stability in Yemen. We reiterate our sincere thanks
and appreciation to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
the United Arab Emirates and all the Arab coalition
countries working to restore legitimacy in Yemen. We
call on all members of the Security Council to pursue
their unified efforts to end the humanitarian suffering
in my country and to take a firm stance against those
responsible for the coup and further pressure them to
comply with the relevant international resolutions and
respect international humanitarian law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now invite
Council Members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

17-1519213/13
