S/PV.9402

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9402

nd meeting
Tuesday, 22 August 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. Moretti
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Chanda
Mr. Almazrouei
Mr. Kariuki

Agenda
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2023/589)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-24726 (E)
*2324726*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9402

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2023/589)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Abdoulaye
Bathily, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Libya and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, and Ms. Noura Al Jerbi, civil
society briefer.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/589, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya.
I now give the floor to Mr. Bathily.
Mr. Bathily: Since my previous briefing (see
S/PV.9351), I have continued my intensive engagement
with the main Libyan stakeholders to achieve three
main objectives. The first is to convince the House
of Representatives and the High State Council to
consider proposals from the High National Elections
Commission, other Libyan actors — and there are
many — and the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) to address the legal loopholes and
technical shortcomings in the draft electoral laws
prepared by the 6+6 committee of the two Chambers.
The second is to explore the possibility of convening a
meeting of the main stakeholders or their representatives
to reach a political agreement on the four main
politically contested issues outlined during my most
recent briefing to the Council. The third is to sustain
dialogue among the security and military actors, to
cultivate a security environment that enables progress
on the elections and sustainable stability for the country.
2/19

22/08/2023

In addition to my engagements with the major
players, I continued to consult with Libyans of all
walks of life, including political parties, community
leaders and notables, youth and women’s organizations
and professional organizations, such as the Libyan Bar
Association. I also continued my visits throughout
Libya. As in the past with Sabha, Benghazi, Sirte,
Misrata and Zintan, I visited the city of Zawiyah on
8 August and exchanged views with political figures,
social leaders, civil society representatives, security
actors, members of academia and other local actors.
That visit, like the previous ones, demonstrated that
the people of Libya want to end the successive interim
arrangements and have a strong desire for an elected
and legitimate leadership to govern the country.
With respect to the electoral laws and the way
forward, I intensified my consultations with the
President of the Presidential Council, the Prime Minister
of the Government of National Unity, the Heads of
the House of Representatives and High State Council
and the Commander of the Libyan National Army. I
shared written proposals to address the technical flaws
and contested aspects of the draft electoral laws. The
Chairman of the High National Elections Commission
also wrote a detailed letter to the leaders of the two
chambers, setting out how to address the legal loopholes
and technical shortcomings in the draft laws. Libyan
National Army Commander Khalifa Haftar shared with
me, in writing, his own concerns about the draft laws,
as did House of Representatives Speaker Agila Saleh.
All Libyan leaders have agreed, in principle, to the
amendment of those drafts.
I am pleased to report that the President of the
Presidential Council informed me of his intention to
convene the leaders of the two chambers to fine-tune
the draft electoral laws, in the light of the comments of
key stakeholders. I urge the two chambers and the 6+6
committee to resume work and finalize the electoral
laws to make them implementable, so as to draw a
reasonable timeline for elections.
Our effort to facilitate a settlement over the politically contested issues between Libya’s main stakeholders has intensified. I am working with the President of
the Presidential Council, Mohamed Menfi, to explore
jointly convening Libyan-led and UNSMIL-facilitated
negotiations among Libya’s main political and institutional leaders. In parallel, I have broached the subject
with House of Representatives Speaker Agila Saleh, the
23-24726

22/08/2023

The situation in Libya

then-High State Council President Khaled Al-Meshri,
Prime Minister Abdulhamid Al Dabiba and Libyan National Army Commander Khalifa Haftar.
Although significant resistance to holding a face-toface meeting persists on the part of certain actors who
wish to maintain the status quo, steps are being taken.
In that regard, Presidential Council President Menfi
informed me three days ago about his meeting in
Benghazi with House of Representatives Speaker Agila
Saleh and Libyan National Army Commander Khalifa
Haftar to explore concrete progress on the political
track. I have urged the key Libyan institutional players
to meet and agree on the politically contested issues
pertaining to the elections. As I have repeatedly
indicated to them, all election-related issues should be
resolved through discussions and compromise between
all relevant actors. As experience has shown over the
past 10 years, unilateral steps must be avoided at all
costs if we are to avert further violent conflict. The
electoral landscape should be a level playing field for
all candidates.
On 6 August, Mohammed Takala was elected
President of the High State Council following internal
elections in that chamber. He replaced Khaled
Al-Meshri, who had been in the position since 2016. I
held an initial meeting with the new bureau of the High
State Council and conveyed UNSMIL’s continuing
commitment to supporting Libyans in their search for
a way out of the current stalemate. It is more important
than ever for Libya to conclude its current chapter of
institutional fragmentation. Its citizens are yearning
for unified political, military, security, economic and
social institutions to safeguard the country’s territorial
integrity and national identity. In that regard, a
unified Government agreed on by the major players is
imperative for leading the country to elections.
The efforts to put in place a Libyan-owned
mechanism for the transparent management of public
funds have finally yielded a positive result. I welcomed
the Presidential Council’s decision of 6 July to create
a high financial management committee tasked with
overseeing public finances and promoting fairness,
accountability and transparency in public spending,
which will also help to ensure that public funds are
not used to create an uneven electoral playing field.
In the same spirit, on 20 August, Al-Siddiq Al-Kabir,
the Governor of the Central Bank of Libya, stated that
the reunification of the Central Bank as a sovereign
Libyan institution has been finalized. The measures

S/PV.9402

that have been taken to effect the reunification
include the integration of eastern and western
deposits, the integration of the eastern and western
settlement systems and the relocation of the Deputy
Governor from the eastern branch to the Central Bank
headquarters in Tripoli. Both the establishment of
the high financial committee and the positive steps
towards the reunification of the Central Bank have
given us cautious optimism that with political will,
Libya’s stakeholders can come together in an inclusive
manner to address issues of common concern for
the greater good of the nation. I urge the financial
committee to turn its discussions into effective action
to achieve transparency, accountability and equity in
State expenditures and the Central Bank to continue
its efforts to reverse the effects of a divided public
financial system.
The fragile stability that had prevailed in Tripoli
since last year was shattered by fierce armed clashes on
14 and 15 August between the Deterrence Apparatus for
Combating Organized Crime and Terrorism (DACOT)
and the 444 Brigade, two of the largest armed groups
in the capital. The fighting was triggered by DACOT’s
arrest of the 444 Brigade’s commander at Mitiga
airport, reportedly linked to personal rivalries. At
least 55 people were reported killed during the clashes
and more than 100 injured, including an unspecified
number of civilians. Fortunately, other armed groups in
Tripoli and its environs chose to remain neutral, which
prevented the fighting from spreading. The clashes
ended when a truce was brokered jointly by local elders,
Prime Minister Al Dabiba, the Presidential Council,
General Mohamed Al-Haddad, Chief of Staff of the
Libyan Army, and leaders of neutral armed groups. I
engaged with the Prime Minister and other relevant
actors to urge them to take the action needed to stop the
fighting. We condemn the clashes and the resulting loss
of life, and we express our sympathies to the bereaved
families and wish the injured a speedy recovery.
Those developments underline the absence of
command-and-control over the fragmented security
apparatus in western Libya and the precarious state
of the security situation. They undermine the ongoing
efforts to cultivate a security environment conducive
to elections and highlight how urgent it is to establish
legitimate authorities and unified military and security
institutions in the country. Armed groups and security
actors that commit violence against civilians must be
held accountable. In addition, the unconstitutional

23-247263/19

S/PV.9402

The situation in Libya

change of Government in the Niger has sparked concerns
over a potential spillover into Libya, as has happened with
the Sudan. As a pre-emptive step, the Libyan National
Army closed the border with the Niger on 26 July and
deployed reinforcements to the border zones. As with the
crisis in the Sudan, the situation in the Niger is a cause
for concern for the entire region.
On 25 July, UNSMIL co-chaired with Italy a plenary
meeting of the Security Working Group of the Berlin
Process International Follow-Up Committee in Benghazi.
Libyan stakeholders, the 5+5 Joint Military Commission
and international partners discussed the evolving political
and security dynamics hampering tangible progress in
the full implementation of the ceasefire agreement, the
reunification of military institutions and the withdrawal
of foreign forces, fighters and mercenaries. Once again,
it will be essential for all parties to preserve the security
gains achieved in recent years. To that end, UNSMIL
will continue to engage relevant actors in advancing the
reunification of military and security institutions, as a
sine qua non for lasting stability in Libya.
I remain concerned about the ongoing human rights
violations, including abductions, arbitrary arrests and
disappearances in both east and west. I reiterate my call
for an immediate halt to those practices, for the release
of persons arbitrarily detained and for independent
investigations. I note the recent partial access accorded
to UNSMIL to a detention centre in Tripoli and call for
more consistent access to places of detention throughout
the country. I commend the Presidential Council’s
national reconciliation efforts under the leadership of
Vice-President Abdullah Al-Lafi and supported by
the African Union, including a preparatory meeting
organized on 19 and 20 July in Brazzaville for a national
reconciliation conference to be held by the end of
the year. Women’s participation at every stage of that
process remains imperative.
I remain concerned about the serious humanitarian
and human rights situation of migrants, refugees and
asylum seekers at the Tunisia-Libya border. While I
note the recent agreement of the Tunisian and Libyan
authorities to relocate several hundred individuals,
people continue to be pushed across the borders in remote
desert areas, facing dire conditions with no access to
food and water. I call for an end to expulsions and urge
the Tunisian and Libyan authorities to ensure that people
are sent to safe locations and to allow the United Nations
and partners humanitarian access to all locations.
4/19

22/08/2023

I am pleased to report that preparations for the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) Summit in
September by the Libyan Government are well under
way. On 13 July, the United Nations and the Libyan
Government convened a high-level event on national
efforts in advancing the SDGs, including under the
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework 2023–2025.
In conclusion, upholding Libya’s stability is even
more critical now in the light of the recent clashes in
Tripoli, the regional turmoil in the Sudan and the Niger
and the combat that took place in the Tibesti region, in
the south, a few days ago, between the Chadian army
and armed elements. The current events in Libya and
the region demonstrate that interim arrangements are
fraught with risks of violence and disintegration for
countries. It is fundamental to restore Libya’s stability
to preserve regional security.
Without an inclusive political agreement that paves
the way for peaceful, inclusive and transparent elections
across Libya, the situation will worsen and cause
further suffering to the Libyan people. I therefore call
on the political and moral responsibility of all leaders
to close the open-ended interim arrangement, break
the current impasse and stop frustrating the Libyans’
legitimate aspiration for elections, peace and prosperity.
I also count on the strong support of the members of
the Council to use their influence, individually and
collectively, to ensure the full commitment of Libyan
leaders to the negotiation that is required to advance
our shared objective — the stability of Libya and its
neighbours. I once again repeat my call for all the
regional and international partners of Libya to speak
in one voice and act accordingly to respond to the
aspirations of the people of Libya for peace, stability,
prosperity and national unity.
The President: I thank Mr. Bathily for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Al Jerbi.
Ms. Al Jerbi: My name is Noura Al Jerbi, and I
am a Libyan women’s rights activist, journalist and
editor-in-chief of one of Libya’s few independent factchecking organizations.
I had lived in Libya for most of my life, but I no
longer live there because of the current situation. I
nevertheless continue to fight for a better future for my
country. Yet we continue to face significant challenges
to building a society based on freedom, justice and
23-24726

22/08/2023

The situation in Libya

equality. A critical barrier to that future is the severe
restrictions on the space for civil society in Libya today,
including through the imposition of draconian laws
and regulations, unwarranted investigations, arbitrary
detentions, enforced disappearances of human rights
defenders and activists, hate speech, disinformation,
continued violations of women’s rights and the lack
of accountability.
Libya’s legal framework is incomplete, reflects
ongoing political divisions and serves only to repress
civil society and limit fundamental freedoms. In March,
Libya’s Supreme Judicial Council declared a draconian
Al-Qaddafi-era law — law no. 19 of 2001 — as valid.
The House of Representatives’ attempts at amending the
law do not help. Law 19/2001 not only violates Libya’s
2011 constitutional declaration, but was also repealed
under law no. 29 of 2013, which abolished all repressive
laws enacted before 2011. That law undermines the
freedom and independence of civil society and violates
the principles of freedom of expression and association
enshrined in the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights. For that reason, we seek the repeal
of repressive laws and regulations intended to impede
civil society organizations and their critical role in
Libya’s transition. That is necessary before any election
can be organized and is also a fundamental basis for a
free and fair vote.
The House of Representatives needs to enact a new
civil society law that is in compliance with international
legal standards to regulate the work of civil society
organizations. In addition, it is necessary to have an
independent civil society commission to guarantee that
its work will not be subject to interference from political
authorities, intelligence agencies or the security sector,
including armed groups and militias. The pervasive
issue of hate speech and disinformation undermines
civil society by fuelling hostility and violence against
human rights defenders and civil society organizations,
trigging investigations and ultimately freezing their
speech. We need immediate action to halt systemic
media campaigns that incite hate and violence against
human rights defenders and civil society organizations.
We are also seeing an increase in hate speech
and online violence against women in civil society,
politics and media. I myself have faced the distressing
phenomenon of online violence. My work has made
me a target of hate speech, harassment and threats
on various online platforms. Those forms of online
violence not only attempt to silence my voice but also

S/PV.9402

create an atmosphere of fear and intimidation, both for
me and for others who wish to engage in meaningful
discourse about human rights and social justice. As a
journalist, fact-checker and human’s rights activist,
I urge the international community to push Libya to
enact and enforce laws against online hate speech and
violence targeting women, while also collaborating with
technology companies to develop effective contentmonitoring tools. Additionally, Libya should promote
digital literacy programmes, establish user-friendly
reporting channels and support women’s organizations
in their efforts to combat online gender-based violence.
That comprehensive approach will contribute to a safer
and more inclusive digital environment for all.
Given the alarming trend of human rights defenders
and activists being arrested, investigated, prosecuted
and physically attacked in Libya, it is imperative for
the international community to prioritize safeguarding
their digital spaces from hate speech and violence.
More broadly, it is necessary to ensure the full
protection of human rights defenders and civic activists
to enable their work in a Libyan transition. All forms
of abuse, including threats and reprisals against civil
society organizations and human rights defenders,
must be investigated, and those responsible should be
held accountable.
As we advocate for the protection of human rights
and the empowerment of civil society, we must also
address another pressing issue significantly affecting
our society: gender inequality and continued violations
of women’s rights. The latest violation is restrictions
on women’s movement. In May, the Government of
National Unity’s Internal Security Agency introduced
a new procedure whereby Libyan women travelling
alone from an airport in western Libya are required to
complete an official declaration stating their reasons
for travel and rationale for travelling alone. The eastern
Government of National Stability imposed restrictions
a month later, requiring security approvals for travel.
Those new procedures discriminate against women
by depriving them of their autonomy and rights as
equal citizens. A multifaceted approach involving legal
reform, awareness-raising and international cooperation
is essential to ensuring the complete abolition of these
unjust restrictions on women’s travel in Libya.
Those restrictions also reflect the broader gender
inequality within our society and parallel the lack of
women’s representation in current political dialogue.
The absence of women’s and youth’s voices in political

23-247265/19

S/PV.9402

The situation in Libya

dialogue hinders any real progress in a transition
to peace and stability. A more inclusive approach is
necessary for Libya’s stability and for building a just
and prosperous future for all.
I would like to end my time with a note on the
importance of accountability for Libya’s future, as it
ensures justice, fosters reconciliation, deters future
abuses and demonstrates a commitment to human
rights and good governance. By holding individuals
and institutions responsible for past wrongs, Libya can
build the foundation of trust, stability and progress
that is essential for a peaceful future. In championing
human rights, we forge a path to a Libya marked by
dignity, equality and justice — a future where every
voice is heard, every life is valued, and the bonds of our
shared humanity are unbreakable.
The President: I thank Ms. Al Jerbi for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bathily
and Ms. Al Jerbi for their briefings today. I welcome
the participation of the representative of Libya in
our meeting.
Let me make three points.
First, the United Kingdom is deeply concerned by
the violence last week in Tripoli, in particular its impact
on civilians. We have already seen the cost of violence
and instability in Libya’s neighbourhood this year, from
the Sudan to the Niger. Libyan actors must heed this
warning and fulfil their responsibilities to upholding
peace and security across the country. Individuals and
entities that threaten the peace and security or obstruct
the political process in Libya may be designated under
the Libya sanctions regime.
Secondly, these clashes underscore the importance
of making urgent progress in Libya’s political process.
I welcome Special Representative Bathily’s ongoing
efforts to facilitate a negotiation between Libyan
actors to reach a political agreement for elections.
Libya’s leaders must urgently engage with the Special
Representative to give this process a chance of success.
We call on Libya’s leaders to work constructively
with the Special Representative Bathily, including
by attending any meetings he convenes, to be open
to making concessions and to move the country
towards elections.
6/19

22/08/2023

Thirdly, Ms. Al Jerbi’s briefing highlights the
impact of the crackdown on civil society on ordinary
Libyans. Competition over control of civic space by
Libya’s institutions and recent reports of arbitrary
arrests and clampdowns on civil society activity indicate
an alarming trend. Civic space should be protected to
allow Libyans to hold their leaders accountable and
to empower everyone to play a role in developing an
open, democratic society that allows for freedom of
association, operation and assembly.
Let me conclude by calling on Libya’s leaders to
consider the impact the political impasse is having on
the Libyan people. Libya continues to suffer from the
lack of political progress and is unable to make longterm investments for stability, security and prosperity.
Libya’s leaders must fulfil their responsibilities and
make the compromises needed to deliver elections and
unlock longer-term political progress.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bathily for his
update and Ms. Al Jerbi for her insightful briefing. I
also welcome Ambassador Elsonni, who joins us today.
At the outset, Japan renews its strong call for the
holding of presidential and parliamentary elections
across Libya without delay. After seeing the efforts
made by the 6+6 Committee, Security Council members
unanimously voiced the need to further build on the
progress achieved to secure a legal basis and political
agreement to conduct free, fair, transparent, inclusive
and safe elections. Elections are the only way to restore
the legitimacy of the country’s institutions. Regrettably,
Libyan political stakeholders have not yet reached the
consensus necessary to pave the way towards elections.
To realize the long-awaited elections, Japan
strongly believes that the Council must fully support
Special Representative Bathily’s ongoing efforts to
facilitate political negotiation and compromise among
the Libyan actors. As things move forward, a more
careful approach is needed to avoid any backsliding. The
Special Representative’s inclusive approach should be
supported. While Japan notes the meeting in Benghazi
on 19 August, the Council should also urge Libyan
actors to engage constructively with Mr. Bathily’s
efforts. Japan hopes to support a truly Libyan-led and
Libyan-owned political process.
Turning to the issue of security, Japan expresses
its sincere condolences to the family members of those
who were killed in the recent violent clashes in Tripoli.
23-24726

22/08/2023

The situation in Libya

Japan also notes with concern that the situation in the
Sudan has significantly slowed down the efforts aimed
at the withdrawal of foreign forces, foreign fighters
and mercenaries. On another note, Japan welcomes
the recent meeting of the security working group in
Benghazi to create a safe environment that is conducive
for elections.
On economic issues, Japan welcomes the
announcement of the finalization of the reunification of
the Central Bank of Libya and notes with appreciation
the establishment of the High Financial Oversight
Committee to ensure fair and transparent spending and
distribution of national resources. We sincerely hope
that these developments will help to create momentum
towards unifying all the country’s political, security
and military institutions.
With regard to the asset-freeze measures, we welcome the discussion between the Libyan Investment
Authority (LIA) and the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya earlier this month on the progress
made in the implementation of the LIA’s transformation strategy.
Lastly, Japan joins others in expressing concern
about increasing restrictions imposed on the activities
of civil society organizations on the ground. We call
for the Libyan Government to take the steps necessary
to clarify the legal basis for their activities. Further,
humanitarian problems arising from the situation of
refugees, migrants and abductees have to be addressed
as soon as possible.
Let me conclude my statement by reiterating
Japan’s strong commitment to the Libyan people and
their aspirations for a stable and peaceful Libya.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank Special Representative
Abdoulaye Bathily and Ms. Noura Al Jerbi for
their briefings.
The Libyans have clearly expressed their desire
to hold presidential and legislative elections. It is
important to listen to them. The full commitment of all
Libyan and international players to this end is essential.
The Libyan people have the right to choose their leaders
democratically by going to the polls.
The draft electoral laws proposed by the 6+6
committee, representing the Libyan House of
Representatives and High State Council, are a step in

S/PV.9402

the right direction. They represent significant progress
towards the holding of simultaneous presidential and
legislative elections. Discussions between Libyan
players, in conjunction with the Special Representative,
must be encouraged in order to finalize and promulgate
the electoral laws as soon as possible.
France welcomes the commitment of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya to continuing its
work with all the Libyan institutions and players
concerned, with a view to holding credible, inclusive
and transparent elections. It reiterates its support for
the mediation of Special Representative Bathily to
achieve this objective.
The full implementation of the 23 October 2020
ceasefire agreement and the maintenance of stability
and security in Libya are essential. Serious armed
clashes between militias took place in Tripoli a few
days ago against a backdrop of increasing insecurity
in Tripolitania, owing to the growing influence of
the militias. France once again calls on the Libyan
authorities to prevent any escalation and reminds
them of their responsibility to ensure the safety of the
population. The latest events are a reminder of the
importance of unified security and military institutions
capable of ensuring security throughout the country
and ending the militias’ stranglehold. In that regard, in
coordination with the United Nations and all its partners,
France will continue to support the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission and the two Chiefs of Staff, with a view
towards reunifying the Libyan army. France will also
continue to demand compliance with the arms embargo
and the withdrawal of all foreign forces, fighters and
mercenaries from Libyan territory, in cooperation with
Libya’s neighbouring countries.
The fair distribution of resources among all
Libyan regions is key to resolving the political and
security crisis and building a stable, unified and
sovereign Libya. In that regard, France welcomes the
establishment by the Presidential Council of a high
financial management committee dedicated to the
distribution of revenue sources and the management of
public expenditures. France also welcomes the efforts
of all Libyan stakeholders to that end.
France reiterates its concern about human rights
violations against the civilian population, particularly
migrants, in Libya. Ending human trafficking is an
urgent priority. Attacks on fundamental freedoms and
the curtailment of freedom of expression and associa-

23-247267/19

S/PV.9402

The situation in Libya

tion are also very worrisome, as are the restrictions on
Libyan women’s freedom of movement that the civilsociety briefer mentioned earlier. We call on the Libyan
authorities to comply with their obligations under international law and international humanitarian law.
Political legitimacy, together with the country’s
sovereignty and unity, must be restored in Libya. That
is the only way to achieve stability. The holding of
transparent and impartial elections throughout Libya
as soon as possible is imperative. France calls on the
parties concerned to work in good faith and to cooperate
with the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to that end, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the expectations of
the Libyan people.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the
three African members of the Security Council (A3),
Gabon, Mozambique and my own country, Ghana.
We thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, for his informative
briefing. We also thank Ms. Al Jerbi. We welcome the
participation of the Permanent Representative of Libya
at this meeting. The A3 would like to underscore three
points today.
First, we express our appreciation for Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bathily’s
tireless efforts to find consensus solutions, in
cooperation with the Libyan authorities, to the issues
related to the holding of transparent and inclusive
presidential and legislative elections in Libya as soon
as possible.
(spoke in English)
On the political front, the A3 commends the Special
Representative’s continued efforts to work with all the
relevant Libyan institutions and actors to address the
contested aspects of the electoral framework. While
noting the useful work carried out by the 6+6 committee,
we urge the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to work with all stakeholders to establish firm
timelines in order to meet the aspirations of the Libyan
people for the holding of elections without further delay.
The A3 hopes that a political consensus among Libyan
stakeholders on viable draft electoral legislation will be
reached as soon as possible in order to pave the way
for sustainable stability in the country. We reiterate our
call on all Libyan stakeholders to ensure the meaningful
participation of Libyan society, including women and
8/19

22/08/2023

young people, in inclusive dialogue in good faith — the
sole guarantee of the lasting peace and stability that
the Libyan people deserve. The A3 reiterates that the
peace process in Libya must be Libyan-led and Libyanowned, facilitated by the United Nations, supported by
the international community and guided by inclusive
dialogue conducive to national reconciliation. In that
regard, we welcomed the preparatory meeting held in
Brazzaville on 20 July as part of the reconciliation
processes facilitated by the African Union.
Secondly, with regard to the security situation,
the A3 notes with concern the fragile security context
recently manifested in armed clashes between rival
groups in Tripoli. The violent clashes that took place
on 14 and 15 August between the 444 Brigade and the
Deterrence Apparatus caused at least 55 deaths and
146 injuries among civilians. We strongly condemn
the incident and reiterate our call on all armed groups
to exercise restraint and fully comply with the 2020
ceasefire agreement in order to maintain the current
positive momentum towards long-term peace and
security. The A3 calls on the Libyan authorities to
pursue their efforts and commitment to unifying
Libya’s security forces.
Thirdly, on the human rights front, the A3 continues
to urge the Libyan authorities, with the support of
the international community, to work to improve the
plight of migrants and refugees in Libya. We strongly
condemn the massive arbitrary detention of asylum
seekers in inhumane conditions and call on the national
authorities to ensure that migrants are protected against
any human rights violations, including trafficking,
torture, sexual and gender-based violence and extortion.
We echo the Secretary-General’s call for alternatives to
detentions aimed at managing migration in line with
international law.
The A3 continues to be concerned about the economic
impact of the protracted conflict and the ongoing
political crisis in Libya, which are negatively affecting
access to essential services, including health care and
education, particularly for the most vulnerable. However,
we commend the work of the high financial committee
and the agreement reached two days ago to unify the
Central Bank of Libya. We urge that the consultative
and national-oriented approach taken to arriving at
such important outcomes be replicated in resolving the
many national challenges that Libya has to deal with.
23-24726

22/08/2023

The situation in Libya

Considering the ongoing political and security
turmoil in the Sahel, the A3 would like to see a
renewed commitment and a sense of urgency on the
part of the State of Libya, bolstered by the support of
the Security Council and the international community
at large, for stabilizing Libya as soon as possible while
respecting its sovereignty, political independence and
territorial integrity.
Mrs. Chanda (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank Special Representative Abdoulaye Bathily and
Ms. Noura Al Jerbi for their briefings. I would like to
discuss the following three points.
First, with regard to the political process,
Switzerland remains convinced of the importance
of holding elections, especially in view of the fact
that it is the Libyans themselves who are calling for
elections. We take note of the work done by the 6+6
committee to reach agreement on draft electoral laws.
It will be crucial to ensure that the unresolved issues
are addressed. An inclusive pre-electoral agreement is
essential to creating an environment conducive to fair
and equitable elections. We support a process under the
auspices of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
and call on Libyan stakeholders to engage constructively
in that regard. Since security is also a precondition for
ensuring an environment that facilitates the holding of
elections, Switzerland is concerned about the extremely
tense security situation, illustrated by the clashes that
took place in Tripoli last week.
Secondly, with regard to the human rights situation,
one of the lessons that Switzerland has drawn from its
role as co-Chair of the Working Group on International
Humanitarian Law and Human Rights within the
Berlin Process is that it is crucial to give a voice to
those who are dealing with the deteriorating situation
on a daily basis. As Ms. Al Jerbi told us earlier, Libyans
are letting us know about one of their major concerns,
which is that the space for civil society is constantly
shrinking, as the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral confirms (S/2023/589). Excessive control
and bureaucratic restrictions imposed by security
actors continue to increase. Switzerland supports the
Secretary-General’s call for those measures to be lifted,
in particular law no. 19 of 2001. That law restricts the
rights of expression, association and peaceful assembly
of all individuals, including members of civil society,
in clear contradiction with Libya’s obligations under
international human rights law.

S/PV.9402

Switzerland is concerned in particular about the
violations and abuses suffered by women and girls,
whether they be Libyan or foreign. Sexual and genderbased assaults, including in places of detention, must
be stopped, prevented and punished.
The inclusion of women in political processes, such
as elections and the national reconciliation process,
is also essential. They must be able to participate in
complete safety, free from harassment, intimidation
or impediments on their freedom of movement and
fundamental rights.
With regard to sanctions, they must be implemented
effectively, in compliance with Security Council
decisions. Strengthening fair procedures in sanctions
regimes is also important. Switzerland welcomes the
work of the Ombudsperson to the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities in
promoting the application of the rule of law in United
Nations sanctions. In that respect, we underscore the
relevance of that review mechanism for delisting requests
for other sanctions regimes similar to that one. In that
connection, Switzerland recalls the letter addressed
to the Security Council by the Group of Like-Minded
States on Targeted Sanctions (S/2023/486).
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bathily, as well as the Permanent Representative of
Japan, Ambassador Ishikane, in his capacity as Chair
of the Libya Sanctions Committee, for their briefings.
I also listened carefully to Ms. Al Jerbi’s statement. I
welcome Ambassador Elsonni to today’s meeting.
The political process in Libya is currently at a
critical stage. China appreciates the work of the 6+6
joint committee in reaching agreement on the draft
electoral law and notes the approval of the relevant
draft law by the Libyan House of Representatives.
China supports all parties in Libya in engaging in
dialogue on the current basis, building consensus and
promoting a comprehensive and inclusive political
transition process.
China attaches great importance to and supports the
continued important roles of the League of Arab States,
the African Union and countries in the region. China

23-247269/19

S/PV.9402

The situation in Libya

also supports Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Bathily in strengthening communication with
all parties in Libya to form synergy.
The Libyan issue is the result of multiple factors
such as politics, history and ethnicity, and external
pressure and interference are important sources of
instability. Recently, relevant parties in Libya and
regional organizations, such as the League of Arab
States, have repeatedly called for respect for Libya’s
sovereignty and ownership on the Libyan issue. The
international community should adhere to the principle
of Libyan-led and Libya-owned, respect the voices
of all parties involved, accommodate the reasonable
concerns of all parties instead of blindly applying
external pressure and imposing solutions.
Recent intense clashes in Tripoli have resulted
in casualties. China calls on all parties in Libya to
exercise restraint, avoid escalating actions and maintain
the ceasefire.
China welcomes the fact that Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Bathily has presided over
the 5+5 Joint Military Commission meetings on
many occasions and hopes that all parties in Libya
will implement the results of the meetings and make
substantial progress in unifying security agencies and
establishing a ceasefire mechanism.
The withdrawal of external armed forces and
mercenaries and is an important factor affecting the
security of Libya and the region, and the spillover
effects of the situation in the Sudan cannot be ignored.
China supports Libya in strengthening communication
and cooperation with countries in the region to ensure a
smooth and orderly evacuation process and to maintain
the common security of the country and the region.
China has noted the gradual recovery of oil
production in Libya and the improvement of the economic
situation. We welcome the important measures recently
taken, such as the establishment of the high committee
on financial oversight and the reunification of the
Central Bank of Libya. The international community
should assist Libya in coordinating efforts to promote
political reconciliation and economic reconstruction
and provide more support for Libya’s foreign trade
and investments.
All parties in Libya should resolve their differences
in the management and income distribution of the
petroleum industry and ensure that all people truly
10/19

22/08/2023

benefit from the dividends of development. The frozen
assets of the Libyan Government are the collective
property of the Libyan people and should be used for
national reconstruction and development. The Security
Council and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya
should attach great importance to the issue of the loss of
frozen assets and take practical measures to address it.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Libya and Head of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, and the Permanent
Representative of Japan, Mr. Kimihiro Ishikane, for
their briefings. We also listened to the briefer from
civil society.
Unfortunately, for more than a decade now Libya
has been unable to recover from the consequences
of the military intervention of NATO countries, as a
result of which its statehood was practically destroyed,
its territorial integrity undermined and its economy
ruined. As a result, despite numerous attempts,
initiatives aimed at rebuilding the country have not
been realized as quickly as hoped. The country is even
more divided, owing to the influence of varied external
interests and the lack of neutral and coordinated support
for national dialogue.
Nevertheless, ongoing efforts by the Libyan people
to put the pieces of their country back together are
bearing fruit. We welcome the decision taken by Libyans
on 6 July to establish a high committee on financial
oversight and the decision of 20 August to merge the
western and eastern branches of the Central Bank of
Libya, which had been operating separately since 2014.
We hope that the work to reunite the institution, which
is responsible for, among other tasks, the distribution of
revenues from energy exports, can also spur integration
on the political track.
A key issue on the Libyan agenda is the preparation
for and holding of presidential and parliamentary
elections which would put an end to the protracted
situation of having two authorities and ensure the
restoration of the unity and territorial integrity of
Libya, as well as address the challenges of its postcrisis recovery.
In that connection, we have been closely following
the constitutional track of the Libyan political process.
On 25 July, it was announced that the heads of the
23-24726

22/08/2023

The situation in Libya

House of Representatives and the High State Council
had concluded negotiations and approved a road map
within their respective structures for holding elections
and forming a new national Government. Earlier at
the end of June, within the framework of the 6+6 joint
committee, which was created at their initiative in the
Moroccan city of Bouznika, a number of important
agreements were reached.
We call on all Libyan players to redouble their
efforts and finally create suitable conditions for the
organization of presidential and parliamentary elections
in the foreseeable future. We believe that Libyans
themselves should ultimately determine when and
how to hold elections. In that regard, it is vital to focus
efforts on providing them support in that endeavour,
but not to take decisions for them.
If the outcome of the national elections in Libya is
not recognized by all key political forces, the country
will not be able to avoid worsening destabilization and
another round of violence. Therefore, the electoral
process must be transparent, genuinely inclusive and
include, without discrimination, the full spectrum of
the leading political forces of the former Jamahiriya,
including representatives of the former authorities.
It is clear to us that in the current circumstances
significant progress in Libya can be achieved only
through the joint efforts of all Libyan stakeholders
and influential global and regional players, with a
central role played by the United Nations. In resolving
the crisis, the United Nations and its key instrument,
UNSMIL, are more important than ever. We reiterate
our support for Mr. Bathily, Head of UNSMIL, in his
tireless work to find acceptable ways to resolve the
political impasse and boost political dialogue.
As stated by the President of Russia, Vladimir
Putin, during the plenary session of the second RussiaAfrica Summit on 28 July, it is important to achieve
genuine national unity and to prevent Libya’s territory
from becoming an arena for confrontation between
third States. Russia understands the complexity of that
process and will, in its turn, do its utmost to support
constructive cooperation among all Libyan forces.
The Libyan experience clearly shows that any
separate initiatives including those that create different
formats and round tables to support a resolution that
do not include all influential international and regional
players — and indeed, the representatives of Libya
itself — will not achieve the desired result. Once again,

S/PV.9402

we underscore that our country is ready to engage in
constructive cooperation with all stakeholders. At the
same time, we are of course concerned by the attempts
of some Western countries to use the situation in Libya
to further certain geopolitical and economic interests,
including in the hydrocarbon market.
It is good to hear that there has not been any
active fighting in Libya for more than two years now.
However, the security situation is fragile, as evidenced
by the recent clashes in Tripoli, Zawiya and other
cities. It is also concerning to see the strengthening
position of the cells of international and regional
terrorist structures in the country and the growing
chaos in the border areas of the former Jamahiriya,
some of the neighbours of which are experiencing a
period of instability. Moreover, we note the need to
intensify efforts to create the necessary conditions
for the integration of the country’s disparate military
components into a single Libyan army. Achieving that
goal requires a great deal of energy and political will.
In that connection, we welcome the activities of the 5+5
Joint Military Commission, which is making further
progress towards a complete resolution. One of the
key areas in that regard is the ultimate removal of the
foreign military presence from the territory of Libya.
We are in favour of a synchronized, balanced, gradual
and phased withdrawal of all non-Libyan armed groups
and military units.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bathily for
his detailed presentation and Ms. Al Jerbi for her
insightful remarks.
I would like to begin by welcoming the unification of
the Central Bank of Libya and praising the stewardship
of all those involved. We take note of and welcome
the establishment of the high committee on financial
oversight in Libya. We appreciate the significant step
towards ensuring transparency in public funds and
ensuring an equal distribution of Libya’s national
wealth, as requested by the Council. We hope that that
momentum will last and will encourage the political
forces in Libya to continue in that direction, as well
as when it comes to the security track and the political
processes. In fact, the recent deadly clashes in Tripoli
are a stark reminder that the security situation is heavily
affected by the political stalemate in Libya. We join
others in their call for de-escalation and accountability.
Such events also remind us of the necessity of full
observation of the arms embargo in Libya.

23-2472611/19

S/PV.9402

The situation in Libya

We welcome the statement by Special
Representative Bathily and reiterate Albania’s full
support for his mandate and crucial mediation role in
Libya, which we commend. We remain committed to
an inclusive Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political
process mediated by the United Nations that paves the
way towards holding free, fair and inclusive elections as
soon as possible. All Libyan stakeholders must commit
to finding credible and sustainable solutions to fulfil
the aspirations of their own people. We therefore call on
them to renew their efforts towards a political agreement.
In that vein, the Libyan parties should define the legal
basis necessary to lay the foundations for establishing
democracy in the country through democratic elections
based on an electoral law that meets the expectations of
all political stakeholders. Elections are the only tool to
restore legitimacy to Libyan institutions. It is therefore
essential that the mediation of the United Nations and
of Special Representative Bathily receive the strongest
support from within and outside Libya. All actors share
responsibility for creating the conditions for stability and
security. Those obstructing must be held accountable.
On the security track, we acknowledge that the
situation remains fragile and reiterate the urgency
of unifying the military and security institutions to
achieve sustainable peace and stability. Unfortunately,
the political situation in the country has also had a
heavy impact on the human rights situation. As our civil
society briefer just shared — and this remains a deep
concern — attacks against human rights defenders,
women’s rights activists, journalists and civil society
associations must be stopped. Accountability is
important in that regard, as mentioned by the briefer.
Civil society has a crucial role to play in creating a
climate conducive to free and fair elections.
Let us conclude by emphasizing to all Libyan
stakeholders the necessity for a clear path towards
elections. We call on them to constructively engage
with the United Nations Support Mission in Libya to
break the deadlock that is diminishing all hope for the
future of Libyans.
Mr. Moretti (Brazil): I thank Special Representative
Bathily for his briefing. I also thank Ms. Al Jerbi from
civil society for her contribution, and I join others in
welcoming the Libyan delegation to this meeting.
Brazil has followed with deep concern the recent
armed clashes that erupted in Tripoli on 14 and
15 August. We deplore the return to hostilities and urge
12/19

22/08/2023

all parties to refrain from further violence. We call upon
all parties with authority over armed groups across the
country to redouble their efforts towards establishing
a unified and accountable security architecture in
Libya. The threat of the resurgence of conflict in Libya
is a stark reminder of the urgency of supporting the
implementation of the October 2020 ceasefire, including
through security sector reform. The disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of armed groups into
Libyan society are also key to any successful strategy
to improve the security conditions in the country. At the
root of the current political impasse, there is an obvious
and profound lack of trust and of social cohesion
among key Libyan institutions and stakeholders.
Those circumstances also enable external interference
that reinforces the current political deadlock.
Peacebuilding efforts can establish an environment
conducive to political and social reconciliation. In
that sense, we recall the role that the Peacebuilding
Commission can play, upon Libya’s request, to
mobilize international attention towards nationally
determined peacebuilding needs and priorities. The
Commission can help to foster dialogue among all
relevant actors and contribute to the Security Council’s
consideration of the situation in Libya. The linkages
between the situation in Libya and in neighbouring
countries, particularly in the Sahel, also require close
collaboration in the region. We acknowledge the
contribution of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission to
coordinating positions among relevant Libyan actors on
the withdrawal and repatriation of foreign forces from
Libya and to neighbouring countries. We acknowledge
and commend the engagement of the African Union in
support of the national reconciliation process in Libya.
We hope it can contribute to sustainable solutions in the
political sphere as well.
The establishment of a unified Government
should be the result of a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned
political process. Agreement between the House of
Representatives and the High State Council, based
on the work of the 6+6 committee, in preparation for
national elections, aligns with that key principle.
We trust that the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya will continue facilitating intra-Libyan dialogue
to establish conditions conducive to the unification of
the Government. Brazil reiterates its support for the
mandate of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to mediate among Libyan stakeholders in
accordance with the principle of national ownership. We
23-24726

22/08/2023

The situation in Libya

were encouraged by the announcement on 20 August
of the reunification of the Central Bank of Libya after
nearly nine years of division. We are hopeful that the
decision will have a positive impact on the Libyan
economy and serve as a catalyst for the unification of
other institutions.
After 12 years of an assets freeze, the preservation
of Libya’s frozen assets requires closer monitoring
and updated measures by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
adapted to present-day circumstances. The paralysis
of the political process in Libya should in no way
justify paralysis in the Sanctions Committee in the
face of reports of the depletion of funds or threats of
confiscation of Libya’s sovereign wealth. Brazil stands
ready to explore technical improvements to the assets
freeze within the Committee and the Council, as may
be required.
Mr. Almazrouei (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), for his important briefing. We also listened
to the briefing by Ms. Noura Al Jerbi. We welcome the
participation of Ambassador Taher Elsonni of Libya in
today’s meeting. I would like to focus on the following
key issues.
First, it is vital to resolve the outstanding issues
concerning the draft legal framework for the elections,
as prepared by the 6+6 committee, and to reach a
compromise that is acceptable to all parties. That will
enable parliamentary and presidential elections to be
held simultaneously, based on solid legal foundations and
with results that are respected by all parties, ultimately
bringing the transitional period to a conclusion in
a manner that accords with the will of our brother
people of Libya. The United Arab Emirates calls on all
parties to continue their efforts and build on the recent
understandings in order to reach a comprehensive and
just solution to the issue and overcome the political
deadlock. We also stress the need for the parties to
avoid any unilateral initiatives that may deepen current
divisions. We affirm our support for the efforts of
Mr. Bathily and UNSMIL in facilitating a Libyanowned and Libyan-led political process.
Secondly, we must continue to address the
various growing security challenges facing Libya, as
exemplified by the recent worrisome developments we

S/PV.9402

have witnessed in Tripoli. The United Arab Emirates
expresses its sincere condolences and sympathy to the
families of the civilians who lost their lives in the recent
clashes, and reiterates its call to all parties to de-escalate,
resolve their differences peacefully and protect the
safety of civilians, while exercising maximum restraint
so as to ensure that such unfortunate events do not
happen again. We also stress the urgent need to advance
the unification of all vital State institutions to enable
Libya to more effectively address its challenges and
threats, given that the situation in some neighbouring
countries could undermine the progress achieved in
Libya in the past few years.
We commend the meeting held by the security
working group of the Berlin process International
Follow-up Committee in Benghazi at the end of July,
which was attended by the members of the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission, and we commend the sincere and
responsible commitment demonstrated by the parties to
fully implementing the ceasefire agreement. My country
reaffirms the continued support for those efforts and
all initiatives aimed at building confidence between
the military and security leaderships and uniting the
Libyan people. We align ourselves with the security
working group and its call for the Libyan parties to
create an environment conducive to holding elections.
In that context, we stress the need for continuing efforts
to unify the military and security institutions, as well
as the gradual, balanced and simultaneous removal of
all foreign forces, fighters and mercenaries.
Thirdly, we stress the need for the international
community to unite in supporting the Libyan national
efforts aimed at addressing irregular migration and its
root causes while respecting Libya’s sovereignty and
national legislation. We also emphasize the need to
expand those efforts to include countries of origin and
countries of transit. We commend Libya’s participation
in international and regional efforts to address that issue.
Fourthly, my country stresses the importance
of protecting the rights of the Libyan people and of
preserving their wealth and frozen assets as a top
priority. Those assets should be preserved for future
generations, and Libyan concerns must be taken into
account. That includes the issue of the erosion of
Libyan assets, as well as attempts by others to control
and acquire such assets. We reiterate our previous
call for insulating the oil and financial sectors from
political polarization and for maintaining their unity
and integrity. The United Arab Emirates supports the

23-2472613/19

S/PV.9402

The situation in Libya

efforts of the Libyan Presidential Council to establish
a financial oversight mechanism and commends its
working methods in that regard. We also welcome the
high financial management committee’s approval for
developing and unifying standards for the disclosure
of revenues and public expenditure at the beginning
of this month. On the other hand, we emphasize the
need for the Security Council to take a serious and
practical approach to the Libyan sanctions regime. The
reassessment should ensure that it reflects the current
situation in Libya and supports national efforts rather
than obstructing them, especially in southern Libya.
In conclusion, we stress the importance of finalizing
the national reconciliation process in a manner that is
fully inclusive. That is essential to achieving tangible
progress across all the political, security and economic
issues in Libya. We eagerly anticipate the success of all
initiatives aimed at maintaining Libya’s independence,
unity and territorial integrity.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Special Representative Bathily for his briefing
and Ms. Al Jerbi for her remarks. We welcome the
Permanent Representative of Libya, Ambassador
Elsonni, to today’s meeting and will listen closely to
his statement.
Ecuador has followed with concern the news about
the armed clashes that occurred in Tripoli a few days
ago, leaving dozens dead and many more injured.
Those tragic events threaten to undermine the gains
that have been made, as well as efforts to establish a
healthy security environment conducive to progress
on the political front. It is essential that the parties
involved address their differences through dialogue
and fulfil their responsibility to guarantee security and
respect for civilians’ human rights. We encourage the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya to continue to
support the efforts of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission
in the implementation of the 2020 ceasefire agreement
and in the development of the operational plan for the
orderly exit of foreign forces, fighters and mercenaries.
In order to prevent a deterioration of the humanitarian
situation and the entry of arms and ammunition into
the country it is important to ensure full respect for the
arms embargo, in line with the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council.
We commend the efforts of the United Nations team
in Libya to prepare a response for a possible increase in
humanitarian and protection needs along the borders.
14/19

22/08/2023

We also welcome the establishment of a high financial
oversight committee, as well as the announcement of
the finalization of the reunification of the Central Bank
of Libya. Those positive steps can be an important
impetus for supporting the political process and
contributing to the unification of other institutions for
the benefit of the Libyan people.
My delegation agrees with the Secretary-General
that the political process in Libya has reached a critical
phase. We urge the relevant Libyan actors to agree on a
realistic electoral framework and resolve all contentious
issues with a view to holding peaceful, transparent and
inclusive elections as soon as possible. Ecuador reiterates
its support for the efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to facilitate an agreement among
Libyan actors for the holding of such elections, in line
with the relevant resolutions of the Council and building
on the progress of the negotiations of the 6+6 committee.
In conclusion, we urge the country’s leaders to work
constructively and cooperate with Special Representative
Bathily in order to find a solution that meets the Libyan
people’s desire for a return to democracy and a life of
dignity and prosperity. The support of the international
community in that regard continues to be important in
a context of unconditional respect for the principle of
national ownership.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank Special Representative
Bathily for his briefing and Ms. Al Jerbi for her
insightful remarks. I also welcome the participation of
the Permanent Representative of Libya in this meeting.
We continue to observe a prolonged political impasse
in Libya. That gives rise to a tense security situation,
which can quickly escalate into violent clashes, as we
recently witnessed. That underlines the need for the
international community to be unified and supportive
of efforts to advance peace and stability in the country.
Elections are necessary to find a sustainable and inclusive
political solution.
On the political front, we continue to urge
all Libyan parties and key stakeholders to engage
fully, constructively, transparently and in a spirit of
compromise with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. Malta will continue to support the
Special Representative’s efforts to engage in inclusive
consultations with a broad range of actors and to
facilitate discussions among them. That is the only
pathway to advancing a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned
political process, under United Nations auspices, with
23-24726

22/08/2023

The situation in Libya

the necessary political consensus and legal framework
to conduct free, fair, transparent, inclusive and secure
elections. We reiterate the right of the Libyan people
to choose their own leadership through such elections
and to see their democratic aspirations realized. In that
context, we emphasize the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in all political processes and
electoral reforms, as well as their safe participation
in elections.
The recent clashes in Tripoli and recent incidents in
Zawiyah underscore the fragile security situation. We
continue to call for dialogue, de-escalation and the legal
responsibility to protect civilians. Structural threats to
Libya’s security continue to be present, posing threats to
civilians in Libya, including children. In that context, we
welcome that UNICEF will conduct a multiple-indicator
cluster survey to increase data and analysis on women
and children in the country. We hope that that will
enhance Libya’s capacity for child-rights monitoring and
effective child-protection policies.
We are concerned about the continued presence of
foreign fighters, foreign forces and mercenaries, whose
full withdrawal should be prioritized. Equally concerning
is the proliferation of weapons under the control of
various State and non-State actors. Full compliance
with the arms embargo and the broader framework of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya is essential. We
believe that the assets freeze is meant to exist for the
benefit of Libya and its people, and that Libyan funds
held abroad must be declared and frozen for eventual
repatriation. The continued work of the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission and other measures that seek to
stabilize the security situation require our full support.
That includes the role of Operation IRINI and the
holding of the first in-person plenary meetings in Libya
of the security working group of the Berlin process
International Follow-Up Committee on Libya.
We welcome the announced finalization of the
reunification of the two branches of the Central Bank of
Libya. We hope that that will lead to the unification of
political and military institutions. We also welcome the
establishment and recent meetings of a high committee
on financial oversight to address issues of transparency
in the spending of public funds and to ensure the fair
distribution of national resources as a positive step. We
hope that will support efforts to address the difficult
socioeconomic conditions facing large segments of the
Libyan population.

S/PV.9402

From the human rights perspective, we regret to
note the decreased space for civil society in Libya. The
recent restrictive measures on fundamental freedoms
and rights, including on women’s freedom of movement,
run counter to the goal of inclusive elections and
national reconciliation, in which women, young people
and civil society have a pivotal role to play.
I conclude by reiterating Malta’s support for all
efforts that seek to secure an inclusive, peaceful, stable
and prosperous present and future for all Libyans.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States of
America.
I would like to thank Special Representative
Bathily for his informative briefing and all the work
that he has been doing. I also thank Ms. Al Jerbi for all
that she does to report on the hopes and the struggles
of people across Libya and the need for accountability.
Her voice was very powerful in the Security Council
today. I welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Libya in this meeting.
Today I want to touch on five challenges facing
Libya and discuss the path towards stability and
democratic elections.
First, the United States is deeply concerned about
the outbreak of violence in Libya and the region. We
condemn the fighting between militias in Tripoli last
week. Persistent grievances cannot be resolved through
more fighting. That is abundantly clear. And with
instability growing in places such as the Sudan and the
Niger, factions within Libya must avoid actions that
could precipitate a spiral into wider violence.
Secondly, I want to stress that the best path forward
for the Libyan people is for all of us to support Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bathily’s
efforts to consolidate support for elections as soon as
possible. We encourage the Special Representative to
continue building on the work of the 6+6 committee,
which is critical to addressing the contested elements
of the electoral framework, securing the necessary
inclusive political agreement on the path to elections
and enabling a level playing field for all candidates. All
parties — the House of Representatives, the High State
Council, the Government of National Unity, the Libyan
National Army and the Presidential Council — need
to come together to make the necessary compromises
required to hold elections.

23-2472615/19

S/PV.9402

The situation in Libya

Consistent with our support for national ownership
of the election process, we also encourage all external
actors to respect the Libyan people’s desire to formulate
their own path. In any discussions, the Special
Representative’s Office must continue to involve Libyan
civil society actors, who will play a key role in the longterm success of any political transition. The Libyan
people are ready for compromise — a compromise that
will bring about elections and stability. Towards that end,
we are open to supporting the formation of a technocratic
caretaker Government, the sole task of which would
be to bring the country to free and fair elections.
Thirdly,
on
the
crucial
question
of
revenue-management, we are encouraged by the
unification of the Central Bank of Libya and the
establishment of a high committee on financial oversight.
This Libyan-led effort will ensure that no single player
has exclusive control over public expenditures, and it
will help to address legitimate grievances over equitable
revenue distribution. The Committee must emphasize
transparency and fiscal oversight to win the confidence
of the Libyan people. Together with the recent
announcement of new progress towards reunification
of the Central Bank of Libya, these developments lend
critical momentum to support of a political agreement.
Fourthly, we are encouraged by the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission’s efforts to remove foreign
forces, fighters and mercenaries and advance efforts
toward possible disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. Recent progress towards the formation
of a joint unit that could patrol the south will help
secure Libya’s borders and prevent the spillover of
regional turmoil.
Fifthly, we will continue to shine a spotlight on
the Wagner Group’s pernicious impact on Libya and
across Africa. Let us be clear: countries with Wagner
deployments within their borders find themselves
poorer, weaker and less secure. We see that phenomenon
in Mali, Burkina Faso, the Niger and the Sudan.
Wagner’s leadership has made no secret of its ambition
to gain a further foothold in Africa and of its disregard
for Libya’s territorial integrity.
The Libyan people deserve change, they deserve
progress, and they deserve hope. It is up to Libya’s
leaders to take action and deliver results. We urge
all parties to work towards elections, which is a
critical, long overdue step that will advance stability
and prosperity.
16/19

22/08/2023

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Ambassador Ishikane, in his
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya.
Mr. Ishikane: In accordance with paragraph 24 (e)
of resolution 1970 (2011), of 26 February 2011, I have the
honour to report to the Security Council on the work of
the Committee established pursuant to that resolution.
The report covers the period from 20 June to
22 August 2023, during which time the Committee met
twice in informal consultations and conducted its work
using the silence procedure. Most recently, in informal
consultations on 18 August, the Committee heard a
presentation by the Panel of Experts on its final report
submitted in accordance with resolution 2644 (2022).
The report, which will be submitted to the Council no
later than 15 September 2023, covers a range of issues,
including acts, particularly those of Libyan armed
groups, which threaten the peace, stability or security
of Libya, violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights, including in the context of human
trafficking and migrant smuggling, violation of the
arms embargo, illicit exports of refined petroleum
products and implementation of the assets freeze. In
the interactive discussion that ensued, Committee
members expressed their support for the work of the
Panel. Committee members are currently considering
the full recommendations of the Panel to the Committee
for possible follow-up action.
Earlier, in informal consultations on 4 August 2023,
which were organized in response to a communication
received from the Libyan Investment Authority (LIA),
a listed entity, the Committee heard a briefing from
the LIA and its audit company on issues pertaining to
implementation of the assets freeze. Remarks were also
made by the representative of Libya. In the interactive
discussion that followed, Committee members noted
the progress made on the implementation of the
LIA’s transformation strategy and took note of the
LIA’s request on the assets freeze, which stressed the
importance of guaranteeing that the frozen funds would
remain for the benefit of the Libyan people.
Concerning the arms embargo, no negative decision
was taken by the Committee in connection with two
notifications invoking paragraph 13 (b) of resolution
2009 (2011), submitted by Kenya and Germany,
23-24726

22/08/2023

The situation in Libya

respectively. The Committee also approved a request
for exemption under paragraph 9 (c) of resolution 1970
(2011), submitted by Malta. Further, the Committee
responded to a letter from Libya pertaining to certain
aspects of the implementation of the arms embargo.
The Committee is currently considering a response to
another letter from Libya on an interaction between a
vessel flying the Libyan flag and the European Union
Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI. The
Committee also received a letter from the European
Union concerning the status of cargo seized on board
a vessel flying the flag of Equatorial Guinea following
an inspection thereof by Operation IRINI last year.
One Committee member expressed varying views with
regard to possible follow-up on the matter, referring to
the implementation of resolution 2292 (2016). There is
an absence of consensus among Committee members
in this regard.
In the context of the measures aimed at preventing
the illicit export of petroleum from Libya, including
crude oil and refined petroleum products, the
Committee received a letter from Libya, pursuant to
resolution 2146 (2014), on the subject of the new Libyan
Government focal point.
In relation to the assets freeze, no negative decision
was taken by the Committee in relation to a notification
invoking paragraph 19 (a) of resolution 1970 (2011),
submitted by the Kingdom of Bahrain. The Committee
also responded to letters from Libya and Bahrain on
issues related to this measure. The Committee received
two letters from the Libyan Investment Authority on
various aspects of the assets freeze.
With regard to the travel ban, the Committee
received two travel notifications from Ms. Aisha
Al-Qadhafi, a listed individual, for travel from Oman to
Egypt and thereafter to Italy, under a travel exemption
granted previously for unlimited travel within a sixmonth period for humanitarian purposes. Subsequently,
the Committee also received letters from Egypt and
Italy, the countries of destination, notifying it of
the travel.
With regard to the sanctions list, the Committee
received a communication from the focal point for the
listing established pursuant to resolution 1730 (2006) in
connection with the new delisting request submitted by
a listed individual, as well as a second communication
from the focal point under the listing request submitted
by another listed individual.

S/PV.9402

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
Committee’s commitment to contributing to the
promotion of peace and stability in Libya.
The President: I thank Ambassador Ishikane for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elsonni (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate you, Madam President, on
the United States presidency of the Security Council
this month. I would also like to thank Mr. Bathily for
his briefing, in which he demonstrated the scale of the
challenges that my country is facing and underscored at
the same time the shared responsibility of the Council
with respect to what is happening.
I would also like to thank the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya for his briefing. We hope
that he will be able to take into consideration the requests
that we have made in relation to the list of sanctions
imposed on individuals owing to the fact that the list
contains names that should no longer be featured on
it. We also have made other requests, including on the
mechanism for dealing with the frozen Libyan assets,
which we have already discussed at length. We hope
that the Committee will be able to review this issue and
safeguard the assets and funds belonging to Libyans.
We listened to Ms. Noura Al Jerbi and would
like to thank her for her briefing today. The different
challenges that she mentioned illustrate that many of
them can only be solved through complete stability
in Libya.
Libyans today are more determined than ever to
preserve the stability of their country and prevent a
return to political divisions and war. They hope to lay
solid foundations upon which they will safely navigate
the phase of democratic transition that my country has
experienced for more than 10 years. That is why the
current political situation will not allow for us to launch
new processes and dialogues that will only prolong the
transition phase. The solution lies in the strong and
genuine will of all parties to overcome the crisis caused
by the lack of trust among them. The leadership must
be genuinely Libyan-owned to end the transition phase
through the holding of national elections on the basis of
just and equitable laws.
We therefore reiterate today our request to the
international community to support national efforts and

23-2472617/19

S/PV.9402

The situation in Libya

prevent spoilers within and outside the country from
depriving the Libyan people of their right to maintain
stability, which has been achieved over the past two
years following a series of bloody wars, in order to
ensure the realization of a peaceful transition of power
to be enjoyed and defended by the Libyan people.
Despite the challenges related to the democratic
transition phase that Libya is currently experiencing,
we have seen stability in terms of economic and
living conditions in the country. The Government of
National Unity has been able to address major issues
related to citizens’ daily lives, such as the energy
and electricity issue and maintaining oil production,
while even increasing its output. The stable situation
has also contributed to the reopening of a large
number of foreign embassies and consulates and the
resumption of several foreign airlines’ flights to Libyan
airports. That has been coupled with measures taken
by the Presidential Council concerning intra-Libyan
reconciliation in cooperation with the African Union,
together with the convening shortly of a national
conference on reconciliation.
Despite all of that, the delay in finding a solution to
and achieving consensus on the enactment of electoral
laws by the relevant institutions, the holding of elections
and efforts to end the fragile transitional phase has
given rise to increased tensions among stakeholders in
Libya. The unfortunate incidents that took place few
days ago in the capital, Tripoli, and tragically led to
dozens of casualties attest to that. The hesitation and
indecision that characterizes the political process and
the absence of radical solutions to the crisis in Libya
will only create further crises and undermine efforts
to reform the security sector and reunify the military
institutions. Those incidents and others are not the
first of their kind. We have seen similar incidents in
various other regions of Libya over the past years. But
we are fearful that, if the political impasse continues,
they will not be the last of their kind either. The most
recent security-related tensions must not be allowed
to undermine the peacebuilding and democratization
process in Libya but must send a warning signal to all
parties to maintain stability and to commit to dialogue.
The Libyan people are asking the High State Council
and the House of Representatives to demonstrate
political will and shoulder their historic responsibility,
as the problem in Libya is not a legal but a purely
political one. The two bodies must fulfil their duty and
accelerate the enactment of just and applicable laws
18/19

22/08/2023

that are acceptable to all parties so that the Government
can oversee the holding of elections as soon as possible
to restore the legitimacy of all political bodies to meet
the aspirations of Libyans for stability and prosperity,
adequately build State institutions, reunify the military
and security institutions, ensure the State’s exclusive
power over the armed forces, enforce laws and protect
citizens. Achieving that goal requires the participation
of all stakeholders in seeking a comprehensive solution
that ensures everyone’s commitment. The motivation
must be based on peaceful political competition and the
holding of presidential and legislative elections as soon
as possible, not by making the same past mistakes and
launching new transition phases.
We must build on the achievements of the 6+6
committee, made up of members of the High State
Council and the House of Representatives. Pending
issues must be resolved. The political, legal and
technical issues that were raised to the committee must
be taken into account. Just and equitable electoral laws
must be enacted according to a time frame in order
to guarantee comprehensive, transparent and credible
elections that their outcome will be accepted by all.
In the same context, we call upon the international
community to provide technical support to the High
National Elections Commission so that it will be ready
to proceed once the electoral laws have been enacted. In
that regard, we note that the Government is continuing
to allocate all financial resources requested by the
Commission to hold the elections.
We have recently been following the establishment
of the high committee on financial oversight by the
Presidential Council, the members of which represent
all sovereign and executive bodies of the State. The
committee seeks to reach a compromise on financial
arrangements and managing State resources and
public spending throughout the country, on the
basis of information-sharing and transparency. The
Committee has thus far convened four meetings, in
several Libyan cities, and has made various practical
recommendations to strengthen the Government’s
transparent policy on public spending. At its first
meeting, held in Sirte, the Committee underscored
the importance of pursuing development projects in
the oil sector, reforms involving the electric grid and
infrastructure projects in every region. In that context,
two days ago marked a positive development when the
Governor and Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of
Libya announced its reunification, a long-awaited and
23-24726

22/08/2023

The situation in Libya

important step towards strengthening the activities of
that sovereign and important institution and ending the
years-long division.
Libya is not immune from events related to the
current political and security events in neighbouring
countries, as we have seen with regard to increased
fighting in the Sudan and the recent crisis in the Niger,
which might spread in the region, especially in the
African Sahel. It is incumbent upon all to step up their
support for the Libyans in order to end the current crisis
and halt all negative foreign interference to prevent the
conflict from worsening and spiralling out of control.
The current events in Libya’s neighbouring States
provide an opportunity for terrorist groups and criminal
networks to ratchet up their operations and threaten
the region and every State in the world. A stable Libya
will be able to address that despite all outstanding
challenges and will be able to support its neighbours
once its current political crisis has been resolved.
In that regard, the increase in tensions and instability
is undermining my country’s efforts to deal with the
issue of irregular migration and its causes and effects.
It is worth noting once again that the attempts to impose
the settlement of migrants in Libya will be rejected. The
position of Libya is clear and unambiguous and has been
reflected in recent statements made by the President of
the Presidential Council, the Head of Government and
the law enacted by the House of Representatives, all
of which underscore Libya’s categorical rejection of
the establishment of such a settlement, which certain
States would unfortunately like to see in an attempt to
exploit my country’s current situation so as to settle
irregular migrants and asylum seekers whose truly
desired destination is actually Europe, not Libya.
Despite all challenges, Libya has spared no effort to

S/PV.9402

ensure the protection of migrants on its territories. We
are pursuing the implementation of a voluntary return
programme of those migrants, in cooperation with the
relevant United Nations organizations.
Before concluding, I must reiterate from this
rostrum the strong indignation of Libya and the
dissatisfaction of the Libyan people with regard to the
acts carried out by some hard-core individuals from the
far right in Europe who are burning copies of the Holy
Qur’an, as we have seen recently in Denmark in front of
the Libyan Embassy and, before that, in Sweden, while
their countries look on. That is a desperate attempt
to provoke Muslims under the pretext of freedom of
expression. Those acts come at a time when all of us,
pursuant to international resolutions, are combating the
phenomenon of Islamophobia. We therefore call on all
concerned States to put an end to that kind of act and
support awareness among their citizens and not allow
double standards with regard to freedom of expression.
The Islamic religion will never be affected by such
acts. They will only fuel violence and threaten social
peace and even international peace and security. Those
who benefit from such acts are extremists and terrorists
and their supporters and all those who exploit such acts
to justify their crimes in the name of Islam while Islam
is completely innocent. The Islamic religion is far from
hate, radicalization and extremism. It is a religion of
mercy, tolerance, coexistence and peace.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

23-2472619/19
