UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL
TWENTY-NINTH

RECORDS
YEAR

‘ING: 20 FEBRUARY
NEW

1974

YORK

CONTENTS

i.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1763) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda

Page
1

......................................

1

Complaint by Iraq concerning incidents on its frontier with Iran:
Letter dated 12 February 1974 from the Deputy Permanent Representative of
Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11216).............................................

1

S/PV.l763

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Securi~ Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SIXTY -THIRD

Held in New York on Wednesday,
Besident: Mr. Louis de GUIRINGAUD

20 February

MEETING

1974, at 3.30 p.m.

ance with Article 31 of the Charter, to participate without
the right to vote in the Council’s debate on the item on its
agenda.

(France).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania, Peru, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Cameroon and United States of America.

4. If I hear no objection I propose, in accordance with the
Council’s practice and under rule 37 of the provisional rules
of procedure, to invite the representative of the United
Arab Emirates and the representative of the Libyan Arab
Republic to participate, without the right to vote, in the
Council’s debate. Given the limited number of places
available at the Council table, and in conformity with the
usual practice, I shall invite the representatives of the
Libyan Arab Republic, the United Arab Emirates and
Democratic Yemen to take the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council Chamber, on the understanding that
they will be invited to take a place at the Council table
when it is their turn to speak.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 763)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Complaint by Iraq concerning incidents on its frontier
with Iran:
Letter dated 12 February 1974 from the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Iraq to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 1216)

At the invitation of the Resident, Mr. A. S. Ashtal
(Democratic Yemen), Mr. S. D. A. Swedan (Libyan Arab
Republic) and Mr. A. Hum&an
(United Arab Emirates)
took places at the side of the Council Chamber.

The meeting was called to order at 4 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

5. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from l+ench): The
first name on the list of speakers is that of the representative of the People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen,
whom I now invite to take a place at the Council table and
to make a statement.

The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Iraq concerning incidents on
its frontier with Iran
Letter dated 12 February 1974 from the Deputy Permanent Representative of Iraq to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1216)

6. Mr. ASHTAL (Democratic
Yemen): Let me at the
outset extend my sincere thanks to the members of the
Council for giving me this opportunity
to address this
august body on an item of special significance to my
Government.

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken by the Council at its
1762nd meeting, and with the consent of the Council, I
propose to invite the representative of Iran to take a place
at the Council table in order to participate in the Council’s
debate without the right to vote.

7. I am particularly pleased to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February. This Council will
undoubtedly benefit from your vast experience and
wisdom. You are a qualified and tactful diplomat whom we
hold in great esteem.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. I? Hoveyda (Iran)
took a place at the Council table.

8. I have asked to be allowed to speak, on behalf of my
Government, not as a bystander or as a party remotely
influenced by or concerned with the latest acts of aggression perpetrated by the Irani Armed Forces against a
sisterly country-Iraq-but
as a party most intimately
preoccupied with the self-declared Iranian political and
military patronage of our area. After all, according to
Iranian military strategists,
the People’s Democratic
Republic of Yemen is within the so-called defenceperimeter of Iran-a euphemism for neo-imperialist aspirations .

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): In
accordance with the previous decision- also taken by the
Council at the 1762nd meeting, I propose, in accordance
with Article 31 of the Charter, to invite the representative
of Democratic Yemen to participate, without the right to
vote, in the debate on the item on the Council’s agenda.
3. I have also just received letters from the representative
of the Libyan Arab Republic and the representative of the
United Arab Emirates requesting to be invited, in accord1

9. Indeed, sometimes only brothers can fight ferociously,
and for ulterior motives designed by inimical factions and
Powers which labour to maintain and enhance their
political and economic interests at the expense of almost
anything. Throughout the ages the Arab and Iranian
peoples have been welded together by bonds of common
heritage, religion, history and neighbourliness, and whenever they fought each other it was never in their best
respective interest, but because of imperialists’ designs and
the grandeur of an alienated patron or an interest group.
Today, a large number of fellow Iranians are peacefully
living in the midst of their Arab hosts in Iraq, Kuwait,
Manamah, Dubai, Abu-Dhabi and the rest of the Arab Gulf
Area, while Arabs are coexisting with their brothers in Iran.

14. Now, in the best tradition of a self-styled rnini-superPower, Iran is not only engaged on one front. Its avarice for
armaments of all sorts can only be paralleled by its thirst
for territorial expansion and its lust for regional overlordship. The fiasco of American imperialism in Viet-Nam is too
recent to be overlooked by Irani militarism. On 13
February 1974, John Kroley wrote in the Christian Science
Monitor:
“In an interview with the London Daily Telegraph, the
Shah of Iran disclosed that the Iranian Rangers were
fighting the guerillas in the Omani Province of Dhofar.
The forces are estimated at three battalions of Iranian
Sea-Rangers”-that
is, 3,000 marines-“supported
by
helicopters”-25
helicopters.

10. But the affinity of the Arab and Iranian peoples is
distasteful to imperialism and its lackeys. In 1969, when
Britain contemplated and then decided on withdrawal from
the Arab Gulf Emirates and Sheikhdoms, Iran at the time
declared that there would be no power vacuum in the Gulf
area, that it, Iran, was destined to be the guardian of the
Gulf and its littoral Emirates, and that stability would
prevail under its tutelage. Almost at the same time, it
abrogated its border treaty with Iraq, a despicable move
aimed at manifesting its military preponderance and might.

The paper went on to say:
“The Omani army, already officered by senior officers
from. Britain and the Commonwealth
countries, apparently welcomed the Iranian assistance which was
regarded by Arab radicals as ‘an invasion’.”
15. What else can one call such a brazen and outright
incursion? Is it a goodwill visit to Oman, or a picnic with
bombs? Or is Iran only testing its newly acquired weapons
on a people already plagued by repression and colonialism
in disguise? “Military invasion” is what it is-an invasion
not, of course, of the Sultan’s palace and his imported army
of mercenaries, but of Oman and its valiant people.

11. As if to mark a new era of territorial aggrandizement
and political.provocation,
the Iranian forces have systematically intruded across Iraqi borders and entered into Iraqi
territories in an undisguised mission of continued expansionism. The Iranian Army, which is now very offensively
overequipped has been, ever since, deployed and redeployed in aggressive patterns along the SOOnrile IraqiIranian borders.

16. On IO February 1974, the Iranian paper Kayhm
boasted in bravado: “Iranian soldiers in Oman have fought
valiantly-like
lions-thus demonstrating their resolve and
ability to help a friendly country in need of support against
international conspiracies.” “Like lions”. By indulging in
arrogant self-praise the Iranian paper is merely trying to
boost the morale of an invading army, now confronted not
by a few thousand freedom fighters, but by the whole
Omard people, whose pride is being insulted. Colonialists of
the past have tried such ventures, “like lions”, but they
were compelled to retreat in disarray.

12. The latest Irani aggression on Iraqi border posts and
the penetration of their armed forces 5 kilometres into
Iraqi territory could only be regarded as an escalation of
tension and an invitation to largeacale hostilities. This time
the Iranian armed forces have not only been deployed
within Iraqi territories on a war-footing; they have trespassed upon Iraqi sovereignty by crossing the border, while
their air force violated Iraqi air space. Those acts of
provocation and outright aggression are qualitatively different in magnitude and in their ominous timing. About
two thirds of the Iranian armed forces, armed to the teeth
as Ambassador El-Shibib said the other day, and deployed
in offensive formations along the Iraqi borders, play with
fire, thanks to the American military complex which is now
searching for another Viet-Narn in the Middle East and an
outlet for its military stocks. It is a situation which
portends grave risks and bitter hostilities.

17. The nine-year-old Popular Front for the Liberation of
Oman and the Arabian Gulf, which is the target of Irani
invasion, now controls the whole Province of Dhofar save
for the beleaguered capital City of Sallalah, a prototype of
Phnom Phen under constant fire. As the vanguard of the
Ornani people, they are exercising their right to selfdetermination. They do not aspire to build an empire, nor do
they claim to interfere in the internal affairs of Iran. They
serve not the interests of “international conspiracies” but
the welfare of the impoverished Omani people. They are
the real representatives of the Omani people, and to uproot
them Iran will have to obliterate the whole Omani people.

13. As for the timing, it is no coincidence that Iraq is
being subjected to Iranian military pressure at a time when
it is courageously depriving the proponents and underwriters of Israel from plundering its natural resources. Iraq,
moreover, is dedicated to defending the legitimate national
rights of the Palestinian people-a fact which naturally
worries American imperialism and its extended arms in the
Middle East. In its attempt to disrupt Arab solidarity and
mitigate the over-all Arab power by exerting pressure on
Iraq, Iran is doing a great service to the Zionist aggressors.

18. When, on 30 November 1971, Iranian troops invaded
the Arab islands of Abu Musa and the Greater and Lesser
Tumbs, the delegation of Democratic Yemen addressed a
pertinent question to this Council on 9 December 1971
/161&h meeting]. What are the long-term goals of Iran,
Ambassador Ismail asked at the time? Well, it is now
established that the three captured islands, which were
immediately transformed into military bases, became the
2

launching-pads for further aggression. For the invading
Iranian forces in Oman took off from those very islands,
whose occupation is both illegal and condemnable. Now
have we not reason to anticipate that the invasion of Oman
is only a prelude to further aggression in the Arabian
Peninsula?

only feelingsof friendship and a desireto work together in
order to safeguardboth the independenceand the territorial integrity of all countriesof the region.
23. If I am constrained to speakin this debate it is only
becauseI feel I must make the position of my Government
very clear on a subject which is of direct and considerable
interest to us-namely, the sovereignty over the three
islandsof Abu Musa,Greater Tumb and LesserTumb.

19. At a time when the fashionable word “dbtente” is
gradually replacing “confrontation”
and the “cold war”,
Iran is apportioning a substantial part of its resources for
military build-up. With the billions of dollars spent on arms
procurement it has now become a garrison State. Is it the
trend that the designs of imperialism are being materialized
by local foremen? And are we small States going to be
deprived of the fruits of the relaxation of tension in the
international arena? I am here to draw the attention of this
Council to the fact that the Iranian invasion of Oman
endangers the security and territorial integrity of my
country. The appetite for Irani expansionism will not stop
along the borders of Iraq, nor at the frontiers of the
People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen. Its military
tentacles are already feeling out way beyond its borders and
well into the high seas. In the words of Hans Morgenthau:

24. In the statement he made on 15 February last
meeting],
the repiesentative of Iran said that
those islands are Iranian islands over which Iran has
reestablishedits sovereignty, exerciseof which had according to him beeninterrupted during the colonial period.

/1762nd

25. On this point, the position of the Government of the
United Arab Emirateshasbeenmadeclear repeatedly, and I
wish to stateit againhere. Werecognizeno sovereignty over
those islands other than that of the State of the United
Arab Emirates.
26. In so saying, I must add that our regional policy, our
policy towards our neighbours,is very clear. Furthermore,
it was spelled out by our Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Ahmed Khalifa Al-Soweidi, when he addressedthe
General Assembly on 27 September 1972, in the general
debate. He said:

“A nation that throws into the scales of international
politics the maximum of material power it is capable of
mustering will find itself confronted with the maximum
effort of its competitors to equal or surpass its power. It
will find that it has no friends, but only vassals and
enemies.”

“Our geographicalposition in the Gulf has given us a
vital interest in the maintenanceof peaceand stability in
that important economic and strategic area of the
world. . . . It is our firm belief that the peaceand stability
of the Gulf region can be maintained only with the
co-operation of its States and their respect for one
another’sindependenceand territorial integrity. Whatever
disputesor differencesexist at presentor may arisein the
future can and must be resolvedby peaceful meansand in
a manner that will recognize and preservethe legitimate
rights of all parties concerned and without prejudice to
their basicnational interests. . . .“I

20. In addressing this Council on 9 December 1971
Mr. Afshar, the representative of Iran, referred to
the question of the Irani occupation of the three islandsas
“miniscule to the point of embarrassment”. By what
standard is the encroachment on others’ territories an ad
minim&? There are no exceptions to the observationof the
rules of law and the principles and purposesof the Charter.
Seen from the perspective of the victims of aggression,
those are acts of violence endangeringpeaceand security in
our area. The responsibility of this Council doesnot start
once the flamesof war have faded away and an injustice has
been done. Its moral and political obligations warrant its
27. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
immediate action to extinguish the first sparksof hostilinext name on the list is that of the representativeof the
ties.
Libyan Arab Republic, whom I invite to take a seat at the
Council table and to make a statement.
21 The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
next name on the list of speakersis that of the represen- 28. Mr. SWEDAN (Libyan Arab Republic): Mr. President,
tative of the United Arab Emirates, whom I now invite to
frost 1 should like to congratulate you on your assumption
take a place at the Council table and to make a statement.
of the dutiesof the presidencyof the Security Council. Not
only are you yourself endowed with the requisite qualities
22. Mr. HUMAIDAN (United Arab Emirates) (interpretato undertake these duties; you also come from a country
tion from French):
Mr. President, I cannot disguisemy
with a long history in diplomacy and the pursuit of
pleasureat seeingyou presideover this important Council,
freedom, a country with which my own country maintains
for you represent France, a nation that is friendly not only
closeties of friendship and co-operation.
to the United Arab Emiratesbut to the entire Arab world.
We cannot but admire the wise policies of your Govern- 29. As is well known in this chamber,my Government has
ment, which never ceasesto work for peaceand justice in
in the past avoided coming to the Security Council in the
the Middle East. May I therefore congratulateyou, Sir, and hope of obtaining justice or of obtaining effective concrete
thank you as well asthe membersof the Council for having measuresagainst injustice and aggression,even when such
allowed me to participate in this debate on a conflict that
injustice and aggressionhave directly concerned and afaffects two great countries of our region. One is a brother
with which we have ajoint destiny; the other is a neighbour
1 SW Official Records of the General
Assembly,
Twenty-seventh
with which we enjoy good relations and for which we have Session. plenary Meetings, 2043rd meeting:,
para.154.
[ibid.],

3

fected my country and people. We have refused to seek or
resign ourselves to mere paper resolutions designed not to
counteract dangerous situations but only to condemn to
oblivion and sidetrack those victims of aggression and
injust ice.

concern to CENTO.” Referring to the policy of the United
States of providing Iran with huge amounts of the most
modern American armaments, Mr. Rogers said that this
policy would be “a stabilizing influence for peace in this
rich oil-producing area”.

30. I need not, however, dwell on the poor record of this
Council in taking effective measures to cope with international situations either in my part of the world or anywhere
else. Many other representatives have voiced their opinions,
cast their doubts and spelled out their disappointments in
the vain hope that this Council would at least once
overcome the dominance of power politics and meet its
prime responsibility on the basis of objectivity and the
merit of the issue in question.

35. Indeed, this policy of arming Iran has met its real
objectives, although, as is all too apparent, peace does not
prevail in the area. But peace was never the objective
anyway. The real objective of American policy was to make
of Iran a new force in the area-a force capable not only of
encroaching upon the rights and sovereignty of its neighbours, but also of meddling in the internal affairs of other
States, and even intervening militarily when instructed to
do so by its patron.

31. To turn now to the issue of which the Council is at
present seized, there is no need for me to dwell on the
record of the events that have taken place as a result of the
premeditated Irani aggression against its neighbour in
defiance of the Charter of the United Nations and the
principles governing friendly relations among neighbouring
States.

36. The expansionist policies and dreams of the Shah
faithfully serve the interests and the strategy of international colonialism in the area of the Arabian Gulf and the
Indian Ocean. That strategy of the United States, based as
it is upon establishing military outposts in the heart of the
Arab world, also seeks to devise and cement a link between
the American military presence in the Mediterranean and in
Palestine, on the one hand, and the Arabian Gulf and the
Indian Ocean, on the other.

32. Everyone can attest to the fact that the latest act of
aggression is but one manifestation of a policy of expansion
and domination by Iran over the entire Arabian Gulf area.
Perhaps the most perfidious chapter of this policy of the
Shah and his regime was opened when, in December 1971,
the Iranian Government staged a military aggression and
iIlegaIly occupied three Arab islands in the Arabian Gulf.

37. Perhaps the clearest evidence of American policies and
designs for the Arab area was revealed by Senator Fulbright
in a statement he made during the discussions in the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee on the energy crisis. In that
statement Mr. Fulbright confirmed the designs of the
United States, Israel and Iran towards two of the major
oil-producing States-namely, Kuwait and Libya-when
he
declared:

33. As is well known, this was done with the connivance
and collaboration of the British Government in blatant
betrayal of its treaty obligations with the Arab States,
which since the dawn of history has had legal sovereignty
over these islands. This policy of aggression and expansionism directed against the Arab people does not,
however, reflect the true aspirations and sentiments of the
Iranian people, with whom we Arabs have the closest bonds
of common history, civilization and religion. Quite the
contrary, the policy of aggression and expansionism is
merely an integral part of the imperial dream and mythology entertained by the Shah to resurrect the ancient
Persian empire.

“There is no question of our ability forcibly to take
over the oil-producing States of the Middle East. We
might not even have to do it ourselves-with
militarily
potent surrogates in the region. The Shah of Iran is
known to aspire to a protecting role in the Gulf region.*’
38. Perhaps it is appropriate to refer, in this context, to
the other end of the axis of American attempts at
domination of the Arab area through the establishment of
strategic military outposts in the heart of the Arab world. I
refer to the so-called State of Israel, which was artificially
planted in the midst of the Arab nation and has been
forcibly maintained through huge military and financial
support, amounting to many thousands of millions of
dollars-not to mention the latest cash payment of $2.2
billion. There is little doubt that this latter payment to the
Zionists is but part of an over-all military plan that
encompasses not only support for the so-called State of
Israel but also similar and analogous payments to the Shah
of Iran. These huge American financial and military outlays
are designed to enable America’s clients in the Arab area
more fully and effectively to serve American interests.

34. Moreover, the forces of imperialism and neocolonialism have found in this dream, as in the Zionist dream, a
golden opportunity to exploit the entire area-an area of
vital strategic and economic significance. These forces of
imperialism and neocolonialism, while using the pretext of
attempting to safeguard the security and stability of the
area, have sought to perpetuate their domination over it.
One of their most blatant tactics in this their policy of
perpetuating domination and exploitation has been the
establishment of the so-called Central Treaty Organization,
known as CENTO, encompassing Iran and other States in
the region, as well as the United Kingdom and the United
States. During the meeting of CENT0 members in Teheran
in June 1973, Mr. William Rogers, former United States
Secretary of State, defined the role of CENT0 as a defence
system devised to maintain the security of the area of the
Arabian Gulf. “If’-said
Mr. Rogers-“the
Persian Gulf
becomes an area of conflict, it would be a matter of

39. Whatever the rhetoric used by the Shah of Iran to
justify his latest premeditated act of aggression against the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq, this must all be
understood and evaluated in the context of the dream of
the Shah to dominate and exploit the entire Arabian Gulf
area. We therefore declare before this august Council that
4

unless the international community can halt this expansionism and this aggression, the area will witness in the
not-too-distant future an explosive and endless conflict
with global dimensions and implications.
40. My Government, convinced of the seriousness of the
situation in that part of the world, therefore strongly
condemns the aggression of Iran against the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq and requests the Council to
meet, if only this once in its lifetime, the responsibilities
which it has up to now failed to fulfi in many parts of our
troubled world.
41. The PRESIDENT (inrerprefation from French): I call
upon the representative of Iran, who has asked to speak in
exercise of his right of reply.
42. Mr. HOVEYDA (Iran) (interpretation j?om French):
The fact that the representative of Southern Yemen has
ventured to abuse the Council’s practice in order to
interfere in an affair which is of no concern of his-1 refer
to the co,mplaint concerning a purported Iranian aggression
against Iraq-is in itself symptomatic of bare-faced, habitual
conduct which has resulted in the sowing of terror and
devastation among its own neighbours. Must I remind the
Council of the acts of aggression perpetuated by that
country against, infer alia, Oman or its neighbour to the
north? Must I reiterate here the objective openly proclaimed by its own leaders to liberate the whole region of
the Persian Gulf-that
is to say, nothing less than the
overthrow of the lawful regimes of those countries?
43. The insistence of the representative of Southern
Yemen, and also of the representative of Libya a few
minutes ago, on using a fictitious term to refer to the
Persian Gulf-an expression historically established and
universally recognized-is
vivid proof of the spirit of
systematic distortion that characterized the remainder of
their remarks. And when those two delegations venture to
talk of dreams of hegemony and expansion on the part of
Iran, do they not realize that in thus distorting this
historical expression they are in the process of building an
empire, happily fictitious?
44. The tissue of lies and insults which we have just heard
directed at my Government in fact merits no reply.
Nevertheless, mention has been made here by the representative of Southern Yemen of the assistance granted by my
country to the Sultanate of Oman. I must in this respect
recall that this assistance was furnished at the actual request
of the lawful Government of that friendly country, and the
Sultan of Oman recently publicly expressed his gratitude to
Iran in an interview with the Lebanese newspaper AZ
Hawadess. In any event, I am not surprised to see the
representative of Southern Yemen fly to the succour of his
Iraqi colleague-and this comment is equally applicable to
the representative of Libya. When the October war broke
out in the Middle East the Libyan authorities, despite their
proximity to the region, remained steadfastly silent and
refrained from making any gesture vis-&vis the countries
involved in the conflict. And now a representative of Libya
all at once comes here to speak of a conflict which is taking
place very far from his region. He says that Iran has
perpetrated an act of aggression. What would he know

about it? Has the representative of Iraq brought before the
Council even the beginnings of proof? All the representative of Libya does is repeat what the representative of
Iraq maintains. What is more, has the representative of
Libya forgotten that in his country there are training camps
for terrorists who are subsequently sent far off to other
countries, and even to my own region, my own country?
Has he forgotten the “VIP” treatment that Libya accords
terrorists who come from the four corners of the world?
45. The representative of the United Arab Emirates saw fit
to repeat in the Council the position of his Government. I
shall reply by saying that I myself stated the position of my
Government on this subject at the last meeting of the
Council and that this position was also stated by the
representative of Iran in the Security Council on 9 December 1971 (Z61Oth meeting]. The representative of the
United Arab Emirates talked about the friendly relations
between our two countries. I can assure him that we have
the same feelings towards his country. He said that the
security of the region must be ensured by co-operation
among all the States of the region. That is in fact the
position that has always been maintained and proclaimed
by my country.
46. Regarding the subject of this debate, on which the
preceding speakers have touched, my Government’s position remains the same. Despite the Iraqi aggression, despite
the complaint brought before this Council, despite the
insults and the appeals to subversion contained in the Iraqi
mass media, we are, as we have always affirmed, ready to sit
down at the negotiating table with a view to the complete
normalization of our relations and the resolution of all our
differences.
47. Since I have the floor, and since the preceding
speakers have thought fit to make comments about the
subject now before the Council, I should like to mention a
number of new developments since last Friday which
render even more curious the presentattitude of Iraq.
48. First, last Saturday the Iraqi Ambassadorin Teheran
presented his credentials and on the same day air links
between the two countries were resumed.Today-indeed at
this very moment-for the fast time in three years an
aircraft of Iran Air is landing in Baghdad with the new
Iranian ambassadorto Iraq on board. Thus everything
seemsto indicate that diplomatic relations and communications between the two countries are again becoming
normal. Nevertheless,the delegationof Iraq refusesto have
recourseto thesenormal means.
49. The other recent newsI should like to sharewith the
Council concernsthe bloody incident of 10 February. First
of all, I should like to inform the Council that a
documentary film containing sequencesshowingthe clash
between Iranian and Iraqi forces on the frontier on Sunday,
10 February, was shown the very next day on Baghdad
television with a commentary accusingIran of being the
first to attack. On the same day the same film was
broadcast by the television network of another capital. I
wonder by what divination the Iraqi television cameramen
knew in advancewhere this incident wasgoing to take place
so that they could go to film it, for it is impossibleto

53. One of the preceding speakers referred to the fact that
Iranian troops were in Iraqi territory. Here I must revert to
what the representative of Iraq told us last Friday-that the
Iranian troops were supposed to have advanced “5 kilometres inside Iraqi territory” [ibid., para. IO], an argument
which does not appear in the letter of complaint addressed
to the Security Council by the Iraqi delegation. The
representative of Iraq will perhaps say that he was not in
the possession of detailed information at the time he sent
his letter to the Security Council. In that case, whom are
we to believe? Are we to lend our ear to the statement of
the representative of Iraq when he talked about Iranian
forces which had purportedly occupied Iraqi frontier areas
on 10 February 1974, or are we rather to believe the
reports from Iraqi Government controlled radio and television, quoting communiques from their Chief of Staff which
boasted of the victories won over the purported Iranian
aggressors on 10 February 1974?

maintain a television crew all along a 1,200 kilometre
frontier. The documentary even showed the very first
moments of the clash. Technically, this must mean that
there were several cameramen and even a whole television
crew present, in very remote areas of the two countries.
Must we not, therefore, conclude that everything was
planned well in advance if this film was to be shown only a
few hours later on Baghdad television? Is this not evidence
that this incident was premeditated by the Iraqis?
50. That was the first fact which I wished to bring to the
Council’s attention. The second development concerns the
corpses of Iraqi soldiers which were left behind on our
territory after the withdrawal of the invading forces. Since,
in his letter of today’s date /S/11224], the representative
of Iraq has mentioned this question, I find myself obliged
to submit to the Council’s attention the following information. On 14 February 1974, the Iraqi frontier guards were
invited by their Iranian opposite numbers to a meeting on
the frontier line in order to discuss procedures with a view
to transferring the 29 Iraqi dead who lost their lives in
Iranian territory on 10 February-2 officers and 27 soldiers
or frontier guards. The Iraqi frontier guards, although they
accepted this Iranian offer of a meeting and attended the
meeting, refused to sign the minutes concerning the
transfer. They refused a reference to the fact that these
corpses were in Iranian territory. They refused to take
delivery of the bodies of their own soldiers. In itsletter of
today’s date, the delegation of Iraq again mentions the
presence of Iranian forces on the frontier. Of course, it
omits to mention the presence of Iraqi forces on the other
side of the frontier. I should Iike here to repeat what I said
last Friday in the Council. I said then:

54. Did. the Iranian troops enter Iraq, or was it rather, as
the communiqut? declares, that they were severely punished
and that they were thrown back with losses?
55. I am in possession of news reports and bulletins issued
by Basra and Baghdad radio and newspaper cuttings from
those cities. They speak in general terms of Iranian
aggression, but hasten to add that the Iraqi forces made
short shrift of the aggressive ambitions of the Iranian
forces. Now, either our troops were victorious or they were
repulsed, in accordance with the Iraqi story.

51. At that time I gave the Council information concerning a number of Iraqi divisions which were massed on the
frontier prior to 10 February, and this very morning I
received information indicating that the Iraqis were continuing to send forces and to mass them along the frontier
with Iran.

56. The facts that I have mentioned-the television, the
refusal to take delivery of the bodies, the contradiction
between the statements by the representative of Iraq and
the communiquCs from his Chief of Staff concerning the
same incident-cast serious doubt on Iraq’s claims that we
were the first to attack. These facts constitute evidence,
they constitute proof; besides, the campaign of hatred
orchestrated by the radio, television and press in Iraq on a
wide scale from 10 February onwards suffices to show the
Council where the truth really lies. And since in regard to
this incident, the representative of Iraq thought fit to
mention in his statement of Friday last, quoting a United
States newspaper, the socalled Iranian “armaments shopping list”, I think I might give the Council some clarifications concerning this.

52. I have also received information concerning the new
incidents mentioned in this letter. Those incidents, which
are not specified in the letter from the Iraqi delegation,
consist of five rounds of cannon fired from the Iraqi side in
the same region as the incident of 10 February. To this let
us add the fact that Iraq has now resumed the expulsion of
Iranian nationals from its territory, this time attacking the
religious authorities and theological students in the Najaf
region. Attached to. the letter from the representative of
Iraq is a map which as a matter of fact was circulated to the
members of the Council last Friday. I must draw the
attention of members of the Council to the fact that no
treaty delimiting the land frontier between Iraq and Iran is
in existence. What is more, there is an arrow on this map. I
wonder whether in the mind of the representative of Iraq
an arrow, drawn by hand by his cartographers, is supposed
to prove anything at all?

57. I do not claim to be familiar with the “shopping list”
of the Iraqis, but I do have some specific information
concerning the present state of Iraqi armaments, and I am
going to mention them to you-not
all of them, rest
assured, since that would take hours. The representative of
Iraq talked about tanks, naval forces and air forces. I shall
confine myself to these three elements. Iraq now has more
than 150 T-26 tanks, 400 T-55 tanks, 600 T-54 tanks, 72
T-34 tanks, 66 T-76 tanks, 36 M-24 tanks, and a large
number of Centurion tanks. I shall omit mention of a whole
series of armaments and I shall now go on to the Iraqi Air
Force: 80 Sukhoi fighter bombers, 81 MIG2l’s,
25
MIG-19’s, 25 MIG-17’s, 36 MIG-15’s, 33 Hunters, 12
Ilyushin-28
bombers,
16 Tupolev-16
bombers,
16
Tupolev-22 bombers-and
I should Iike to draw the
attention of members of the Council to the destructive
power of the Tupolev-22 bombers-3 AN-2 air transports,

“ . . . I wonder what a responsible Government is expected to do following upon an incident as regrettable as
that of 10 February last? Is it not normal for any
country to adopt the measures dictated by its defence
needs? ” [I 762nd meeting, para. 751.

6

16 AN-12’s, 11 AN-24’s, 3 Tupolev-124 air transports,
4 Bristol air transports, 6 Dove transports, 2 Hern transports, 34 MI-4 helicopters, 12 MI-6 helicopters, 31 MI-8
helicopters, 12 Vessox helicopters, 12 Alouette helicopters,
and so on and so forth.

the Persian Gulf. First of all it is the Arabian Gulf, and I
should like to say to him that the People’s Democratic
Republic of Yemen is engaged in liberating itself from the
remnants of colonialism. We have no ambitions in any of
our neighbouring countries and, at the same time, we think
it is the right of the peoples in the different countries to
exercise their self-determination. We are not there to build
an empire, as he said. It is very ironic that the People’s
Democratic Republic of Yemen, a very small country of
2 million people, should be accused of wanting to build an
empire. The representative of Iran is probably speaking of
the Persian Empire, and not of any other empire.

58. I might also mention the fact that among these most
sophisticated armaments, apart from the TU-22 bombers
that I mentioned, Iraq has all kinds of SAM missiles-SAM
2,3,6 and 7 missiles.
59. I shall refrain from continuing this list any further.
The Council can see that it goes on and on. I do not wish to
dwell further on this point, but if the Council wished me to
do so it would be my pleasure to read out the list in its
entirety. The representative of Iraq, like certain others,
accuses us of arming to the teeth, yet Iraq does likewise and
has done so for a long time.

65. He also said that the Iranian forces went to Oman to
assist Oman at the invitation of the Sultan of Oman. It
would be well to recall that this kind of justification is not
new to imperialist and sub-imperialist Powers. We can only
recall here that when the United States forces went to
South Viet-Nam it was at the invitation of South Viet-Nam,
but they did plunder and that is what the Iranians are doing
in Oman.

60. In concluding this statement, I wish only to reiterate
the position of my Government. Despite the fact that we
are the victims, despite the many unfriendly acts on the
part of our neighbour, and despite its intransigent refusal to
negotiate with us, once again we should like to say clearly
that we are prepared to embark on direct negotiations using
the normal diplomatic channels m order to settle this
question and all others. As of April 1973, before the
resumption of our diplomatic relations, our Foreign Minister conveyed to his Iraqi opposite number various alternative methods of negotiation and improvement of relations
between our two countries. The Foreign Minister of Iraq
has not replied to this day. Before 1973, as well as since
1973, we have repeatedly offered to enter upon direct
negotiations. I reiterated this position last Friday and I
reiterate it once again today.

66. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
representative of Iraq wishes to speak in exercise of the
right of reply, and I now call on him.
67. Mr. EL-SHIBIB (Iraq): It was my intention to participate in today’s debate merely to bring to the attention of
the members of the Council my letter dated 20 February
1974 /S/11224/ relating to increased tension on the border
and other recent shooting incidents and to point out the
fact that the Iranian authorities are holding for ransom the
dead bodies of Iraqi soldiers-the
Iraqi authorities must
agree to the Iranian claim that the bodies fell in Iranian
territory. This fact needs no elaboration as testimony to the
humanitarian and civilized attitude of the Iranian authorities when dead bodies are used as bargaining chips.

61. I should like in conclusion to ask the representative of
Iraq whether he does not believe that the path of
negotiation, opened up when we resumed our diplomatic
relations, is the best way of easing tensions and settling our
problems.

68. However, we were led again by the remarks of the
Iranian representative through the same maze of confusion,
false accusations and unsubstantiated claims which can only
serve to divert this debate from taking a constructive
course. I am sure that the members of the Council, have
seen the Iraqi delegation’s restraint and its effort to see that
this debate should not degenerate into rhetoric and
accusations, but should go along a constructive path that
would lead to the establishment of peace in our region and
a settlement of the dispute which is the subject of this
meeting of the Coun& However, I deem it my duty to
reply to some of the remarks made by the representative of
Iran.

62. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
representative of the People’s Democratic Republic of
Yemen has asked to be allowed to speak in exercise of the
right of reply. I now invite him to take a place at the
Council table for that purpose.
63. Mr. ASHTAL (Democratic Yemen): The representative of Iran made a number of allegations against my
Government and I should like to take this opportunity to
reply to them He said at the beginning of his remarks that
the participation of the delegation of the Democratic
Republic of Yemen in this Council debate was an interference in the Council’s affairs. If I remember correctly, he
even said that it was a sort of encroachment. To us this is
not new, because for Iran, which has attempted to deprive
us of the right to exercise our sovereignty in our area, such
remarks are to be expected. Again in the best tradition of a
sub-imperialist Power, they would like us to sit by quietly
and watch them invade our area.

69. First of all he disputed the fact that Iraq had stated
that Iranian forces had made an incursion and had occupied
a post which was 5 kilometres inside Iraqi territory. I need
only refer to the verbatim record of the Council meeting on
15 February 1974 /1762nd meeting, para. IO] to show
that at the outset I stated this fact very clearly. I wonder
whether he is disputing my claim to represent my country,
but my country, through me, as its representative, has made
this claim and it stands by it.
70. Then we heard the charge again of Iraqi aggression.
Now Iraq must really be a brazen aggressor-first
of all to

64. The representative of Iran said that the objective of
the People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen was to liberate
7

commit aggression against Iran, to complain about it to the
Security Council, to insist, on having the Security Council
meet, despite the efforts of my Iranian colleague and his
friends not to have the Council meet and then to frustrate
this debate so that it will not arrive at any conclusion, and
to ask the Council to investigate this matter. We must be
either mad people or truly very brazen. I believe that the
conduct of my delegation and the conduct of the representative of Iran attest clearly to the true situation, to the true
intentions and to the facts. I cannot take this Council
bodily and place it on the spot in Iraqi territory where the
dead bodies of Iraqi soldiers are still piled in order for
members to see the true nature of the aggression. But the
conduct of Iran in trying to prevent the facts from coming
before the Council, in trying to prevent a debate from
taking place and in trying to prevent a resolution of this
debate attests to the true facts.

75., Now for the last point I should like to bring before the
Council. It may seem a little frivolous, but since my
colleague from Iran decided to bring the matter up, I must
reply to him. I refer to the famous film that Baghdad
television cameramen are supposed to have shot of the
events of 10 February. 1 knew the story of that film
because I was in possession of a story which was published
on 13 February by the well-known
Iranian propaganda
sheet Kayhan Indeed, I was praying that he would not fall
into the trap of simplistic propaganda. The film shown was
of the events of 4 February, and the facts themselves will
tell my colleagues very clearly how impossible it was for us
to have shot the film on 10 February. Let me elaborate a
little on this point.
76. According to Iranian claims, we have committed
aggression against Iranian territory, and we have been
repulsed and have left behind us armaments and dead
bodies. And yet our cameramen were apparently not only
present at the scene of the battle-for, according to the
newspaper, they filmed the scene of the battle from all
points-but they had the alacrity to evacuate the position
faster than our soldiers; our army had to Ieave its dead
bodies and armaments on the spot. I feel that if my
colleague had thought that point over a little longer he
would not have been a victim of that propaganda.

71. My Iranian colleague has been generous enough to
furnish us with a list of Iraqi armaments. I shall not dwell
upon this point. I only wish to say that it is not the arms
that matter, but the way in which they are used and the
objective for which they are used. Iraq has never used its
arms except to defend its territory and the territories of
sister Arab States under foreign occupation. I do not need
to elaborate upon the use of the arms and the might of
Iran. There is enough in the records of this Council to
dispel any doubts.

77. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I call
on the representative of Iran, who wishes to exercise his
right of reply.

72. The representative of Iran has brought up a point and
has rather strangely presented another claim to substantiate
exactly the opposite. Let me elucidate. First of all, he
spoke about increased concentration of Iraqi troops along
the border and said that Iraq was bringing more units to the
border area. We have not told the Council that the situation
was all calm and quiet. Indeed, we said exactly the
opposite-that
the situation was tense, that the situation
was dangerous and that it could explode at any moment
unless speedy and effective action was taken. But at the
same time he went on to say that the Iraqi Ambassador had
arrived and presented his credentials, that aircraft were
flying again and so on, that everything was peaceful. I
cannot understand the purpose of all this. Then he asked
me if it was not better to resolve these matters through
direct negotiation.

78. Mr. HOVEYDA (Iran) (interpretation from French): I
shall not take too long in replying to the representative of
Democratic Yemen because it appears to me that he did not
quite follow what I said at the very beginning of my
statement. What I said will appear in the verbatim record of
this meeting of the Security Council; the representative of
Democratic Yemen will be able to consult that record and
will realize that he failed to understand what I said.
79. However, when he says that we invaded Oman and
that region, 1 must observe that I have already stated that it
was at the request of the legitimate Government of Oman.
And when he says his country has no ambitions, I would
reply that doubtless it is not Southern Yemen but Iran that
aids the rebellion in Dhofar and elsewhere.

73. NOW,let me say this. Prior to the arrival of our
Ambassador, we had diplomatic relations with Iran; we had
a charge’ d’affaires. Secondly, our Ambassador did not
arrive in Teheran on Saturday last; he was there on
3 February, and Iraqi positions were attacked on 4 February.
He was there on 10 February. I wonder if that is the
welcome Teheran has prepared for him

80. With regard to liberation-and I deliberately use the
word “liberation’‘-of
the entire region, I would remind
him that it is his country that protects and eggs on the
socalled Front for the Liberation of the Arab Gulf.
81. Let me reply to my colleague from Iraq very rapidly.
He spoke of the question of the transfer of the bodies of
Iraqi soldiers. But I want to know what those bodies were
doing on Iranian soil. Why do they refuse to accept the fact
that the transfer is from Iran to Iraq? It was the
representative of Iraq who came before the Security
Council and submitted what I would call a very strong
complaint against my country. Yet he speaks of selfcontrol. It is very strange moderation-to
come here to the
Council and accuse a neighbour of aggression. Furthermore,
he accuses me of evading certain questions and of dwelling
on others. I did not make the complaint: I am the object of

74. Not only have ambassadors been exchanged between
us and Iran; we have a border more than 1,000 kilometres
long; we have historical ties between our peoples which are
unbreakable; we have a common culture; our histories are
interwoven. We want those relations to continue, we want
to preserve them, we want to cherish them-but on the
basis of justice, on the basis of respect for our sovereignty
and territorial integrity, through a process of respect for
law, international law, which specifies the sanctity of
treaties and the fulfilment by States of their obligations
under such treaties.
8

the complaint. And should I not have the right to go into
certain points?

fact, there has been a worsening of the situation, an
escalation of the incidents, to the point that my Govern.
ment felt we were facing an untenable and intolerable
position which threatens the peace and security of our
region, and as a State bound by the Charter of the United
Nations our first resort should be to this Council to see that
justice is done and that peace is achieved. This is our
course; this is our purpose in being here.

82. As far as armaments are concerned, it was not I who
opened up that subject. It was he who read out his first
Iranian “shopping list”. I wanted to prove to him that I was
not aware of the contents of his “shopping list”, but I did
know what sophisticated weapons, and how many, are
possessed by his country.

92. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I call
upon the representative of Iran, who has asked to speak in
exercise of his right of reply.

83. The representative of Iraq says that in this Council I
am trying to stand in the way of a resolution. How can I do
that? I am not a member. I have met with the Ambassadors
members of the Council, and I have explained to them the
views of my Government and expressed my feelings.

93. Mr. HOVEYDA (Iran) (interpret&ion from French):
If anyone here is trying to stop the debate from progressing, it is the representative of Iraq. He just mentioned the
intervention of friendly nations to try to solve our
problems. I want to draw the attention of members of the
Council to the letter addressed by the representative of Iran
on 17 February 1970 to the Secretary-General. I should
like to quote only the following lines:

84. As far as the massing of troops is concerned, he tosses
the ball back into my court.
85. As far as the arrival of his Ambassador on 3 February
and the presentation of credentials two weeks later are
concerned, need I recall that my Sovereign was not in Iran
at the time? I think that was common knowledge.
Certainly, it was no secret to the Iraqi Government.

“I should like to recall that in its consultations with
various friendly Governments which endeavoured to
mediate between Iran and Iraq, my Government welcomed the idea of a simultaneous troop withdrawal and
even agreed to a tentative date for such withdrawal.
However, the efforts of these Governments were frustrated by the Iraqi authorities.“2

86. The representative of Iraq speaks of certain documents
dating back to the colonial era. I do not quite understand
why his Government is eager to adopt the colonial ideas set
out in those documents.
87. I do not know whether the film to which he referred
was made on 4 February or 10 February,.but the commentary accompanying the film spoke of the “invasion of Iraqi
territory by Iranians”. I did not read the article in the
newspaper he showed. It was on the basis of diplomatic
reports that I raised that aspect of the question.

I shall not read the rest of the letter; the letter stands as an
official document and is in the archives of the Secretariat.
94. Once again the representative of Iraq brought up the
question of frontiers. Well, I have a whole file on this
matter, Sir, but I see that you glance at the clock every now
and again and I shall therefore postpone this part of my
statement to some future meeting. But I would ask you to
allow me personally to give each member of the Council
some documents that set forth the entire background of the
boundary question. I shall also ask you to allow me at some
future meeting to give the necessary explanations.

88. In conclusion, I would point out that the representative of Iraq, in his reply, adduced no tenable argument
against the holding of direct negotiations.
89. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I call
on the representative of Iraq, who has asked to speak in
exercise of his right of reply,

9.5. With regard to our offers of negotiation, I repeat that
they still have had no answer on the part of the Iraqi
Government. Since the representative of Iraq claims that we
have launched an aggression against his country and that we
are occupying his territory, and since as representative of
Iran I refute his argumentation, is not the best way to solve
the problem for someone to go to the battlefield of 10
February and try to find out wherein lies the truth and
then report back to you? That is a very constructive idea
that I had the honour to suggest in my private talks with all
the members of the Security Council. We are not opposed
to such a step being taken. All the members of the Council
can attest to the fact that the day after the Iraqi complaint
had been submitted, this was the idea that I had the honour
to propose to them.

90. Mr. EL-SHIBIB (Iraq): Mr. President, I wish to assure
you that I do not wish to expose the Council to a
“swinging-match”
between me and the representative of
Iran. I should like to say only one thing to bring the debate
back to its constructive path and to put before the Council
the true facts of the situation. Since 10 February, and to
this very moment, Iranian troops have been occupying
territory within Iraq, a distance of five kilometres from the
border.
91. This is not the first Iranian transgression. or incursion
into Iraq. In fact, since Iran unilaterally abrogated a valid
and binding border treaty between the two countries,
incursions upon our territory, violation of our air space and
violation of our territorial waters have been taking place.
We have been patient; we have been restrained; we have
tried every possible venue, from direct contacts to the use
of the good offices of friends, many of whom are probably
present in this chamber. But all that has been a failure, in

96. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I call
on the representative of Iraq, who has asked to speak in
exercise of his right of reply.
2 Quoted

9

in English

by the speaker.

97. Mr. ELSHIBIB [Iraq):_. I shall take only one minute, to
set the record straight and put things in their true
perspective. The Iranian representative speaks of direct
negotiations. Iraq has never refused, and would welcome,
direct negotiations. But, as I have said to the representative
of Iran, if we are to negotiate regarding difficulties and
disputes on our borders, then Iran must declare before this
Council that it is willing to fulfd its international obligations under a valid and binding border treaty which Iran
unilaterally abrogated.
98. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I call
on the representative of Iran, who has asked to speak in
exercise of his right of reply.
99. Mr. HOVEYDA (Iran) (interpretation from French):
My colleague from Iraq refuses to understand certain
things. He refers to existing valid treaties. I am unaware of
any such treaties. Allow me, therefore, to explain the
situation to members of the Security Council. I must say

that this reminds me of something else. Since .I have been
the Permanent Representative of Iran in this Organization, I
have been present at all meetings of the Security Council in
the place reserved for Iran at the back of the chamber, and
the attitude of the representative of Iraq reminds me of the
attitude of a certain representative of another country that
wishes to impose prior conditions on negotiations.
100. Mr. ELSHIBIB (Iraq): Instead of making a lengthy
statement regarding the claims of my Iranian colleague, I
wish to append to my statement before the Council the
text of the Treaty of 1937 between Iraq and Iran [S/93,23,
annexIV/,
for the information of the members of the
Council.
101. Mr. HOVEYDA (Iran) (interpretation from French):
I wish to assure my colleague from Iraq that he does not
have to do that. I have just done it myself.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

10
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Rice:

SUS.

1.00

74.82001-April

1980-2.200
