United Nations

A/S-22/PV.5

General Assembly

Official Records

Twenty-second Special Session

5th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 28 September 1999, 7 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gurirab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In the absence of the President, Mr. Hasan (Iraq),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 7.10 p.m.
Agenda item 8 (continued)
Review and appraisal of the implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development
of Small Island Developing States
The Acting President: I give the floor to His
Excellency the Honourable Mr. Rajkeswur Purryag, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Trade of Mauritius.
Mr. Purryag (Mauritius): It is with great pleasure that
I join the delegations which have preceded me to
congratulate the President most warmly on his election to
preside over this special session of the General Assembly
on the review and appraisal of the implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and the United
Nations system for convening this special session to address
the particular concerns of the small island developing
States.
My delegation endorses fully the statements made
yesterday by Guyana on behalf of the Group of 77 and by
Samoa on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States.

00-40728 (E)

(Namibia)

It could not have been more opportune for this event
to take place at the dawn of a new millennium and prior
to the convening of the third World Trade Organization
(WTO) ministerial conference in November 1999 and the
tenth meeting of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development (UNCTAD) in February 2000.
Indeed, we feel reassured by the large attendance
and participation, which demonstrate that there is global
interest in the problems facing small island developing
States. We also feel confident that at the end of this
special session a broad consensus will emerge to take the
process of implementation of the Barbados Programme of
Action further.
The adoption of Agenda 21 in 1992 by the Earth
Summit and the Barbados Declaration and Programme of
Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States in 1994 is clear recognition by the
international community of the existence of small island
developing States as a category of States with their own
specificities, inherent constraints and development needs.
The problems facing small island developing States
arise essentially from their specificities over which we
have little or no control. Small island developing States
are not responsible for global warming and climate
change, and yet they suffer from the consequences and
have to pay a heavy price to protect their coastline and
low-lying areas from being submerged. Otherwise, their
tourism industry may be devastated, and with that the
hope for sustainable tourism might be thwarted.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original speeches only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178. Corrections will
1
be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session
We have no control over the terrible hurricanes that
very often devastate our fragile economies. Our land areas
are populous and markets are small. We can grow crops
that are suitable to the terrains and that can better withstand
adverse climatic conditions. Our freshwater resources are
severely limited and we are prone to draught. Small island
developing States generally are deprived of mineral
resources. The absence of economies of scale inhibits
diversification and industrialization.
We are heavily dependent on trade and are thus
exposed to terms of trade and income volatility that create
vulnerability. Most of these issues, including our
remoteness and locational handicaps, were addressed very
ably and eloquently by the representatives of Saint Lucia,
Barbados, Cyprus, Seychelles, Cape Verde, Fiji and others
in their interventions, and we support them.
It is against such a background that small island
developing States are expected to adapt and keep pace with
globalization and comply with the WTO rules, obligations
and disciplines. The tasks are enormous and daunting.
Five years ago in Barbados, small island developing
States and the international community, through the
adoption of the Barbados Declaration and Programme of
Action, sent a strong political message for joint and
sustained actions in favour of small island developing
States, with a shared sense of common purpose and
partnership and a vision underpinned by concrete actions in
a number of sectors. Indeed, these sectors of cooperation
and action are vital for the sustained growth and sustainable
development of small island developing States.
Today, at the time of the review and appraisal of the
implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action, we
have a feeling of disappointment. At the national level,
Mauritius has taken a number of legislative and institutional
measures and has instituted programme and projects. But
they are small and insignificant compared to the challenges
and to our needs. Unfortunately, concrete actions at the
international level have not been forthcoming, especially in
terms of resource flows and measures to mitigate the
adverse effects on small island developing States of certain
activities and developments both natural and man-made,
including gas emissions causing greenhouse effects.
It is also imperative to operationalize the 300 or so
projects which were presented at the donors conference last
February. Concrete actions need to be taken urgently on
these if the international community really wants to honour
the vision of the 1992 Rio Earth Summit and the 1994

2

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999
Barbados Declaration and Programme of Action. Let us
take the opportunity of this special session to reaffirm our
commitment to this instrument and to other initiatives that
have been taken recently.
In this respect, we welcome the setting up of a Joint
Commonwealth Secretariat/World Bank Task Force on
Small States — many of them are small island developing
States — to address the problems of small States and also
to develop a generally, if not universally, acceptable
vulnerability index. Such an index, we believe, will
transform our recognition of the specificity and needs of
small island developing States as a category of developing
countries into practical tools, measures and instruments in
order to elaborate special provisions by the World Bank,
the WTO, UNCTAD and the United Nations and its
specialized agencies, such as the United Nations
Commission on Sustainable Development.
We are encouraged by the reference made in the
1998 Geneva WTO ministerial declaration relating to the
risk of marginalization of small economies, many of
which are small island developing States. We express the
hope that, at the third WTO ministerial conference in
Seattle, concrete actions will be taken to operationalize
this recognition. Like the previous four Lomé
Conventions, we also expect, in the ongoing negotiations
for a post-Lomé IV agreement, the European Union to
continue to provide special treatment to small and
vulnerable African, Caribbean and Pacific island States.
We also strongly believe, especially in the wake of
the unacceptable treatment given to the banana issue at
the WTO, that the traditional provisions on special and
differential treatment for developing countries, such as
exemptions and exceptions or longer transitional periods,
may no longer suffice. Rather, a dimension to promote
the sustainable development of small island developing
States should be built into the basic rules of the WTO and
its various sectoral agreements so as to create a level
playing field. The inherent constraints on small island
developing States are in most cases of a permanent nature
and can be addressed only through the adoption of
long-term measures, be they in the economic, financial,
trade or social sectors.
We were comforted by the statements made by
Finland on behalf of the European Union and endorsed by
Germany and Belgium to the effect that the European
Union supports the need to give special consideration to
small island developing States and their vulnerability. We
also welcome the reassurance given by the European

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session
Union to the conclusion of a new post-Lomé instrument of
cooperation and partnership for the coming decade and
beyond, and its acceptance of small island developing
States receiving even more secured access to markets.
The difficulty of small island developing States having
access to international financial markets and concessionary
loans because of their relatively high gross domestic
product per capita is a cause of serious concern. Gross
domestic product per capita does not reflect small island
developing States’ inherent constraints, lack of economic
resilience, creditworthiness and high foreign and domestic
debts. In the case of Mauritius, out of a total debt of 51
billion rupees, 40 billion are domestic debt. This constitutes
a heavy burden on the national budget and constrains the
capacity of the Government to finance the modernization
and development of vital infrastructure and utilities
necessary for sustained growth, without which there is a
risk of exclusion and marginalization of the vulnerable
groups of the population.
Like many small island developing States, Mauritius
faces serious environmental danger. For example, because
of the recent severe, prolonged and unprecedented drought,
the growth of the gross domestic product of Mauritius will
be around 2 per cent compared to 5.2 per cent last year and
a forecast of 5.6 per cent for 1999. These are phenomena
over which we have no control.
It is true that some small island developing States,
including Mauritius, have registered positive and sustained
economic growth. This is not because of their small size
but in spite of it. The success of Mauritius may be rightly
attributed to the existence of preferential access to the
market of the European Union under the Sugar Protocol
and the Lomé Convention, relatively large inflows of
foreign aid and the prevalence of political and social
stability underpinned by democratic principles, values and
institutions, as well as the availability of a literate work
force and sound macroeconomic policies. All these factors
have contributed to ensure social cohesion in a small island
characterized by multi-ethnicity which otherwise makes the
social fabric quite fragile. But these preferences are being
constantly eroded and may be threatened by the proposals
on alternative trade arrangements. We need to be careful
about and responsive to the specific situation of African,
Caribbean and Pacific States, including small island
developing States.
Hence, the challenge for small island developing
States is to make growth further sustainable, to ensure
economic development with social justice and to

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999
mainstream all segments of the population in the
socio-economic development process. This challenge
cannot be easily faced without props in the form of
preferential market access and eligibility to concessional
loans.
As Germany has rightly pointed out, international
trade is an important prerequisite for sustainable
development and changes in the international trade regime
would weaken terms of trade and national incomes. W e
therefore urge the WTO to recognize this in view of the
specificities and needs of small economies, including
small island developing States, so as to provide special
and differential treatment commensurate with their
development needs. In this respect, we welcome and
appreciate the support of the Group of 77 and a number
of developed countries.
Against such a background, we are of the view that
we have to go beyond the review of the Barbados
Programme of Action and its scope of activities. I
propose that the Barbados Programme of Action be
enlarged beyond environmental concerns, which are
admittedly important, so as to embrace the wider context
of trade, investment and finance. We need a coherent and
multi-pronged strategy to tackle the problems of small
island developing States in order to ensure, on a sound
basis, their sustained growth and sustainable
socio-economic development and thereby contribute to
peace and security, to which we are all committed.
The transportation of hazardous waste across the
seas is a matter of serious concern to many States and to
small island developing States in particular, which,
surrounded by the ocean, are never far from the sea
routes which the transporting vessels take. Only a few
weeks ago, the Government of Mauritius took steps to
prohibit the entry of one such vessel into our waters as it
sailed through the Indian Ocean. We fully understand the
concern of the Caribbean small island developing States
in this regard and support their proposal in respect of the
Caribbean Sea. Indian Ocean States will also be taking
appropriate action on this matter.
It is our sincere hope that the special session
underscores the urgency in addressing the problems facing
small island developing States and that the international
community will assume its responsibility to find urgent
solutions to the problem of small island developing States.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): B e f o r e
giving the floor to the next speaker, I would like to

3

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999

remind Members of the Assembly that the time limit for
statements in this session is five minutes only.

What route must we follow to achieve the objectives that
have been advocated?

I now call on His Excellency Mr. José Pereira Batista,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation
of Guinea-Bissau.

In our view, positive steps have been taken. The
sustainable development of small island developing States
in various regions of the world must be a priority, as
many delegations before mine have said. By way of
illustration, we can note the effective creation of measures
to strengthen States and Government structures dealing
with the environment, the definition of national strategies
for environmental protection and sustainable development,
and the institutionalization of a regional cooperation
mechanism for the small island developing States.
Guinea-Bissau is among those countries which have
carried out such projects.

Mr. Batista (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in Portuguese;
English translation furnished by the delegation): On behalf
of the delegation of Guinea-Bissau, I would like first of all
to congratulate, through you, Sir, the President of this
special session of the General Assembly. I am convinced
that this session will make it possible to advance in the
promotion and implementation of the sustainable
development of small island developing States. In the
pursuit of this objective, the Assembly may rely on the
cooperation of the delegation of Guinea-Bissau.
Guinea-Bissau is a small country that is largely
insular. Like other island countries, it must confront
enormous difficulties in its development effort, stemming
in part from geographic characteristics. The irregularity of
its territory, the lack of means of transport and
communication, precarious economic and social structures
and problems of marine and coastal pollution are part of the
long list of these constraints.
Added to this fragile structural network is a military
and political conflict which lasted from 7 June 1998 to 7
May 1999. That crisis took a great toll in human life and
resulted in the displacement of thousands of individuals,
above all in the Archipelago dos Bijagós, with nefarious
consequences for the environment and the destruction of
economic and social infrastructures. The result was a
paralysis of the administrative fabric, which caused a great
number of refugees in the countries in the subregion and in
Portugal. Consequently, the capacity for reconstruction and
rehabilitation of the country has suffered.
In this context, I would like more than ever to
underscore the imperative of my country benefiting from
the Barbados Programme of Action adopted by the Global
Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States in 1994. In our view, this Programme is
a genuine guide for the mobilization of energies and
capacities, not only for the countries in question but also
for the international community, with the purpose of
attaining sustainable development of the countries belonging
to this family.
Five years after the adoption of this Programme, what
conclusions can be drawn? Has there been any progress?

4

While underscoring that progress has been achieved,
a wide gap still separates us from the objectives
advocated in the Programme. Hence, we would like to
launch an appeal to the international community,
particularly the industrialized countries, to render
technical support to the small island developing States.
This would make it possible to consolidate their capacities
and help them to confront the needs for stable
development and to overcome the inherent obstacles to
participation in the ongoing globalization process.
Let there be no doubt: there is a lack of qualified
human resources, appropriate technologies and financial
possibilities in our countries. These obstacles hamper the
implementation of the Programme of Action. We must
find a better way.
We appeal to the international community, especially
the developed countries, to honour the commitments they
have made to guarantee the necessary support to the small
island developing States in accordance with the principles
and spirit of the Programme of Action. We also support
the Plan of Action of the Food and Agriculture
Organization and the Rome Declaration to consolidate
efforts to help these countries.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I now call
on His Excellency Mr. Hasmy Agam, chairman of the
delegation of Malaysia.
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation is pleased to
see that the small island developing States group is now
enriched by three new members, namely the Republic of
Kiribati, the Republic of Nauru and the Kingdom of
Tonga, each with its own potentialities. We welcome

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session
them most warmly to the United Nations family of Member
States.
Malaysia attaches importance to the convening of this
special session, as it provides a forum for highlighting the
particular concerns and problems of small island States for
the larger membership of the Organization.
At its nineteenth special session the Assembly
reviewed the implementation of Agenda 21. Among other
things, this also gave us an opportunity to remind ourselves
of the importance of the small island developing States as
a group that required special attention. Similarly, at the
various forums on the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, whenever we talk of global
warming and the consequent sea level rise, our attention
inevitably falls also on the vulnerability of the small island
developing States.
At this twenty-second special session of the General
Assembly our attention is focused specifically on the
progress made since the adoption of the Barbados
Programme of Action in 1994. The Barbados Declaration
pointed out that small island states are particularly
vulnerable to natural as well as environmental disasters and
have a limited capacity to respond to and recover from such
disasters.
We also recently witnessed the extensive damage
wreaked by hurricanes Mitch and George on the eastern
seaboard of the United States. We can only imagine how
much more devastating and terrifying the impact of such
natural disasters might be on small, vulnerable island
States.
As we meet today, we are conscious of the
vulnerability of small island developing States to
environmental disasters, but there is also a need to look at
their vulnerability in the context of globalization and
liberalization. The marginalization of the small island
developing States, particularly those that are in the low per
capita income group, will further complicate the
sustainability of development in these countries.
Malaysia strongly supports the position of the small
island developing States in the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change negotiations. We support
the call that developed countries should take domestic
action to reduce greenhouse gases to combat climate change
and sea level rise. The adverse impact includes
submergence of precious land, loss of water and coastal
resources, threats to food production and biodiversity and

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999
associated economic losses. Global warming may increase
the frequency and intensity of storms and storm surges,
which would have devastating effects on small island
States.
In the important negotiations on the Framework
Convention on Climate Change and the Kyoto Protocol,
Malaysia is pleased to have aligned itself with the
concerns of small island States. Together, we have called
upon the developed countries to take serious domestic
action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. We agree that
action must be taken immediately to reduce such
emissions — the ameliorating effects of which would
only be felt many years hence — in order to reduce the
risks of sea level rise and climate change which threaten
the very survival of small island States.
Under the clean development mechanism of the
Kyoto Protocol, an adaptation fund will be set up.
Malaysia will work closely with the small island
developing States to ensure that the fund is administered
in the most effective manner so as to assist those small
island developing States that are currently fighting the
adverse impact of climate change and sea level rise.
We support the call of small island States for
enhancement of research in and development of
technologies to adapt to, and mitigate the adverse impact
of, climate change. We also support the need to expand
a systematic observation network for long- term detection
of climate and climate changes as well as building
endogenous capacity in the adaptation of technology.
Malaysia hopes that when we next review progress
in the implementation of the Barbados Programme of
Action, in 2004, we will be able to see a more tangible
outcome of sustained efforts in this area of international
cooperation.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I now call
on His Excellency Mr. Patrick Albert Lewis, chairman of
the delegation of Antigua and Barbuda.
Mr. Lewis (Antigua and Barbuda): Let me at the
outset convey my delegation’s hearty support for the
President’s unanimous election to the presidency of the
fifty-fourth session and, by acclamation, of this
twenty-second special session of the General Assembly.
We pledge our full cooperation to him as he presides over
the deliberations of this important session.

5

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session
My delegation wishes to acknowledge and fully
support the statements made by Guyana on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, and that made by Samoa on behalf
of the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS). The
Alliance now collectively speaks with 43 voices in unison
for the issue which unites us: our sustainable development.
In the preparatory process to this special session, we
collectively had the occasion to look back at the last five
years since the adoption of the Barbados Programme of
Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States at the first post-Rio Conference, in
Bridgetown. The overwhelming conclusion of the review
was that, despite considerable progress at the national level,
implementation in a number of key areas of the Barbados
Programme of Action has been sadly lacking, particularly
at the international level.
Recent world events such as the rulings of the World
Trade Organization do not bode well for the implementation
of key aspects of the "state of progress" document. For
example, many small island developing States are facing
the loss of trade concessions that sustained their agricultural
economies. Such rulings, made in the name of trade
liberalization, serve only to restrict or eliminate the very
trade preferences on which many small island developing
States depend for their economic development.
While we have listened to arguments that there are
significant opportunities arising from increased global trade
and economic integration, so far the evidence on the ground
only points to the significant and increased risk of the
economic marginalization of most small island developing
States, due in part to their well-known vulnerabilities.
Against this backdrop, we sincerely hope that the provisions
of the soon to be adopted text requesting the multilateral
trading system to consider granting special and differential
treatment to States will be taken fully into consideration
during the Millennium Round of trade negotiations.
The need to address the inherent vulnerabilities of
small island developing States cannot be overemphasized.
In the ultimate irony of ironies, many small island
developing States have relatively high per capita gross
national products, which are always almost exclusively used
as a benchmark of their success and, hence, to exclude
them from consideration for assistance. What is most
frequently overlooked is the fact that the economies of most
small island developing States lack the resilience needed to
recover quickly from one single unfortunate event such as
a natural disaster, which can in the space of a few hours
obliterate the physical infrastructure, industrial base and

6

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999
agricultural assets of small island developing States,
thereby setting back their economic development by many
years. The need to develop a more reliable indicator or
set of indicators to more accurately gauge the
development of small island developing States is therefore
urgently needed. In our view, the use of a single income
measure such as gross national product to determine the
economic well-being of small island developing States —
and hence exclude them from special economic
consideration — is at best unreliable and at worst unjust.
This is why we placed the highest possible emphasis
on the conclusion of the work currently under way both
here in the United Nations and jointly by the World Bank
and the Commonwealth Secretariat on the development of
a vulnerability index. But that should not be the end of
this endeavour. Once the index is developed, we urge its
widespread use by all multilateral financial and trade
institutions, as well as bilateral aid agencies, as one of the
criteria for determining special consideration for our
countries.
Our vulnerability to natural disasters is also of grave
concern. The increase in the frequency and intensity of
hurricanes in the Caribbean region is already having
effects on some of the life support systems in many of
our countries. When one considers the recent findings of
the Inter-governmental Panel on Climate Change
regarding a discernable influence of human activities on
the climate system, the spectre of climate change —
which is a global issue not of our own making, but for
which we will ultimately pay perhaps the greatest price
with the disappearance of our countries — haunts us and
raises questions of equity and ethics. We again urge our
large continental neighbours in the developed world to cut
back on their use of fossil fuels that heats the atmosphere.
Let me conclude by reiterating my country’s
profound disappointment in the collective inability of the
Member States in the General Assembly to conclude an
agreement on a resolution calling for the designation of
the Caribbean Sea as a special area in the context of
sustainable development. We continue to believe that the
thrust of the original draft resolution — to establish a
regime for the wide protection of the Caribbean Sea and
for the sustainable development of its coastal and marine
resources — is a valid one. Nevertheless, we are pleased
that the matter, albeit in a different form, has been
referred to the Second Committee for further
consideration, and we welcome the pledges of all
concerned to successfully resolve this important issue
during the current session of the Assembly.

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session
On adoption of this review of the Barbados
Programme of Action, we sincerely hope that the
international community will measurably and demonstrably
do its part to assist small island developing States in
implementing it, taking into account the determination of
small island developing States to effectively manage the
Barbados Programme of Action, and the Member States’
acceptance of their primary responsibility for their
sustainable development.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I now call
on Mr. Lee See-young, chairman of the delegation of the
Republic of Korea.
Mr. Lee See-young (Republic of Korea): On behalf
of the delegation of the Republic of Korea, I would like to
extend my congratulations to the President on his election
as the President of the General Assembly at this special
session.
Five years ago the international community took a
bold step towards the sustainable development of small
island States by adopting the Barbados Programme of
Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States. The Government of the Republic of
Korea strongly supported the Barbados Programme of
Action, as it provided for the first time a comprehensive
blueprint for the sustainable development of these countries.
Since 1994 considerable progress has been made in the
implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action, at
both the national and international levels. We highly
commend those small island countries that have introduced
new policies, appropriate institutions and legislative and
regulatory reforms in accordance with the guidelines of the
Programme. Regional cooperation has been strengthened to
set priorities for the sustainable development of these small
island developing States. We have also witnessed the
significant development of international norms to address
global environmental degradation and natural disasters,
which particularly threaten most small island countries.
Despite these achievements, small island States still
face significant challenges. Environmental vulnerabilities
such as sea level rise and natural disasters caused by global
warming have devastating implications for them,
threatening their very survival. Furthermore, as the process
of globalization has accelerated in recent years, these small
island States are particularly prone to the marginalization,
due largely to their insufficient capacity to capitalize on the
opportunities afforded by globalization.

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999
To overcome such challenges and to help integrate
these countries into the global economy in a more
favourable manner, it is vital for the international
community to renew its commitments to the Barbados
Programme and to foster stronger global partnership in
the following ways.
First, the trend of declining official development
assistance to small island States needs to be reversed to
help enhance their capacity to implement the Barbados
Programme of Action. In the same vein, the international
community should take steps to allow these countries
more market access and to promote trade and investment
with them. We also urge an early completion of
negotiations on the Kyoto mechanism, as provided for in
the Kyoto Protocol.
Secondly, the transfer of environmentally sound
technologies is essential for capacity-building and creating
an enabling environment in these countries. To this end,
we should promote wider participation of the small island
developing States in the clean technology initiatives and
public-private partnerships. In an effort to facilitate such
transfer of technologies, my Government, in cooperation
with the United Nations, will host the High-level Forum
on South-South Cooperation in Science and Technology
Transfer in February next year.
Third, emphasis should also be placed on the full
compliance by all parties concerned with major
environmental conventions in the fields of climate change,
biological diversity and hazardous waste.
The Government of the Republic of Korea has long
attached great importance to the strengthening of its
friendly ties and cooperation with small island States. In
1995, we joined the South Pacific Forum as a dialogue
partner. Since last year, we have been participating in the
meeting of the Association of Caribbean States as an
observer. These initiatives represent our commitment to
sharing with these small island developing countries the
experience and knowledge we have acquired through our
own development process in the spirit of South-South
cooperation. We will continue to extend technical
cooperation and financial contributions to the small island
States through the Korea International Cooperation
Agency and also continue to make contributions to the
Global Environment Facility.
We now live in a mutually interdependent global
village. As the Secretary-General put it so well yesterday,
“brighter horizons for small islands can mean brighter

7

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session
horizons for the world” and for all of us. My delegation
sincerely hopes that this special session will prove to be an
opportunity for the international community to reaffirm its
commitment to the world’s small island nations and to
revitalizing the spirit of the Barbados Conference, which
declared the sustainability of small island States to be one
of the principal tasks of the global community.
The Republic of Korea will certainly continue to do its
part in these global efforts.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Luigi Boselli, head of the
observer delegation of the European Commission.
Mr. Boselli (European Commission): Following the
statement made by the representative of Finland on behalf
of the European Union, I have the pleasure to address this
special session of the General Assembly on behalf of the
European Community.
Since the 1994 Barbados Conference, the world
development environment has undergone important changes.
The specific policies, actions and measures defined by the
Barbados Programme of Action should be implemented in
such a way as to adapt to these changes.
We acknowledge with satisfaction that the Barbados
Programme of Action has led to appropriate action in many
countries, and that policies and programmes have been
introduced or amended to conform to the Barbados
principles. For that reason, the European Union
development activities financed by the European
Development Fund and the European development budget
will continue to contribute to the 14 priority areas
mentioned in the Barbados Programme of Action in our
partner small island developing States, as they have done so
far.
During the seventh session of the Commission on
Sustainable Development, acting as a preparatory committee
to this special session, we presented the booklet “The
European Union’s Cooperation with Small Island
Developing States in the Framework of the Barbados
Programme of Action”, in which we showed the
congruence between the Programme and the European
Union cooperation with small island developing States, and
we listed 185 European Community-financed projects for
those States within the 14 priority areas.

8

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999
The European Community is the most important
donor to the small island developing States, and we
expect to continue in this position in the future.
Between 1995 and 1997, European assistance to
small island developing States has fluctuated between
$700 million and $900 million a year. High priority is
given to least developed countries. Forty per cent of the
European Union official development assistance to those
States is channelled through the European Community,
while 60 per cent is provided by our 15 Member States
bilaterally or through international organizations or nongovernmental organizations.
The small island developing States receive, and will
continue to receive, a high volume of aid per capita
because that aid is based on a number of criteria, of
which island status is one. In this sense, no major changes
in our official development assistance to small island
developing States can be expected.
On the threshold of the twenty-first century, the
European Union is negotiating its future relations with the
71-country African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) group,
currently governed by the Lomé IV Convention. With the
current Convention due to expire in February 2000, we
are negotiating the future partnership agreement.
During the negotiations, the special vulnerabilities of
the island States continue to be recognized. Consideration
is being given to including more island States in the
relationship. In addition to the 26 ACP small island
developing States that are already signatories of the Lomé
Convention, we decided to admit as observers to the
present negotiations seven other countries included in the
group of small island developing States: Cuba, the Cook
Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru, Niue,
Palau and the Marshall Islands.
In this context, I am glad to underline the excellent
dialogue we have with the Caribbean Community and the
Caribbean Forum (CARIFORUM), the Indian Ocean
Commission, the South Pacific Forum and some other
Caribbean, Indian Ocean and Pacific institutions.
We fully agree with the ideas expressed by the
representatives of the three new Members of the United
Nations 188-nation family, the Republic of Kiribati, the
Republic of Nauru and the Kingdom of Tonga, when all
three suggested that the issue of small island developing
States must be seriously pursued by the international
community.

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999

Five years on from the Barbados Conference, the
progress of the small island developing States in some areas
has been impressive. However, it is also clear that there is
still much to be done to ensure that the objectives of the
Barbados Programme of Action are implemented, that the
rich environment of the small island developing States is
protected, and that the three components of sustainable
development are fully integrated.

programmes must be the guiding force in our work. That
being said, it is true that improvement of the quality of
life for all, especially the inhabitants of small island
States, must be the first purpose now and in the future
implementation of this Programme of Action. These
programmes must be formulated and implemented not just
in theory but in relation to the actual needs of the men,
women and children of today and future generations.

Allow me to reaffirm the European Community’s
commitment to the objectives agreed on in the Barbados
Programme of Action and our support for the key elements
for future action that have been identified during this
twenty-second special session of the General Assembly.

His Holiness Pope John Paul II stressed that balance
between social and economic development during his
visits to Jamaica and to Papua New Guinea, when he
said,

May I finish by giving special thanks to Ambassadors
Slade and Ashe and to the Chairman of the Group of 77 for
their commitment and hard work in the preparations for this
session. They have helped to establish the excellent
dialogue we have now between the Alliance of Small Island
States (AOSIS) and the donor community. This will allow
us to agree on ways and means to help the small island
developing States overcome their vulnerabilities.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I now give
the floor to Archbishop Renato Raffaele Martino, chairman
of the observer delegation of the Holy See.
Archbishop Martino (Holy See): With all of the
intense negotiations that have taken place during the past
several months, would it not be safe to say that the
preparations for this special session began as the final gavel
sounded in Barbados, bringing the World Conference on
Sustainable Development of Small Island Development
States to a close? My delegation believes that they have.
At that time, five short years ago, speaking on behalf
of the Holy See, I noted that the Barbados Conference was
the first intersection on the road from the United Nations
Conference on the Environment and Development in Rio.
Today we arrive at a new junction in what has grown from
a path to a superhighway, stretching from the present to the
future. There have been obstacles, but progress continues to
be made on the way towards sustainable development.
My delegation is interested in the outcome of this
special session because the Holy See has always recognized
the centrality of human beings in concerns about sustainable
development. That first principle of the Rio Declaration
must continue to guide each and every initiative undertaken
in the name of development. Respect for the dignity and
freedom of each person affected by development

“Dear friends, as you look out upon your beautiful
land with its jungles and mighty rivers, its
mountains and deep valleys, its volcanoes and
limitless seas, give thanks to God, whose goodness
is without end. With your many different languages
and traditions, you are a wonderful tapestry which
God is weaving into the image of a diverse but
united family of peoples upon whom He wishes to
shower His blessings.”
“Now is the time for the island’s [people] to
strive to ensure that the principles which guide
political, social and economic life are in conformity
with God’s law and with the Gospel. Now is the
time to work together to overcome the effects of
injustice and exploitation, to counteract the lack of
concern for the needs of the poor and the
disadvantaged, the lack of respect for the dignity and
value of each person, especially women and
children.”
“As citizens, you should feel the need to work
to improve your country, and to ensure that society
develops in honesty and justice, harmony and
solidarity.”
The areas of priority action identified by the
Commission on Sustainable Development call attention to
the fact that the Programme of Action remains a valuable,
living framework for the sustainable development efforts
being undertaken. The discussion surrounding small island
States reveals the fact that no person or group lives in
isolation. What affects one affects others. My delegation
believes that the benefits of discussing the issues and
proposing solutions for removing the obstacles that
challenge the sustainable development of small islands
will be felt in every corner of the world.

9

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session
In this understanding of human solidarity, we cannot
lose sight of the need for responsible stewardship which
demands attention to the common good. No one person —
and no one group of people — is allowed to determine his
or her relationship with the universe. The universal
common good transcends the interests of the individual,
national and political agendas and the limits of time.
Responsible stewardship and genuine human solidarity
are directed to all critical areas discussed in this review
process and must also remain the starting point in the
discussion of access to basic social services. The effects of
climate change, the issue of freshwater resources, the
protection of the coastal and marine environment, the
mobilization of energy resources and the promotion of
sustainable tourism must be addressed in the context of
health, education, nutrition, shelter and security.
In view of the progress made during this discussion,
the Holy See wishes to state once again that simply giving
aid, however laudable and necessary, is not sufficient to
touch all the aspects of human solidarity that must be
offered to those in need. Nations must work towards
creating new, more just and, hence, more effective
international structures in such spheres as economics, trade,
industrial development, finance and the transfer of
technology.
The Catholic Church will continue to develop and
promote specific programmes in those critical areas that
seek to improve human life in some of the poorest and least
developed areas of small island developing States and in so
doing, help to improve life for all. My delegation applauds
the progress made in this special session and will look
forward to future initiatives, which will be the next step in
attaining the goals of sustainable development for all.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I now call
on His Excellency Mr. José Antonio Linati-Bosch,
Chairman of the observer delegation for the Sovereign
Military Order of Malta.
Mr. Linati-Bosch (Sovereign Military Order of
Malta): I would like to express my sincere congratulations
to the President of the General Assembly on his election.
I am here on behalf of the Sovereign Military Order
of Malta, a subject of international law, which this year is
commemorating the nine hundredth anniversary of its
foundation. The long period of our existence confers upon
our Order the title of the oldest active humanitarian entity
and, through a long uninterrupted process, we have used

10

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999
our experience and demonstrated our capacity to continue
to fight for world peace and to express our concern for
the health and welfare of mankind.
The Order was granted the status of Permanent
Observer to the United Nations in 1994 and today
maintains full diplomatic relations with 83 Member States
present here in the General Assembly, among them
several small island States, whose problems are being
discussed and considered here.
This special session of the General Assembly is
connected with the areas of economic and social
development that include human rights. The sustainable
development of small island States, which are susceptible
to the effects of climate change and which are also
geographically vulnerable, is a very important issue.
Building upon the achievements of this special session,
the Order of Malta intends to actively contribute to
international cooperative action. The international
community must take prompt and concerted action in
responding to large-scale natural disasters like last year’s
hurricanes in the Caribbean and in the Pacific. These
extraordinary events require work to be carried out on a
permanent basis, including reconstruction efforts, so as to
provide for the creation of jobs and development, thereby
contributing to narrowing the gap between the rich and
the poor.
At the same time, we must pay attention to the fact
that globalization engenders creativity by facilitating
interaction among various cultures. But we must not
forget the due consideration that must be given to the
cultural diversity of the world.
We are conscious of the difficulties encountered by
small island States in maintaining continuous development
without damaging their ecosystems, in ensuring that their
populations enjoy a growing and satisfactory standard of
living, and in solving special problems such as protecting
sources of fresh water and preventing health hazards that
can result from particular difficulties. The Sovereign
Order of Malta is ready to support this difficult process
so that Member States, through effective international
cooperation, can achieve sustainable development and
fight the persistence of poverty, helping to provide basic
social services, including nutrition and health care.
The President took the Chair.
International cooperation does not include only
peacekeeping operations; it also plays a role in the

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session
everyday lives of many people, protecting them from
hunger, poverty, disease and illiteracy. To promote
sustainable development is also to protect the global
environment and human rights. The best way to help
prevent and eliminate conflicts is to create conditions for a
worthy life as well as friendly relations among communities
based on the principles of equal rights and respect for
international law. The Sovereign Order of Malta is ready to
put its experience to the best use. The establishment of
medical plans, the training of specialized staff, the creation
of ambulance corps and first-aid services, and the provision
of surgical instruments and medicines are some of the many
items that can be included in agreements between interested
States and the Sovereign Order.
The Sovereign Order has been linked in the past with
three islands: Rhodes and Malta in the Mediterranean Sea
and Saint Kitts in the Caribbean. But I am not here to
engage in historical reminiscence. I am here to offer our
cooperation in efforts to preserve a fragile and vulnerable
heritage and to offer our experience in the hospitaller and
health care fields. It is not a generous offer but a duty on
our part. Underdevelopment and impoverishment, the threat
of marginalization, the burden of external debt, lack of
resources and ecological disasters pose a real danger to
international peace and sustainable development. The
current activities of the Order in more than 100 countries
and our recent assistance to the populations affected by
hurricanes Charley and Mitch testify to our capacity and
goodwill. We know there is a long way to go, but we are
glad to be on the right track.
The President: The next speaker is the Observer of
Guam, Mr. Robert Underwood.
Mr. Underwood (Guam): It is my distinct honour to
present the views of the people of Guam to the General
Assembly at its special session on small island developing
States. We are grateful for this opportunity to address the
Assembly and for the extensive work accomplished at the
Barbados Global Conference on the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States and in the
course of preparations for the special session.
When we discuss sustainable development, the words
“small” and “island” are not generally viewed as denoting
advantages. The issues identified as important for the
sustainable development of small islands are anything but
small: climate change, renewable resources and the
management of waste come to mind as issues of special
concern. We are therefore extremely fortunate that this
world body is dedicating resources and expertise to

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999
assisting small island States in addressing these long-term
issues and in setting the proper course for future success.
But it is in fact our small size and our micro-scale
that make small islands important. We would perhaps be
harbingers of ecological disasters that the world
community could face in the next millennium. Our fragile
ecosystems and our interdependent communities make us
ideal as the tip of the spear on these global issues. Since
we would be amongst the very first to experience the
effects of climate change and rising sea levels, the
world’s collective success or failure would register first
on our shores. It is in recognition of this relationship that
the developed nations and international organizations,
foremost among them the United Nations, have taken an
active interest in the problems of small island developing
States.
An important issue requiring international
cooperation is climate change. Climate change is no
longer an academic debate. We have seen in recent years
how the effects of El Niño and La Niña translate into
typhoons and hurricanes and droughts. We learn quickly
that the forces of nature can overwhelm even the best
prepared communities and Governments. In Guam’s case,
we went from the extreme of a super-typhoon, to that of
El-Niño-induced fires to that of a drought in the span of
12 months. While Guam cannot greatly influence global
climate change, we have an enormous contribution to
make in teaching other communities about disaster
preparedness and disaster recovery, areas we believe we
excel in.
In island communities, the issue of waste
management is central to our well-being and our quality
of life. We have learned on Guam that the development
of an integrated waste management plan is only a first
step. Creating the political will to implement tough
restrictions and encourage recycling through economic
incentives and penalties seems the bigger challenge.
While it may seem easy on paper to develop an integrated
waste management system, changing attitudes and
eliminating inefficiencies is where the work of
Governments begins. Our experience has also been that
we are hungry for the very best and newest technologies
in waste management. We value the clear skies and clean
water and green hills that make our island famous.
Keeping it that way through effective waste management
strategies that are cost effective is a primary objective.
The international community can be very helpful to small
island States on these issues by assisting us in making the
technological advances accessible to our Governments.

11

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session
In the area of land resources, Guam shares the
common experience of small islands that scarce resources
require a higher standard of stewardship. We have invested
in satellite mapping, and we dedicate substantial resources
to infrastructure development. We may be amongst the few
island States that continue to have problems regarding the
historical military expropriation of our lands over 50 years
ago: more than one third of Guam’s land mass continues to
be held for military bases. The return of excess military
lands is amongst our highest priorities, and, while this may
be viewed as an internal issue between Guam and the
United States, Guam will continue to discuss the economic
and political consequences of this issue in every available
forum.
Guam has benefitted from its participation in regional
organizations in the area of biodiversity resources. We have
created conservation areas on our island and have made
progress in protecting endangered and threatened species.
We are at the forefront of marine research through
innovative programmes at the University of Guam, and we
continue to encourage regional cooperation in the
management of fisheries. We support the goals of the
multilateral high-level consultations on fisheries. We
believe that a great deal has been accomplished on fisheries
management; more controls need to be exercised by the
small island States. In Guam’s case, the relationship
between our island Government and the United States
Government on exclusive economic zones continues to
evolve.
Small island States should not be equated with
weakness. But our vulnerability to the forces of nature and
our relative impact on the international stage relegate us to
the sidelines in many instances. Our fragile ecosystems and
our small-scale economies make us susceptible to the
slightest shifts in balance.
This is why, from our perspective, this special session
and the international attention on our unique problems is
welcome, timely and of vital importance to all of us in the
interconnected world economy.
Thanks in large part to amazing advances in
communications, it is the world, not our islands, that is
getting smaller. In the new information age, there really are
no islands any more. The image of isolated, idyllic Pacific
islands, unchanged by the modern world, no longer applies.
The new image is more appropriately that of diverse
communities, interconnected by technology and at the
leading edge of ecological change that concerns all of
humanity.

12

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999
Guam is proud to take its place among the islands of
the world and we look forward to making our
contributions to mankind’s understanding of the
relationship between humankind, the vast expanse of the
sea and our sacred island homes.
Again, I thank the General Assembly for the
opportunity to present Guam’s views, and I commend the
Assembly for focusing on these issues.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Carlyle
Corbin, observer of the United States Virgin Islands.
Mr. Corbin (United States Virgin Islands): Mr.
President, we wish to express our congratulations on your
election to chair these important deliberations, as well as
our appreciation to the Member States of this body for
their support in according observer status in this special
session of the General Assembly to the associate member
countries of the various United Nations world
conferences.
Our countries have contributed to the global debate
at the world conferences on environment, population,
social development, sustainable development of small
island States, human settlements, natural disaster
reduction and women and development as a result of the
General Assembly’s decisions. We are confident that this
status will be extended to us in the remaining special
sessions to review the various global plans of action and
in the General Assembly as a whole, consistent with a
modern approach to the principle of universality.
The concerns of small island developing countries
have been under review by the United Nations for several
decades. As early as 1976, initiatives of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development addressed
transportation and communications issues in small island
developing States. By 1984, the General Assembly had
called for immediate and effective implementation of
previous resolutions on small island developing States.
Later resolutions emphasized the need for concessional
assistance and the adverse effects of sea level rise
resulting from climate change. In this connection, a
meeting of experts and donor countries was convened in
1988, and it recognized the importance of international
support for the sustainable economic development of
small island developing States. The subsequent adoption
of Agenda 21 in 1992, the Barbados Programme of
Action in 1994 and the follow-up resolutions on small
island developing States over the last five years are only
the latest in the long-standing recognition on the part of

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session
the international community that the unique conditions of
small island developing States require specific measures of
assistance in their sustainable development process. The
implementation of this multifaceted mandate is overdue.
We have always viewed the Barbados Programme of
Action as a tool for sustainable development, rather than
merely as one that addresses only environmental issues. We
therefore recognize that the effects of accelerating economic
globalization are causing additional pressures on the
economies of small island developing States. As we
continue to concentrate on measures to address our
susceptibility to climatic changes brought on by the
conditions created by the excessive emission of greenhouse
gases, our future growth, relative prosperity and, in many
instances, our very survivability are influenced by external
economic pressures as well. This must be an integral part
of our thinking in this implementation phase.
My Government acknowledges the ongoing activities
of the United Nations in implementation of the Barbados
Programme of Action. The adoption by the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) Governing Council last
February of a resolution on oceans and seas that made a
commitment to addressing critical uncertainties related to
climatic change is illustrative. The recent UNEP report
Global Environment Outlook also reminds us that time for
a rational, well-planned transition to a sustainable system is
running out. The convening of the donors’ meeting last
February to review over 300 projects from small island
developing States highlighted the potential role of the
United Nations in mobilizing resources. We are confident
that the donor community will respond accordingly in
providing the necessary assistance.
This importance of resource mobilization and
economic linkages was also emphasized in the 1998
declaration on the sustainable development of small island
developing States in the Indian Ocean, Mediterranean and
Atlantic regions, which called for the international
community to supplement a national and international
efforts by effective financial support, and for international
economic and trade organizations to take account of the
special disabilities of small island developing States and of
the negative effects arising from the processes of trade
liberalization and globalization, especially those associated
with removal of preferential trade arrangements.
Small island developing States continue to bring to the
attention of the international community the need for
additional measures in carrying out the various provisions
of the Barbados Programme of Action. The Alliance of

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999
Small Island States (AOSIS) in which my Government
enjoys observer status, convened in the Republic of the
Marshall Islands last July an important workshop on the
clean development mechanism of the Kyoto Protocol and
stressed in its Majuro Statement on Climate Change the
need for special capacity-building initiatives, the transfer
of technology and the importance of renewable energy.
The Caribbean Community, at the tenth inter-sessional
meeting of the Conference of Heads of Government,
which met in Suriname last March, issued an important
statement on the trans-shipment of nuclear materials
through the Caribbean, citing the potentially catastrophic
consequences of any accident for the peoples and for the
ecological systems of the Caribbean. This concern was
also expressed in the 1998 meeting of heads of
Government of the South Pacific Forum and only several
days ago was reinforced by the heads of State or
Government of AOSIS at its third summit, held here at
United Nations Headquarters. AOSIS also supported in its
summit communiqué the decisions of the countries of the
wider Caribbean to recognize the Caribbean Sea as a
special area in the context of sustainable development and
expressed concern at the increasing incidence and
magnitude of natural disasters and their devastating effect
on the communities of small island developing States.
AOSIS called for the international community to support
appropriate initiatives and mechanisms for strengthening
regional and national capabilities for natural disaster
prevention, mitigation and rehabilitation. The AOSIS
communiqué follows the adoption of the declaration of
the second summit of heads of Government of the
Association of Caribbean States, which convened last
April in the Dominican Republic and which outlined a
network of legally binding mechanisms to promote
cooperation for the prevention, mitigation and
management of natural disasters.
Meanwhile, the South Pacific Group at its eighth
meeting of regional disaster managers, held in Samoa
earlier this month, emphasized that there are technical
measures, traditional practices and public experience that
can reduce the extent or severity of economic disasters.
As has often been said, conditions affecting small
island developing States are but a preview, an early
warning of what is certain to lie ahead for the wider
international community. If we recognize one reality in
this first five years since the adoption of the Barbados
Programme of Action, it should be that the present course
is unsustainable, and postponing implementation is no
longer an option. It is, indeed, time for action.

13

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session
The President: I now give the floor to His Excellency
Chief Emeka Anyaoku, Secretary-General of the
Commonwealth.
Mr. Anyaoku (Commonwealth Secretariat): May I say
what a special pleasure it is for me to address the General
Assembly at this special session under your presidency, Sir.
I welcome the opportunity to do so on behalf of the
Commonwealth, an association of 54 countries collectively
representing more than a quarter of all humanity. Small
States are a big issue for us. As many as 32 of our
members are small countries, and of these, 25 are small
island developing States.
More than three fifths of the Commonwealth
Secretariat’s development assistance is directed towards
supporting the sustainable development of small States. It
covers many of the components of the 1994 Barbados
Programme of Action, which we are reviewing here. The
Commonwealth, through its operation of a small States
office, assists some nine small Commonwealth countries so
that they can have representation here at the United
Nations. As a result of a special ministerial mission
undertaken last year at the request of Commonwealth heads
of Government, we have formed with the World Bank a
joint Task Force, which is making a comprehensive
assessment of how the international community can assist
small States in mitigating the various constraints caused by
their vulnerability in order to accelerate their economic
development.
As a contribution to this general debate, I would like
to suggest six priority areas where action is urgently needed
to give impetus to the sustainable development of small
States.
First, it is vital to avert serious environmental threats
such as climate change and sea-level rise. The Kyoto
Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change must enter into force as soon as possible,
and commitments to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
should be implemented effectively, with further steps taken
to slow down global warming. Vulnerable small States need
urgent assistance in developing and implementing plans for
adapting to climate change and sea-level rise at the
national, subregional and regional levels. Other
environmental challenges must also be addressed, such as
developing effective policies for waste management;
reducing potential threats posed by the shipment of nuclear
wastes; protecting the marine environment from pollution
from various sources; and reducing the adverse

14

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999
environmental impacts of tourism, on which several small
States are so dependent.
Secondly, the destruction caused to the Bahamas by
hurricane Floyd, just a few weeks ago, has underscored
the importance of strengthening international mechanisms
for providing assistance to meet pre- and post-disaster
requirements of vulnerable countries.
Thirdly, multilateral, regional and bilateral
development organizations should take vulnerability into
account in the design of their programmes of assistance
for small States. A set of criteria that is broader than per
capita gross domestic product and that includes explicit
vulnerability indicators should be applied flexibly to
determine the economic status and development-assistance
requirements of small States. In this regard, the
Commonwealth Secretariat has developed a vulnerability
index for developing countries which could serve as
useful operational tool.
Fourthly, there should be a moratorium on United
Nations decisions to graduate small States out of the
status of least developed countries, until a sound and
robust methodology — which includes indicators of
vulnerability — is developed to guide such decisions.
Fifthly, longer transition periods and financing
mechanisms can help small States integrate their
economies into a more open international trading system,
meet transitional costs and gain greater benefits from
trade. There is a persuasive case for extending special and
differential treatment to the more vulnerable small States.
The concerns of vulnerable small States should be given
greater recognition in any new round of multilateral trade
negotiations launched by the World Trade Organization
Ministerial Conference in Seattle later this year.
Finally, all institutions presently involved in
supporting capacity-building in small States need to
develop a coherent and properly coordinated strategy to
support human resource development and institutional
strengthening in those countries experiencing constraints
in key areas of economic and environmental management
and planning.
I recall that just prior to the 1994 Barbados
Conference, I had the opportunity to participate in the
work of an eminent- persons group at the invitation of the
Governor-General of Barbados. This group made several
recommendations on the sustainable development of small
island developing States. We were greatly encouraged by

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session
the Programme of Action agreed to in Barbados. But five
years later there remains much to be done. For its part, the
Commonwealth will continue to do all that it can, both by
itself and working in partnership with the United Nations
and other international organizations, to ensure that as we
enter a new millennium, small States will become less
vulnerable and be able to enjoy greater security and
prosperity.
The President: I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Noel Levi, Secretary General of the South Pacific
Forum.
Mr. Levi (South Pacific Forum): The deliberations of
this meeting are of particular interest to the South Pacific
Forum, which comprises 14 independent and self-governing
small island States, together with Australia and New
Zealand. These countries, which include some of the
smallest in the world, share the vast ocean of the central
and western Pacific. While Forum members vary greatly in
size, social structures and living standards, we have agreed
to work together in a wide range of ways to pursue
cohesion, stability and well-being in our countries.
From the perspective of the Forum an overall
assessment of the implementation of the Barbados
Programme of Action could not wait much longer. The
South Pacific Forum meeting last year reaffirmed its
endorsement of the Barbados Programme of Action as a
comprehensive framework with great potential for the
region, and it commended implementation efforts currently
under way.
Meeting the challenge of sustainable development
across all the facets of the environment and economy is a
central concern of Forum island members. The Barbados
Programme of Action has served as a useful blueprint in
meeting this challenge, and Forum members are addressing
the issues raised across a broad front of activity.
Our individual national capacities to deal alone with
these issues are limited. The region is therefore fortunate to
have a range of regional organizations dealing with
technical issues related to land, oceans and associated
resources, fisheries, the environment, education and
sustainable development. Their work is coordinated through
the council of regional organizations of the Pacific. It is
vital that international agencies use this network of regional
organizations to heighten the effectiveness of their activities
as development partners.

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999
The path to sustainable development is difficult for
us. By any standard, the majority of Forum island
countries are very small. This brings with it a host of
difficulties, such as limited natural resources, small
domestic markets and high per capita infrastructure costs.
These difficulties are compounded by isolation from the
rest of the world as a result of distance and lack of
international transport services. Furthermore, the location
and physical characteristics of these States — many being
low-lying — render them vulnerable to natural disasters.
One consequence of these characteristics is that
income levels can vary significantly, either because of
reliance on a narrow range of exports or because natural
disasters readily disrupt production.
We believe that work on indexing economic
vulnerability has now reached the point where it can be
used for policy decisions. Leaders of the South Pacific
Forum reiterate the importance of applying a vulnerability
index as a more equitable method of determining the
development status of countries. They further urge that
any decision to graduate any least developed country be
deferred until an acceptable vulnerability index can be
taken into account in classification decisions and for
deciding concessional aid and trade treatment.
The fragility of small island States is not restricted
to economic factors. In our region, an environmental
vulnerability index is being developed by the South
Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission, funded by New
Zealand. The framework under development is aimed at
establishing an acceptable ranking that can be broadly
applied and included among the criteria for establishing
least-developed-country status.
A longer term issue of critical importance to all
Forum members is the risk of sea-level rise caused by
global warming. Some of our low-lying island nations are
especially vulnerable, with whole communities living
under increasing threat to their very existence. It is
therefore with a sense of urgency that we watch the
international community’s endeavours to arrive at a
solution to this global problem.
Forum members fully support the agreement reached
at Kyoto as a significant first step on the path of ensuring
effective global action to combat climate change. The
Forum wants the Kyoto Protocol to come into effect as
soon as possible and looks for early progress in meeting
these commitments.

15

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999

Apart from the threat of climate change, our stability
and security are also threatened by natural disasters,
international transport of hazardous wastes, illicit drugs and
unlawful challenges to national integrity. This was
recognized by our leaders when they adopted the Aitutaki
Declaration in 1997.

day of delay is a day when a little bit more of our
precious resources is taken away. S u s t a i n a b l e
development will continue to be an elusive goal for us
unless we implement programmes to begin the serious
management of the limited resources our small island
developing States and Territories do possess.

The Forum strongly reiterates its commitment to the
Barbados Programme of Action and the current review
process. We are pressing the international community to
address those issues which we see as compounding our
vulnerability and which in turn could threaten the whole
global village. This special session provides a very
important opportunity for the international community to
fulfil the necessary commitments, provided we all focus on
objectives which are realistic and achievable.

Resource management, in my humble belief, is
especially critical for small island States and Territories,
such as American Samoa, because of our small size and
relative isolation. Viewed individually on a globe,
Oceania’s thousands of tiny islands appear to be
insignificant. However, if they are viewed as a
geographical entity, one’s perspective of the Pacific
islands changes dramatically. We all know that Oceania
is in fact a very significant region on a global scale — a
region rapidly changing, a region drawing more attention
as a last frontier in the modern world.

In conclusion, it is the hope of the South Pacific
Forum that the deliberations of this special session will give
good cause for small island developing States to view the
approaching millennium with more hope than apprehension.
While Forum members have taken on the challenge of
meeting the changes that are taking place throughout the
world, the small States among them face challenges that
cannot be overcome directly through any actions of their
own. In addressing these challenges, small island States
seek the sympathetic assistance of the developed world and
of all international institutions.
The President: I now give the floor to His Excellency
Lieutenant Governor Togiola Tulafono, Observer of
American Samoa.
Mr. Tulafono (American Samoa): I bring greetings
from American Samoa, one of the smallest Territories of
the United States in the South Pacific Ocean. I bring
greetings and warm regards from our Governor and the
people of American Samoa.
It is indeed an honour and a privilege for American
Samoa to participate in this special session as an observer
for the first time in the history of our country. On behalf of
our people, I thank this Assembly and the United States for
allowing us this great opportunity and the privilege of
standing here today.
American Samoa is proud to join our Pacific
neighbours, the Pacific island nations, in supporting the
Programme of Action of the Global Conference on the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States. However, we also must insist on and strongly urge
the speedy implementation of its initiatives. For us, every

16

Because of this, we continue to find ourselves more
focused on trying to discover our role as a region in
today’s world. We have tried to identify the questions that
we must ask in trying to pin down that role. What is it
about Oceania that best defines our unique status or role
as individual island nations and as a collection of island
nations? Perhaps, instead of repeating most of what has
been said, I may relate some of the experiences we have
had in American Samoa that will, hopefully, offer a few
lessons to those of us responsible for planning the
development of this vast stretch of ocean and resources.
It may also demonstrate how the capability existing in
small island States and Territories can assist in speeding
up the implementation process of the Programme of
Action.
Since becoming an unincorporated Territory of the
United States in 1900, American Samoa has changed
from a subsistence to a cash economy. While we are still
trying to retain our cultural traditions, great demands are
currently being placed on the most central aspect of our
cultural uniqueness: our communal land-tenure system.
Our culture, like many cultures throughout Oceania,
centres around the important role played by our Chiefs,
known as Matai in Samoa. Matai are traditionally the
stewards and caretakers of our lands and near-shore
waters. They have determined, for perhaps 3,000 years
now, how land is distributed equitably to communal
family members for their present use and enjoyment and
to take care of so that it may be passed on to future
generations. The preservation of our Matai system and
our culture is of extreme importance to our people and
there is active resistance to any change.

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session
Accordingly, there is natural resistance to
governmental regulations, which often conflict with the
traditional leadership role of the Matai. As government
leaders and policy-makers, we have made it our policy in
American Samoa to try to integrate traditional policymaking systems with modern policy-making systems.
Although it has been difficult, we have achieved some
measure of success throughout most of our projects.
Nevertheless, transitions are under way as we realize the
need for acceptance of island-wide, rather than village-level
planning.
If I may, I would like to highlight some of the
Territory of American Samoa’s successes with respect to
coral-reef management. We have taken a very pro-active
attitude in dealing with the protection of coral reefs around
American Samoa as a an active partner within the United
States Coral Reef Initiative. Since the Initiative’s inception
in 1994, American Samoa has taken this to a much higher
level, with very limited financial support, and to the grassroots level. American Samoa on its own initiative has
developed regulations, guidelines and educational activities
aimed at reducing human disturbances that may inhibit the
ability of our coral reef to recover. To further enhance that
agenda, American Samoa has also empaneled its own
assessment and planning workshop with outside scientific
experts to determine what information is really needed for
potential management and what goals can realistically be
accomplished by the local government agencies. We have
put together a five-year management plan for our coral
reefs and will submit it to the next meeting of the United
States Coral Reef Task Force in November.
We try to stay ahead, but with the advent of climatic
change and rise in sea level we know we have great
challenges ahead of us in the near future, unless the global
climatic issues addressed at the Barbados Conference are
addressed in a timely manner, as may be mandated by this
conference. Although as a region we are only beginning to
experience the environmental problems that plague the
industrialized nations of the world, we clearly must face the
fact that we have responsibilities for reversing the planet’s
environmental degradation. Although our efforts and
consumption patterns may seem minute, on a larger scale
it is imperative that we plan now to reverse much of the
damage already done to the islands and to continue to gain
insight on how our trade and economic development
patterns might perpetuate known global environmental
abuse.
It has been said that we do not inherit the Earth from
our parents, but that we only borrow it from our children.

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999
We must have respect for nature’s balancing act and find
personal truth in the reality that our actions as a region,
as island nations and as individuals are in fact significant
for the global balance sheet of environmental health.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Simón Molina Duarte, Secretary-General
of the Association of Caribbean States.
Mr. Molina Duarte (Association of Caribbean
States)(spoke in Spanish): Mr. President, allow me at the
outset to congratulate you on your election and to thank
you for the honour of allowing me to speak here.
As Secretary-General of the Association of
Caribbean States (ACS), I would like to begin this, my
maiden address to the General Assembly, by expressing
the sincere gratitude of the Association for the honour of
having been granted observer status in the General
Assembly on 15 October 1998.
The Association, which celebrated its fifth
anniversary on 24 July 1999, is composed of 25 countries
that are also full Members of the United Nations, as well
as other associate member countries such as Aruba,
France — also a United Nations Member — in respect to
French Guiana, Guadeloupe and Martinique, and the
Netherlands Antilles. The ACS is now in a better position
to pursue closer and broader cooperation with the United
Nations in order to contribute to the development of joint
programmes that are favourable to the greater Caribbean
region.
The main objectives of the ACS, as enshrined in the
Convention establishing the Association, are as follows:
first, the strengthening of the process of regional
cooperation and integration, with a view to creating a
broader geo-economic space in this region; secondly,
preserving the environmental integrity of the Caribbean
Sea, which is regarded as the common heritage of the
peoples of this region; and thirdly, promoting the
sustainable development of the greater Caribbean region.
The ACS functions primarily as an organism for
consultation, cooperation and concerted action in the
context of the economic integration and sustainable
human development of the greater Caribbean region.
In April this year the Second Summit of Heads of
State and/or Government of the States and Territories of
the Association of Caribbean States was held in the
historic city of Santo Domingo in the Dominican
Republic. The Declaration of Santo Domingo and the

17

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session
accompanying Plan of Action, unanimously adopted at the
Second Summit, are a reflection of the deliberations of that
important Summit, which aimed at elaborating a mediumto long-term strategy for achieving the objectives set out in
the establishing Convention. In addition, the heads of State
and/or Government also adopted the Declaration of the
Sustainable Tourism Zone of the Caribbean, and the
ministers for foreign affairs signed a memorandum of
understanding for the establishment of this zone. Once
implemented, it will be the first such zone in the world. I
also wish to emphasize that in light of the extreme
vulnerability of the region to adverse consequences of
natural disasters, the foreign ministers also signed an
agreement for regional cooperation in natural disasters
which covers all countries of the ACS.
Of particular relevance to this special session of the
General Assembly is the fact that in the Declaration of
Santo Domingo, and in accordance with the stated
objectives of preserving the environmental integrity of the
Caribbean Sea, the heads of State supported the effort of
the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) to have the
Caribbean Sea declared a special area in the context of
sustainable development and instructed countries and their
representatives to include this subject in the Caribbean
Environmental Strategy prepared by our organization.
Prior to this, the Association of Caribbean States had
cooperated, and continues to cooperate, with CARICOM
and the Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean subregional headquarters for the Caribbean, in
the inter-agency collaborative group on the implementation
of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States.
The draft resolution presented to this special session
on the recognition of the Caribbean Sea as a special area in
the context of sustainable development therefore reflects the
highest political will of all the members of the ACS and
endeavors to coordinate the various efforts to address
sectoral issues relating to the management of the Caribbean
Sea and to treat in a holistic manner this semi-enclosed
regional sea, on which so many States rely for their
prosperity and social development. Obviously, the relevance
of such an approach transcends the region, and it is the
hope of the Caribbean countries that a model might be
found for the benefit of other ecologically fragile enclosed
and semi-enclosed areas.
Moreover, the draft resolution has been the fruit of
countless hours of dedicated labour on the part of diplomats
of the countries of the CARICOM and the ACS. I would

18

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999
like to pay particular tribute to the tireless efforts of the
permanent missions to the United Nations of the countries
of the greater Caribbean region over the past weeks in
preparing this draft resolution for submission to the
General Assembly.
Lastly, I also wish to recognize the endorsement of
the draft resolution introduced by the Group of 77 and
China and all the other countries supporting the draft
resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Edwin Carrington, Secretary-General of
the Caribbean Community.
Mr. Carrington (Caribbean Community): We thank
you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the
Assembly on a subject which spells life or death for the
countries of our region, the Caribbean. Held in
Barbados — a founding member State of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) — the 1994 Global Conference
on the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States and the resultant Barbados Programme
of Action are of particular significance to the Caribbean
Community.
As a 15-member group of 12 small islands and three
low-lying coastal States, the Caribbean Community is the
largest economic grouping of small States Members of the
United Nations.
The member States of the Caribbean Community are
vulnerable to virtually all the classic problems of small
States, some more than others. They are located in a
geographic region highly susceptible to natural disasters:
hurricanes, storms, floods, droughts, earthquakes and
volcanoes. While others experience many, if not all, of
these natural disasters, the significant difference in the
case of the States of the Caribbean and other small island
States is that as a result of their small size, the impact of
these disasters invariably tends to leave no corner
unaffected. Many of these disasters are related to climate
change and global warming, two phenomena to the causes
of which small islands States contribute little, but from
which they are likely to suffer most. The latest
information suggests that these various disasters, natural
and man-induced, are likely to increase in number and
intensity and are projected to cause an even greater loss
of life and destruction of economic and social facilities
and infrastructure. The frequency and intensity of recent
hurricanes in the Caribbean region would suggest,
unfortunately, that this projection might well be correct.

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session
Therefore, in evaluating the quality of life in these
States, those who are guided simply by somewhat bloated
per capita income levels must understand that such income
levels need to be seriously deflated by an appropriate
vulnerability index if one is to arrive at a realistic
sustainable quality of life. Also, such an index must have
relevance to the entire international community and its
relevant institutions and must be referred to by them. In the
present circumstances, therefore, all those who tend to
perceive these territories as paradise must please understand
that there is a serious downside to paradise.
The CARICOM States are also highly open
economies, significantly dependent on agricultural exports,
mainly traded under preferential arrangements. Indeed, this
was how the very foundation of these economies was laid.
These economies are now being seriously, adversely
affected by the current process of globalization, trade and
financial liberalization and an all-too-rapid dismantling of
those preferential trade arrangements. The banana case is
only the most dramatic.
The resulting vulnerability and volatility of their
export earnings to these and other external economic shocks
are factors over which they have no control whatsoever and
are well known to all of us. It is not surprising, therefore,
that nine of the 14 independent CARICOM States are
among the 25 most vulnerable States in the world.
This special session and the upcoming World Trade
Organization (WTO) Ministerial Conference present ideal
opportunities for the international community to address
both the natural and policy-induced sources of vulnerability
of small island developing States. It is an important
opportunity that the international community cannot
squander with impunity.
We in CARICOM, like many other small island
developing States, have not been standing idle in this
regard. We have been pursuing various measures to protect
our environment and to enhance our sustainability. In doing
so, we have received some support from external sources,
for which we are deeply appreciative. The following few
examples of regional level action will demonstrate this.
With respect to our living marine resources, we have
been implementing, with significant assistance from
Canada, a Caribbean fisheries resources assessment and
management programme. We sincerely hope that the
assistance can continue as we move to a longer-term, more
regionally sustained effort.

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999
With respect to sea-level rise, we have just
commenced the implementation of a Caribbean
programme for adaptation to climate change to provide
data and develop human resources. For these activities,
we have received assistance from the Global Environment
Facility and from the Organization of American States.
We trust that this assistance will continue over a longer
period, as this problem, like most of the constraints facing
these small States, cannot be removed overnight.
With respect to disaster mitigation and response, we
have created a Caribbean Disaster Emergency Response
Agency with the assistance of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) to prepare for and
coordinate response to disasters. But resources are needed
to strengthen this into a preparation response and recovery
agency. More UNDP assistance is urgently needed as
bilateral official development assistance continues to
decline.
With respect to environmental policy, the Caribbean
countries and the European Union have just agreed on a
European Union-financed environmental programme for
the countries of the Caribbean.
With respect to the Caribbean Sea, the common
environmental endowment of the entire region, we have
launched a project seeking a United Nations resolution for
the international recognition of the Caribbean Sea as a
special area in the context of sustainable development,
with the full support of the entire membership of the
Association of Caribbean States. The aim is to protect and
preserve this most valuable asset and regional patrimony.
We wish to thank all those States that have already
expressed their support for this initiative and trust that
those United Nations Members that continue to harbour
doubts will join us in the weeks ahead in taking the first
step towards the achievement of this objective, which will
undoubtedly be to the benefit of all Members of the
United Nations.
Since 1995, the year after the Barbados Global
Conference, the work programme of the Caribbean
Community secretariat, which I have the honour to head,
has included a specific focus on and has given priority to
sustainable development, commencing by lending
visibility to the outcome of the 1994 Barbados
Conference. One year after the Barbados Conference, our
Ministers responsible for the environment met in Trinidad
and Tobago to review the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States and to create a coordinating mechanism for

19

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session
follow-up. The task of this coordinating mechanism was
entrusted to the CARICOM secretariat and to the Port of
Spain Office of the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean (ECLAC).
Unfortunately, although our two agencies continue to
work closely together to this end, neither has had the
necessary resources to make this mechanism sufficiently
effective.
More generally, to diminish the limitations of the
naturally imposed smallness of our countries we have been
deepening our integration arrangements to create out of 15
individual countries, including Haiti, a single market and
economy with special provision therein for the arrangement
with regard to the smallest of our already small States —
the members of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean
States. The overall arrangement will not only create for us
a little more size but will help to better position us to
become more effectively integrated into the globalizing
international economy.
We are therefore very conscious that much depends on
our own efforts. We are, however, equally conscious that
our efforts can be successful only in a positive and
responsive international environment, an environment which
recognizes a place and a role for even its smallest and most
vulnerable members.
The Caribbean Community welcomes the three new
Members of the United Nations — Kiribati, Nauru and the
Kingdom of Tonga, all members of our sister organization,
the South Pacific Forum, as well as of the Alliance of
Small Island States. We look forward to working with them
in our joint efforts on behalf of the small island developing
States.
The members of the Caribbean Community have been
greatly encouraged by many of the statements of
understanding expressed during this special session by the
developed and the larger developing States as regards the
plight of small island developing States. We intend to hold
them to their word. We look forward to the international
community adopting and implementing the policies,
including providing the resources, which would add more
muscle to the Barbados Programme of Action and have a
positive impact on the condition of small island developing
States as part of the United Nations of the twenty-first
century.
The United Nations cannot afford to hold forth as its
promise to mankind for the new millennium a world

20

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999
comprising large, rich countries and small, poor and
vulnerable ones.
In closing, I wish to thank you, Mr.President, for
your skilful guidance of this debate, which can prove
decisive for the condition of humanity in the coming
century. We thank the Secretary-General and his staff also
for their continuing outstanding service to all mankind,
and we wish the United Nations a more glorious twentyfirst century.
The President: I now call on His Excellency The
Honourable Hubert Hughes, Observer of Anguilla.
Mr. Hughes (Anguilla): On behalf of the people of
my very small island State, Anguilla — and, I believe I
am safe in saying, on behalf of the peoples of the States
of the British Virgin Islands, the Turks and Caicos Islands
and Montserrat, all with a unique constitutional status,
being non-independent and overseas territories of the
United Kingdom — I am more than pleased to express
my profound appreciation, pleasure and gratitude for this
momentous privilege to address the General Assembly on
so appropriate and economically significant a topic as
sustainable development for small island developing States.
Although I attended the Conference on small island
developing States, held in Barbados in 1994, my
participation in this discussion in New York is of
particular historic relevance in that, while in Barbados, I
was part of the United Kingdom delegation and was thus
not permitted to address that first small island developing
States Conference. On this occasion, I am present in my
exclusive right as the representative and independent
spokesman of my people as their political leader.
Nevertheless, I am not here to deliberate on the
status of the political and constitutional relations between
Britain, the administering Power, and Anguilla, and I am
certainly not competent to deal with the state of relations
our sister overseas territories have with Britain, interesting
though this issue may be, considering our many areas of
incompatibility.
In Barbados, much of the discussion dealt with
environmental issues, and while we in these small island
developing States are particularly vulnerable to natural
disasters brought on by rising sea levels due to global
warming, hurricanes, volcanoes and over-forestation and
general over-exploitation of our very limited natural
resources, we will urge that much more emphasis be
placed on those factors of the new order of globalization

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session
as that concept is applied to the issue of trade liberalization
and competition so as not to negate the declared objectives
of sustainable development for small island economies. We,
as small island States, simply cannot be competitive with
major industrial countries.
Geographically, we are simply not small States. We
are not annexed to much bigger land masses, as Hong Kong
is linked to China or Liechtenstein is linked to Austria and
Switzerland. We are islands: we are each surrounded by
water. Thus, we suffer the particular difficulties of
geographical insularity, separated as we are by water, and
our needs are proportionally greater than our size in so
many ways.
We cannot use the infrastructural development of
Trinidad, which is 500 miles away from us, to serve the
communication needs of Anguilla.
There is therefore a delicate balance to be considered
by the political leadership in a small non-independent
territory like Anguilla, administered by Britain, insofar as
the concept of sustainable development is concerned.
Anguilla, despite its small size, will need an airport and a
seaport, just like Trinidad, to meet its transport needs.

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999
Having a tourist economy, which for Anguilla came
about very rapidly, produced another economic irony, in
that my island does not qualify for many United Nations
aid programmes due to the island’s high per capita
income rating. While it is true that very high wages are
paid out to the top 10 per cent of expatriate technical and
managerial staff in our tourism and in our now growing
financial services industries, the bulk of the local workers
are paid very low wages. To disqualify small island
developing States like Anguilla from these United Nations
aid programmes is unfair and irrelevant. This way of
assessing our needs should be revisited. Per capita income
is not the criterion that should be used.
While reiterating my gratitude for this opportunity to
address this gathering, I regret that the limitations of time
hinder my desire to give adequate airing to my concerns
regarding the obstacles to be overcome in the
accomplishment of sustainable development for the
diverse small island developing States such as ours in the
non-independent territories.

Even though we are small as a State, we are still a
group of inhabitants: we are part of the category called
human beings. We also have concerns about the
maintenance of our identity as a distinct people, which we
want to sustain as we seek a better standard of living.
Sustainable development for tiny islands like Anguilla is
therefore a very, very intriguing process.
We are not only conscious of the threat to our
environment; we are also very concerned about losing our
identity in the process of development. Therefore, while
mindful of the need to create the conditions for the
avoidance of poverty by attracting foreign investment, we
can do that safely only if aid flows from the major donor
agencies assist us in developing not only the social, but also
the economic infrastructure. Without this critical support,
our people will be at the mercy of ruthless foreign
investors.
I am therefore very concerned when the G-7 group of
industrial countries makes allegations of unfair tax
legislation and unfair competition by small island
developing States, which depend on the financial services
industry as a second plank of income that is necessary to
sustain some degree of development and financial
diversification.

21

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session
The President: In accordance with the decision taken
earlier, I shall now give the floor to the representatives of
three non-governmental organizations.
I first give the floor to Mr. Atherton Martin, Executive
Director of the Caribbean Conservation Association.
Mr. Martin (Caribbean Conservation Association): On
behalf of the International Network of Small Island
Developing States, Non-governmental Organizations and
Indigenous Peoples’ Organizations, and the nongovernmental organization community of the
Mediterranean, mid-Atlantic, Caribbean, Pacific and Indian
Ocean regions, as well as the small island developing
States’ diaspora and the wide range of constituencies we
represent, we congratulate the United Nations
representatives here on having successfully negotiated
agreement on the draft declaration. We would have
welcomed the opportunity to share our thoughts with this
gathering at a much earlier stage of the proceedings, in the
hope that our practical suggestions would positively
influence the positions of Member States. In the light of
this, we wish to focus on some concrete recommendations
on several issues that, in our view, will move the process
of sustainable development along in all small island
developing States.
The negative impact of economic globalization and
trade liberalization has been most dramatically felt by the
small islands of the world. The Caribbean, for example, has
seen its traditional market for bananas in the United
Kingdom eroded by the headlong, reckless and unwarranted
rush to implement free trade. Measures to mitigate these
impacts should include full cost-accounting of the human
factors of banana production and the integration of costs
associated with, for example, more sustainable production
through low-input and organic farming.
Other industries are also threatened by World Trade
Organization (WTO) measures, including the sectors of
offshore services, beef production and other agricultural
commodities. If WTO rulings can interfere with the national
economic development planning of a large country like
India, for example, the implications for small islands are
even more foreboding.
The goals of sustainable development are achievable,
but we need to further strengthen implementation through
greater integration of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States
into local and national development plans and strategies.

22

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999
International donors, too, need to consider the
Programme of Action as the framework for cooperation
and collaboration on national development strategies,
rather than the current narrow sectoral and project
approaches that still seem to dominate.
We believe that national and regional implementing
institutions should be strengthened through the provision
of adequate resources, with more mechanisms for the
creative financing of sustainable development initiatives.
Greater public awareness could facilitate the more
active involvement of community organizations in project
design and implementation.
Greater involvement of local entrepreneurs and
improved access to credit would help transform the
Programme of Action into a more vital instrument of
sustainable development.
Although partnerships for sustainable development
are evolving in many small island States, new
partnerships are needed between the small island States
and the rest of the international community to ensure, for
example, the designation of the Caribbean Sea as a
special area. That designation is crucial because of the
importance of the sea as a vital food, transport and
tourism resource — and also as a zone of peace. In this
regard, we are calling for the removal of all external
military bases and for the review of the Shiprider
Agreement.
The exposure to hazardous substances by the transshipment of radioactive wastes, mixed oxide fuel,
plutonium and nuclear derivatives through the waters of
our regions directly threatens the well-being and safety of
the peoples, flora and fauna of these regions. Nongovernmental organizations express their strong support
for the efforts of the Governments of the regions of the
small island developing States to assert their sovereign
rights to bring about an immediate cessation of these
dangerous shipments. This support from nongovernmental organizations is unequivocal, and is even
more significant when we recognize that it is the friendly
Governments of France, Great Britain and Japan that are
the principal perpetrators. We therefore call on all
Member States participating in this special session to give
their full support to the principles outlined in paragraph
24 (c) (iii) of the Barbados Programme of Action, which
allows small island developing States to prohibit the
transport of toxic and hazardous materials within their
jurisdiction.

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session
We call on the member Governments of the small
island developing States to demand far more equitable
returns for our natural resources, in particular with regard
to the tuna resources of the South Pacific region. In this
regard, we call on the distant water fishing nations to assist
instead in the development of the capacities of small island
developing States to harvest our resources ourselves.
Within the framework of the Barbados Programme of
Action, we call on all stakeholders to accept their
responsibilities; to exercise greater political will; and to
agree to be held publicly accountable for commitments
made.
There is much more to be done by all of us. Resources
must be made available to assist non-governmental
organizations to reach out to an even broader section of the
major groups and especially to the many constituencies that
still remain unrepresented or under-represented, such as the
unemployed, the landless farmers, women, youth, the
disabled, indigenous peoples, the homeless and many
others.
Governments, too, can do more by ensuring that in the
spirit of the United Nations Conference on Environment
and Development, in the spirit of Agenda 21 and, certainly,
in the spirit of the Barbados Programme of Action, every
United Nations delegation should reflect the diversity of
that country by including representatives of nongovernmental organizations and other major groups that,
through their vast networks and working experience, can
add valuable information and expertise, which would enable
our Governments to make even more informed decisions.
The international financial community, too, can do
more by translating the words of World Bank President
Wolfensohn into action and by ensuring that the process of
planning and implementation of development places the
needs of people first.
The United Nations community too can and should
demonstrate its commitment by ensuring that the views of
non-governmental organizations are heard and by including,
earlier in the proceedings of these important deliberations,
an opportunity for input by the non-governmental organizations.
The President: I now give the floor to Mrs. Losena
Tubanavau-Salabula, Assistant Director of the Pacific
Concerns Resource Centre.
Mrs. Tubanavau-Salabula (Pacific Concerns
Resource Centre): Let me first convey to you, Sir, the

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999
warmest greetings from the Nuclear Free and Independent
Pacific Movement (NFIP), which is the oldest network of
non-governmental organizations in the Pacific region.
The substance of the presentation that I have the
honour to make here was adopted by the eighth NFIP
Conference on 24 September 1999, in Papeete, Tahiti,
French Polynesia.
We are concerned that paragraph 24 (c)(iii) of the
Barbados Programme of Action is no longer acceptable to
the international community. This paragraph states that we
“Accept the right of small island developing
States to regulate, restrict and/or ban the importation
of products containing non-biodegradable and/or
hazardous substances and to prohibit the
transboundary movement of hazardous and
radioactive wastes and materials within their
jurisdiction, consistent with international law”.
(A/CONF.167/9, annex II)
In our view, the rejection of this language is
symptomatic of the roll-back of what little concessions
the small island developing States were able to squeeze
out of the Barbados negotiations five years ago.
Furthermore, this rejection flies in the face of the
overwhelming opposition expressed by Governments in
the Caribbean and Pacific Ocean and by the South Pacific
Forum to the recent shipment of radioactive mixed oxide
fuel on the Pacific Teal and Pacific Pintail through their
waters. Indeed, other Governments along the shipments’
route, such as South Africa and the Australian Senate,
have also expressed their opposition to the shipments.
Because of this roll-back, we feel that the small
island developing States, including the small island
Non-Self-Governing Territories, must go back to the
drawing board and reassert what few rights they have.
We salute the declaration on 30 August by the
people of East Timor, or Timor Lorosae, of their right to
independence. We call upon the General Assembly to do
all that is practicable to assist the soon-to-be-independent
state of Timor Lorosae, to rebuild its infrastructure and to
take its rightful place in the United Nations and, of
course, in the Alliance of Small Island States.
We call on the General Assembly to ensure the
continuation of the Special Committee on decolonization
beyond the year 2000. To dismantle the Special

23

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session
Committee now would be to abandon the colonized peoples
of the world, the majority of whom are in the small island
countries.
We ask that Kanaky, New Caledonia, remain inscribed
on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing
Territories until it exercises its right to self-determination.
The United States territory of Guam also calls for
reparations for wartime atrocities and asserts its right to
self-determination. Furthermore, we call for the re-listing of
French Polynesia; Ka Pae’aina (Hawaii); West Papua (Irian
Jaya); Rapanui (Easter Island) and Bougainville on the
Special Committee’s list of Non-Self-Governing Territories.
We call on the General Assembly to support the
various calls made via the United Nations Commission on
Human Rights for a permanent forum for indigenous
peoples within the United Nations system. We affirm the
declaration in the Barbados Programme of Action that the
“technology, knowledge and customary and traditional
practices of local and indigenous peoples, including
resource owners and custodians, are adequately and
effectively protected and that they thereby benefit
directly, on an equitable basis and on mutually agreed
terms, from any utilization of such technologies,
knowledge and practices or from any technological
development directly derived therefrom.” (ibid., para.
78)
Our island States were among the first in the world to
warn against the horrifying consequences of climate change.
We warned against the sea-level rise that could make our
island homes, our livelihood and our cultures extinct. We
formed the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS) in
1990, which, with one-fifth of the United Nations seats,
became the voice of the previously voiceless small island
States. The whole world, developing and industrialized
countries alike, recognized our vulnerability and included
this recognition in the Framework Convention on Climate
Change and in Agenda 21.
Encouraged by this support, our island States wanted
to move further and proposed that the Barbados Conference
take place. This first attempt by a group of States to further
elaborate on Agenda 21 was unprecedented and has not
been emulated since by any other group of countries which
are Members of the United Nations. Our island States again
took the lead and again received recognition from the whole
world in the spirit of Barbados.

24

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999
And here we are, five years later, the spirit of
Barbados a distant memory. Now down to earth, we learn
that the Barbados Programme of Action has not made a
significant difference in the cooperation of the
international community with the small island developing
States. The report “European cooperation with small
island developing States”, by the University of Nijmegen,
Netherlands, co-financed by the European Commission
and available at this conference, concludes that:
“For most European donors, the Barbados
Programme of Action did not take root in the
existing cooperation with the small island developing
States.”
For the Nuclear Free and Independent Pacific
Movement and the Pacific non-governmental
organizations, it has been a staggering experience to see
how much in the way of human and financial resources
went into the donor conference last February, the seventh
session of the Commission on Sustainable Development
last April and this special session, and how little in the
way of concrete results of the Barbados Programme of
Action has been achieved. If only a fraction of those
resources had been used for better coordination and
integrated project development in both the small island
developing States and the donor countries, our
presentation today would have been more positive.
In closing, we wish to re-emphasize the rights of all
peoples, especially colonized peoples, to selfdetermination and independence. It is only when this
fundamental human right is recognized and practiced that
we really can start talking about the sustainable
development of small island developing States. Let the
spirit of our ancestors guide the Assembly in making a
just decision in recognizing this right for our Pacific
islands.

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session
Thank you, Sir, for the opportunity you have given us.
May God bless you and the General Assembly.
The President: I call on Mr. Oomar Karabary,
representative of the Pan African Movement.
Mr. Karabary: The non-governmental organizations
of the small island developing States of the Indian Ocean
form an integral part of efforts to ensure the adoption of
policies and practices that encourage the long-term
development and protection of the environment of small
island States in the Indian Ocean.
I wish briefly to highlight the principal problems that
are specific to the small island developing States of the
Indian Ocean region and their possible solutions. First,
climate change has given rise to drought, a phenomenon
that has become progressively worse over the past few
years. This has had a major, negative impact on agriculture,
in particular on the sugar cane crops which form the
principal source of revenue in the islands, with the
exception of Maldives and Seychelles, which rely heavily
on tourism for their livelihood.
Secondly, sea-level rise caused by global warming has
threatened the very existence of the low-lying islands of the
region. The 1,100 islands that make up the Maldive Islands
have had their coastlines inundated by rising sea levels.
Thirdly, the problem of drug-related activities in small
island developing States is a major concern in our islands,
as they lie along the major drug-trafficking route between
Asia and Africa. The region’s chain of islands, including
the Comoros, Maldives and Seychelles, are not spared the
activities of money laundering and crime, which impede the
economic and social development of our peoples and
environment.
Fourthly, the structural adjustment policies directed by
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund serve
in part to marginalize large segments of our diverse
population.
Fifthly, globalization and trade liberalization have
come to have an adverse effect on the cultural and religious
values of our peoples. Sixthly, and finally, the small island
States of the Indian Ocean suffer from a sore lack of
human resource development facilities.
As the Secretary-General stated in his address to this
special session yesterday, there is trouble in paradise;
indeed, I can assure the Assembly that there is trouble in

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999
our area of Indian Ocean paradise, too. While the
problems I have outlined are not unique to the Indian
Ocean, the possible solutions must, however, be tailored
to respond to the specific needs of our peoples and our
environment.
Non-governmental organizations of the small island
States of the Indian Ocean invite all Member States in
both the developed world and developing countries to
introduce practices that would put a cap on pollution rates
and thereby limit the growth of global warming and
control the phenomenon of rising sea levels. Nongovernmental organizations of the small island developing
States of our region pledge to continue the tireless effort
being made in our local communities to change the
practices of individuals and Governments that may tend
to place an undue burden on our fragile environment.
I wish to highlight the concerns of the nongovernmental organizations of the small island developing
States with regard to the occupation of the Indian Ocean
island of Diego Garcia, which is currently being used as
a United States military base, and request the
demilitarization of this island.
To provide a lasting solution to the drug-related
problems, I call upon Member States from Africa and
Asia to form a tripartite cartel with the small island States
of the Indian Ocean to end the trade in illicit drugs, which
is a scourge on the lives of our respective peoples.
Non-governmental organizations of the small island
developing States are aware that, like our sister islands in
other parts of the world, small islands in the Indian Ocean
lack the requisite financial resources to match our big
problems. The non-governmental organizations of the
small island developing States commend countries such as
Australia and Canada and the members of the European
Union, which have assumed the moral responsibility of
forgiving the bilateral debts of some small island States.
Non-governmental organizations of the small island
developing States of the Indian Ocean invite other
countries to consider similar forms of reparation, and we
encourage Governments of the region to invest
specifically to provide possible solutions in other areas,
such as in the development of human resource facilities
in these small island States. Non-governmental
organizations are recognized for their practical work at
the community level. Even as we think and work locally,
we recognize that our actions have implications globally.

25

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999

The President: We have heard the last speaker in the
debate on this item.

Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole recommended the
adoption of the draft resolution.

Agenda item 8 (continued) and agenda item 9

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution?

Review and appraisal of the implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development
of Small Island Developing States
Report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole
(A/S-22/9)
Adoption of the final documents
The President: I call on His Excellency Mr. John
Ashe of Antigua and Barbuda, Chairman of the Ad Hoc
Committee of the Whole of the Twenty-second Special
Session, to introduce the report of the Ad Hoc Committee.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution S-22/2).
The President: The Assembly will now proceed to
take a decision on the draft decision recommended by the
Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the Twenty-second
Special Session in paragraph 23 of document A/S-22/9.
The Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole recommended the
adoption of the draft decision.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted.

Mr. Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda): I have the honour
to introduce the report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the
Whole of the Twenty-second Special Session of the General
Assembly, which is contained in document A/S-22/9.
The General Assembly will recall that the Committee
was charged with consideration of the agenda item entitled
“Review and appraisal of the implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States”. The attention of
representatives is drawn to paragraph 22 of the document,
in which the Ad Hoc Committee recommends to the
General Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution,
entitled “Declaration and state of progress and initiatives for
the future implementation of the Programme of Action for
the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States”.
Attention is also drawn to paragraph 23 of the same
document, in which the Ad Hoc Committee recommends to
the General Assembly the adoption of a draft decision,
entitled “Letter dated 24 September 1999 from the
Permanent Representative of Canada to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the General Assembly”.
I therefore submit the report of the Ad Hoc Committee
of the Whole for consideration by the General Assembly.
The President: The Assembly will first proceed to
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the Twenty-second
Special Session in paragraph 22 of document A/S-22/9. The

26

The President: I call on the representative of
Finland.
Ms. Hassi (Finland): I am taking the floor on behalf
of the European Union. I want to start by saying that we
are pleased that these two significant documents have
been adopted by the General Assembly at its twentysecond special session, on the review and appraisal of the
implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States.
We appreciate the fact that poverty, which was
identified as an overarching theme in Rio, at the United
Nations Conference on Environment and Development,
and in the Rio + 5 process, is a theme that is clearly
reflected in the Declaration, in line with the review text
itself. However the European Union would like to put on
record that, as indicated yesterday in the Committee of
the Whole, we would have liked to see in the Declaration
a more precise reference to the least developed countries
among the group of small island developing States.
Let me reiterate our sincere appreciation to the
Group of 77 and China, the Alliance of Small Island
States and all our other colleagues, including the
Secretariat, for all their efforts in bringing this long
process, which started as early as February this year, to
successful fruition.
The last chapter of the five-year review document
now in our hands is focused on partnerships. The

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session
European Union is ready and willing to continue to work
with the small island developing States within the
framework of our development cooperation policies, both
through the European Commission and through the bilateral
and multilateral channels available to the European Union
and its member countries.
Mr. Hales (United States of America): My delegation
strongly supports the development efforts of small island
developing States, and we strongly support the principles
and objectives spelled out in the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade, which recognize the special needs of the
developing countries. We firmly believe that, in order for
small island developing States — or any other countries —
to take advantage of the benefits of globalization, they must
be integrated into the world economy, including through
membership in the World Trade Organization (WTO).
The document just adopted by the Assembly
encourages the multilateral trading system to consider, as
appropriate, the grant of special and differential treatment
to small island developing States. We interpret this
language to be consistent with, but not expansive of, United
States trade philosophy and market access policies with
respect to developing countries. The document language
should not be seen as prejudging our position on granting
special and differential treatment in any bilateral, regional,
or multilateral negotiations. Nor should it prejudice regional
initiatives of the United States which offer substantial
additional market access to developing countries through
such programmes as our General System of Preferences,
which offers special duty-free access to numerous
developing countries, our Caribbean Basin initiative, the
proposed African Growth and Opportunity Act and
negotiations towards a free trade area of the Americas.
Although the document language does not provide
them with unique special and differential status within the
WTO, we believe that those small island developing States
which are truly disadvantaged by geography and
infrastructure can benefit from the technical assistance and
capacity-building provided by WTO members to facilitate
their integration into the emerging global trading system.
Ms. Drayton (Guyana): The Group of 77 and China
consider that the two documents before us represent a
sound basis for the second phase of the implementation of
the Barbados Programme of Action. That Programme of
Action is one of the most implementable to be adopted by
the United Nations. It contains proposals that are focused,
action-oriented and quantifiable. The Group emphasizes that

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999
the demonstrated commitment of the international
community to its implementation remains critical.
The Programme of Action not only describes a
strategy to address the issues that are of urgent concern
to all small islands. It also offers, in its mechanism for
implementation, the flexibility that allows for a targeted
approach, tailored to the specific needs of each island.
It is undeniable that the question of economic
vulnerability will increasingly present a challenge to the
ultimate objective of small island developing States. Small
island developing States simply seek an opportunity to
participate effectively in the international economic and
trade system. The success of that involvement is
fundamental to their economic viability and integral to
their capacity to achieve sustainable development.
Here, if I may comment briefly on the statement just
made by the representative of the United States, I would
point out that in the document we have adopted we talked
about the need to participate sustainably: it is not only a
matter of trade liberalization but of ensuring that these
islands can continue to have a future.
The Group looks forward to enhanced cooperation
with all partners and to the continued support of the
United Nations system for the further implementation of
the Programme of Action.
Mr. Slade (Samoa): It is my honour to speak on
behalf of the States members of the Alliance of Small
Island States (AOSIS). First, I want to thank you, Mr.
President, for the quantity of intense work and attention
that you have given to this process; we are most grateful
to you. Secondly, let me take this opportunity to thank all
States Members of the United Nations and
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
that participated in this two-day special session for the
review and appraisal of the implementation of the
Barbados Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States.
The adoption of the documents before the Assembly
brings to a close a process that has occupied us for much
of this year, beginning with the meeting of donors and
small island States in February. That process has involved
so many actors; allow me at this stage to convey our
utmost appreciation to the United Nations system. yy
The Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Nitin Desai, is in the
General Assembly Hall, and we thank him, and the entire

27

General Assembly
Twenty-second Special Session
system, for this initiative, which led us through the
preparatory process to this moment.
This whole session has been about implementation,
and about the strengthening of partnerships. A great deal of
awareness has been created in the past few days, and we
are grateful for that process. I believe it bodes well for the
implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action, on
which our determination and our efforts have been
concentrated over the past two days.
Once again, I express the deep appreciation of the
States members of AOSIS.
Closing statement by the President
The President: Words have been spoken, some of
them fiery and passionate, by many eminent world leaders
and heads of delegation. Yet, another call to duty starts
here, and the direction to be taken is straightforward.
We have adopted two documents — indeed, very
important documents, a resolution and a decision —
unanimously. The consensus is clear and focused on
implementation, but it is also recognized that without funds,
resources and sustained goodwill from the rich nations and
multilateral financial institutions, the way forward is
uncertain. Time is running out. We must do the right thing.
When we leave here we must act, and that action requires
the implementation of the resolution and the decision
adopted here.
The Rio Agenda 21 and Barbados Programme of
Action have set out the priority areas and strategies for
implementation. These development plans remain both
urgent and relevant today, as they were when they were
articulated in 1992 and in 1994 respectively. This special
session, thus, was in part a reminder to the international
community to live up to the promises made and to
complete the assistance programmes that have been

5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999
undertaken. The record of what we have achieved here
will be open to the court of public opinion for scrutiny
and final judgement.
It is also an occasion for rededication to taking
further steps towards ensuring that the business of the
small island developing States is truly the business of the
whole of humanity. In Africa we say that a shepherd’s
work is not done until he has accounted for the last few
missing sheep, even the very last one. This is where the
United Nations and its agencies come in. Even when the
dark clouds gather, the United Nations knows the way,
and the will of these embattled States to succeed must
always draw inspiration from the unity and solidarity of
the 188 Member States represented here.
As an old friend of mine insists, we must keep hope
alive. We have listened to States, we have also listened to
representatives of the Observer groups and, lastly, we
have listened to the representatives of the nongovernmental organizations, and together we are sending
a message to our sisters and brothers in the small island
developing States that we are with them.
Lastly, to those who will depart New York to go
back home, I wish Godspeed and all success in your
endeavours.
Minute of silent prayer or meditation
The President: I invite representatives to stand and
observe a minute or silent prayer or meditation.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silent prayer or meditation.
Closure of the twenty-second special session of the
General Assembly
The President: I declare closed the twenty-second
special session of the General Assembly.
The meeting rose at 10.05 p.m.

28
