no

General Assemhly-Thirly-second Session

Recalling the relevant provisions of the International
Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade, 127
1. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, with
the assistance of a group of high-level experts appointed
by him on the recommendation of Governments and
with due regard to equitable geographical distribution,
a report on the following, including conclusions and
recommendations, taking into account studies already
undertaken within the United Nations system:
(a) The guarantee powers of existing international
financia! institutions and their possible enlargement;
(b) The feasibility and desirability of establishing
a multilateral insurance and reinsurance agency;
2. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide
the group with material for its consideration, in consultation with relevant bodies and organizations of the
United Nations system;
3. Decides to consider the report of the SecretaryGeneral at its thirty-third session under the item entitled "Acceleration of the transfer of real resources to
developing countries".
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977

32/178.

Network for the exchange of technological information and the industrial
and technological information hank

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII)
of 16 September 197 5 on development and international economic co-operation,
Further recalling the Lima Declaration and Plan of
Action on Industrial Development and Co-operation, 128
adopted by the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization at its Second General Conference, held
at Lima from 12 to 26 March 1975,
Taking into account resolutions 87 (IV), 88 (IV)
and 89 (IV) of 30 May 1976 of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development129 concerning
strengthening the technological capacity of the developing countries,
Further taking into account General Assembly resolutions 3507 (XXX) of 15 December 1975 and 31/183
of 21 December 1976 and Industrial Development
Board decision V (XI) of 6 June 1977 regarding institutional arrangements in the transfer of technology, 180
Recalling paragraph 1 of its resolution 31/183, in
which it reaffi.rmed the importance of wider dissemination of scientific and technological information for the
121 Resolution 2626 (XXV).
12s See A/10112, chap. IV.
129 See Proceedings of the United

Nations Conference on
Trade and Deve/opment, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.11.D.10
and corrigendum), ,part one, &ect. A.
180 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtysecond Session, Supp/ement No. 16 (A/32/16), annex l.

purpose of allowing developing countries access to
research findings that they considered to be of interest
as well as project experience of other developing countries, thus permitting the selection of technologies essential for their industrial growth and promoting the development of their own technological capacity,
Reaffirming thc need for the improvement and
strengthening of national capacities of developing countries for access to, collection, storage, analysis and dissemination of technological and related information, in
arder, inter afia, to make the proposed network fully
cffective,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
011 the establishment of a network for the exchange of
technological information 131 and the note by the Secretary-General concerning the patent information system, 132 prepared in response to General Assembly
resolution 3507 (XXX), and expresses its thanks to
the lnter-Agency Task Force on Information Exchange
and the Transfer of Technology and to the World Intellectual Property Organization;
2. W e/comes the progress achieved thus far in
determining the shape of a technological information
network, useful to ali countries, in particular developing countries, in studying regional and national
capacities and needs in technological information, particularly in the publication of a pilot user-oriented
directory of information services of the United Nations
system;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the
preparatory studies and assessments of existing information networks already undertaken;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the regional commissions, the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and
the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, as well as with the World InteUectual Property
Organization, the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization and other specialized agencies concerned, to develop altematives for further work
011 the network, including time schedules, costs and
user-oriented operational suggestions, together with
suggestions on sectors and/or subject areas where there
is a particular requirement for an international information network, using the best possible experience in
the fields of identification of user needs, information
exchange and the transfer of technology;
5. Requests the Administrative Committee on Coordination, in view of the fruitful collaboration developed by the Inter-Agency Task Force among agencies
of the United Nations system on measures undertaken
thus far in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 31/183, to make appropriate arrangements to
continue such support and co-ordination during the
period of study envisaged under paragraphs 3 and 4
ahove;
6. Reafjirms that ali countries, particularly developed countries, should take measures as a matter of
high priority to improve the availability and quality of
the technological information, including advanced technologies, needed to assist developing countries in the
selection of technologies relevant to their needs;
7. Urges the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the
rn1 E/6055.
13 2 E/6054.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Executive Director of the United Natíons Industrial
Development Organization and the heads of other relevant agencies to continue their efforts to assist developing countries in establishing centres for the transfer and
development of technology at the national and regional
levels and in providing extension services, and, in this
context, to bear in mind the possibilities of the network
concept;
8. Endorses Industrial Development Board decision V (XI) regarding the pilot operation of an industrial and technological information bank;
9. Recommends that work on the network, as well
as on the bank, should take into account their interrelationship and also the preparations for the United
Nations Conference on Science and Technology for
Development;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-third session, through
the Economic and Social Council, a progress report
on the work requested in the present resolution, with
a view to submitting a final report to the Assembly
at its thirty-fourth session.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
32/179.

Role of the public sector in promoting
the economic development of develop•
ing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970 containing the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development
Decade, 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974
containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974
containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties
of States and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 Septcmber 1975 on
development and international cconomic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 3488 (XXX) of 12 December 1975, in which, inter alía, it recognized the
important and vital role the public sector in developing
countries could play in achieving the over-all economic
and social development goals in accordance with their
national development plans,
Recognizing the necessary and important role of the
public sector, including public administration, finance
and management, in enhancing national capacities for
the full and effective realization of national development
objectives,
Recalling its resolution 2845 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolutions
1977 (LIX) of 30 July 1975 and 2018 (LXI) of
3 August 1976 on public administration and finance
for development,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the Lima Declaration and Plan of Action on Industrial Development
and Co-operation, 133 adopted by the United N ations
Industrial Development Organization at its Second General Conference, held at Lima from 12 to 26 March
1975, which, ínter afia, recognized the importance of
133 See

A/10112, chap. IV.

111

ensuring an adequate role for the public sector in the
expansion of the industrial development of developing
countries,
Recalling the pertinent provisions of the above-mentioned resolutions which reaffirm the right of every
State to exercise ful] and permanent sovereignty over
its natural rcsources for the benefit of its people,
Bearing in mind that every State has the sovereign
and inalienable right to choose its economic and social
system in accordance with the will of its people, without outside interference,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the role of the public sector in promoting the cconomic development of developing countries, 134 prepared in accordance with General Assembly resolution
3488 (XXX);
2. Endorses Economic and Social Council decision 274 (LXIII) of 4 August 1977, in which the
Council recommended to the General Assembly, ínter
a/ia, the continued sludy of the subject;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue
studying the role of the public sector in promoting the
economic development of developing countries, as provided for in Economic and Social Council decision 274
(LXIII), through the fullest utilization of existing possibilities and resources and existing Secretariat departments;
4. Recommends that the competent United Nations
organs should take into account the studies on the role
of the public sector in promoting the economic development of developing countries in formulating a new
international dcvelopment strategy;
5. Invites the Secretary-General, in his study on
the role of thc public sector in the socio-economic development of developing countries, to take into account
especially the following aspects:
(a) Capital formation and full realization by developing countries of their natural resources for the
bencfit of their entire population;
( b) Role of the public sector in implementing the
Iong-term strategy of industrialization;
(e) Role of the public sector in promoting agricultura! production;
(d) Role of the public sector in developing an
effective national potential in research and development
in the fields of science and technology;
(e) Attainment of the aims of a unified approach
to economic and social development, including the
achievement of an equitable distribution of income and
wealth in the nation;
(f) Creation of broader employment opportunities
and rcduction of unemployment;
(g) Role of the public sector in the expansion of
the share of developing countries in international trade,
including the improvement of their export and import
capacity and balance of payments;
(h)
Role of the public sector in adjusting to changing cconomic circumstances and undertaking necessary
structural and other adjustments;

6. Requests the Secretary-General to identify, based
on national requirements, international measures re1:a E/5985 and Corr. l.
