A /77/PV.94

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

94th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 25 July 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 134
Report of the United Nations Youth Office
Report of the Secretary-General (A/77/955)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Camelli (European Union): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States.
The European Union is a steadfast supporter of
young people’s rights and the meaningful participation
of youth in decision-making. For that reason, we
welcome the opportunity to discuss young people and
their role within the United Nations system today.
At the outset, we would like to express our gratitude
for the work of the Office of the Secretary-General’s
Envoy on Youth, which has championed young people
around the world since its inception in 2013 and allowed
them to flourish at the United Nations and make their
impact on the Organization, laying the foundation
for what is today the United Nations Youth Office. In
particular, we wish to commend the work, leadership,
service and dedication of Ms. Wickramanayake.
Allow us to also thank the Secretary-General for
his report (A/77/955), in particular for the updates on
the establishment of the new United Nations Youth
Office. The EU strongly supports the United Nations

youth agenda and the formation of the Youth Office,
which will give youth voices their rightful place at the
heart of the United Nations system.
We are pleased to hear of the progress made and the
milestones achieved so far. We welcome in particular
the focus on consultations with youth, youth-led and
youth-serving civil society organizations and networks.
In addition, we would like to echo the need for
accountability within the United Nations system to
ensure the meaningful participation of youth. We
are pleased to see the United Nations Youth Strategy
permeating the United Nations work across the world
and United Nations country teams taking up meaningful
youth engagement. We look forward to the role that the
new Youth Office will play in strengthening policies
and coordinating processes and platforms on youth
engagement across the United Nations system.
At the High-Level Political Forum on sustainable
development last week, EU Commissioner for
International Partnerships, Ms. Urpilainen, stated
“empowering young people is the single greatest
investment we can make in the future”. When it comes
to youth affairs, the EU is walking the talk. Indeed, the
European External Action Service’s first Youth Action
Plan aims to foster strong partnerships with young
people worldwide, in order to empower and enable them
to shape solutions for the problems that affect them.
That includes our Women and Youth in Democracy
Initiative, which is growing the engagement and impact
of young people and women in democratic processes. It
also includes our Youth Empowerment Fund to support

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-21810 (E)

*2321810*

A/77/PV.94

25/07/2023

and finance youth-led initiatives for the Sustainable
Development Goals, and it further includes the AfricaEurope Youth Academy, which aims at advancing
learning opportunities and exchanges between young
people in Africa and the European Union.

will redouble its efforts to engage with youth-related
envoys of regional organizations as per operative
paragraph 3 (e) and to promote dialogue among the
youth in various geographical regions, especially in
developing countries.

In conclusion, we look forward to our continued
work together on youth affairs. As the work continues
to operationalize the United Nations Youth Office and,
ultimately, to enable meaningful youth engagement
across the world, we should be guided by this simple
principle: nothing should be about young people
without young people.

The delegation of Egypt welcomes the efforts made
to transfer the tasks and mandate of the SecretaryGeneral’s Youth Envoy office to the new Office and to
allocate to it the financial resources that will preserve
the institutional work.

Mr. Mohamed (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of Egypt welcomes the measures taken by the
Secretariat to establish a United Nations Youth Office,
pursuant to resolution 76/306, which was adopted by
consensus in September 2022.
We recall that the adoption of that resolution
demonstrates the readiness of the General Assembly
to advance the youth agenda at the United Nations and
to promote the Organization’s efforts to advance that
important dossier. In that context, the delegation of
Egypt takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
(A/77/955) and the measures therein. We also note the
short time between the issuing of the report and the
holding of this meeting. We look forward to taking
that into consideration in future reports on the work of
the Office.
Egypt was pleased to work with Guyana last year
in facilitating the intergovernmental consultations on
the establishment of the United Nations Youth Office.
There was consensus among the Member States in the
consultations on the need to foster communication
with the youth and listen to their voices, in particular
as their numbers increase throughout the world. The
number of youth now exceeds 1.2 billion persons, which
compels us to take their priorities into consideration
in our efforts to address the growing challenges and
to continue our efforts to implement the Sustainable
Development Goals.
The delegation of Egypt looks forward to
completing the establishment of the United Nations
Youth Office and to the appointment process reflecting a
balance between different age groups and geographical
representation, as per the seventh preambular paragraph
of the resolution, and in a manner that reflects the
largest percentage of young people worldwide in the
developing countries. We also hope that the new Office
2/27

We would like to note the report’s use of terminology
that does not enjoy international consensus. We trust
that completing the establishment of the Office as per
the establishing resolution will prevent the recurrence
of such use and will promote the use of terminology
that unites global youth rather than dividing them.
Resolution 76/306 highlights the important role
of youth in the three pillars of the United Nations
work, namely, the promotion of peace and security,
development and human rights. It also emphasizes
the need for effective participation of youth in
decision-making. It is certain that we will not achieve
a prosperous future without involvement of the youth.
They are the main category that will participate in and
benefit from it.
The Declaration on the Right to Development has
stressed that human beings are central to the development
process. Therefore, achieving development means
equal opportunities for all, in particular youth, while
ensuring fundamental issues, such as housing, health
care and employment. That contributes to establishing
an appropriate environment for youth to realize their
capabilities and enjoy all their rights.
Egypt remains committed to promoting the
involvement of youth, empowering them and
increasing their job opportunities, out of our belief in
their potential and the important role they can play in
advancing development and growth. Egypt declared
2016 the Year of the Youth and took many measures
to expand the programmes that foster their capabilities
and prepare them for work. In addition, the number of
youth appointees to leading and legislative positions
in Egypt has increased, and we have also established
a World Youth Forum, which has provided through its
four iterations an important forum for the youth from
various countries of the world to exchange views and
ideas on peace, development and creativity.
23-21810

25/07/2023

In conclusion, the delegation of Egypt looks forward
to the continued integration of the activities undertaken
by the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth into those
being carried out by the new United Nations office.
We hope that the response of the United Nations to the
aspirations and hopes of the youth at the international
level will be encouraged, with a view to achieving a
safer, more stable and prosperous world.
Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on progress in the establishment
of the United Nations Office for Youth, in line with
resolution 76/306 (A/77/955). We commend the work of
the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth, Ms. Jayathma
Wickramanayake, and her Office for the results obtained
in the process of establishing the new body, and the
progress in the implementation of the United Nations
Youth Strategy 2030. Costa Rica emphasizes that
these achievements have advanced the mainstreaming
of the youth perspective in the three pillars of the
United Nations: peace and security, human rights
and sustainable development. The transition process
towards the United Nations Youth Office is therefore
a great opportunity to position the youth agenda in all
areas of the Organization.
Costa Rica has taken actions at the national level
to encourage and promote the participation of young
people in public affairs and in their communities,
as well as in the representation of youth abroad in
different fields. Costa Rica’s Vice Ministry of Youth,
the leading national institution in this area, has multiple
institutional spaces for participation and consultation
with youth, an experience that was presented at this
year’s Economic and Social Council Youth Forum.
Various Costa Rican youth representatives are
already contributing their innovative ideas to our work,
for example, in preparing the national contribution to
the initiative for the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights launched by
the High Commissioner. The new Youth Office has
many pathways and a great deal of potential on the road
to a more inclusive and expressive United Nations. In
the process towards the establishment of the Office,
Costa Rica considers it necessary to emphasize the
following points.
First, the United Nations Youth Office should
reflect the diversity of our global community and
ensure gender parity and non-discrimination as
principles of its composition. Costa Rica recommends

A/77/PV.94

the appointment of another woman to head the Office,
ensuring the continuity of the leadership shown by the
Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth.
Secondly, Costa Rica recalls the importance
of the mandate to promote and facilitate dialogue,
collaboration and intergenerational solidarity. We
encourage the Office to apply this approach by linking it
to agendas related to aging and demographic transition,
and by facilitating pathways for the participation of
people of all ages, including children. Building a
society for all ages is part of the commitments we have
made as States.
Thirdly, we believe that the Secretary-General’s
youth strategy is of particular relevance to the work of
the Office. However, taking into account the Office’s
strengthened capacity, Costa Rica believes that it should
aspire to strengthening its strategic and programmatic
agenda, for example, by building a stronger network
of focal points in the system and enhancing its
synergies with regional organizations. We also stress
the importance of supporting and advising developing
countries and small missions in promoting greater
involvement of youth at all levels.
In conclusion, the meaningful, inclusive and
effective participation of all youth in the United
Nations will be nothing less than a guarantee of success
for the Youth Office’s mandate; it must therefore be a
cross-cutting pillar of its work. Their participation
must also be protected, ensuring that it is safe for all
young people at all times. Costa Rica reaffirms its full
support for the forward-looking agenda represented by
creating the Youth Office and encourages the ambition
and optimism that characterizes youth to be applied in
the process towards its establishment. We look forward
to working with the Office on these and other issues
of interest.
Ms. Zacarias (Portugal): We thank the SecretaryGeneral for the presentation of the first report on the
new United Nations Youth Office (A/77/955), and we
commend the work done by the United Nations on
youth over the past several decades, with the adoption
of numerous resolutions and a range of activities and
achievements within the United Nations system. There
has also been growing recognition of the role of young
persons as positive agents of change and key contributors
to the advancement of agreed global frameworks. In
particular, we are pleased to see improvements in the
engagement with youth-led civil society organizations
and networks.

23-218103/27

A/77/PV.94

But we need to deliver more for young people with
young people, if we want to have a United Nations
system that is truly inclusive. For this, the establishment
of the Youth Office through resolution 76/306 as the
first concrete deliverable of Our Common Agenda is a
key development. Portugal attached great importance
to the establishment of the Office, and we reiterate
our full commitment to reinvigorating our efforts for
youth, which must be put on a more sustainable footing,
ensuring complementarity with existing functions on
youth across the system and with a clear mandate to
coordinate United Nations system efforts in this regard.
We look forward to the recruitment process for
the staff of the new Youth Office, which we expect to
be represented by an agile team, leveraging the rich
capacity and technical expertise of the United Nations
system as a whole and taking stock of the experience
brought by the current Envoy on Youth, whose work we
truly commend.
In the UN75 declaration, Member States made a
commitment to listening to and working with youth.
We are confident that the Youth Office will fulfil this
commitment, turn it into reality across the three pillars
of the United Nations, and, in the short term, at the
upcoming Sustainable Development Goals Summit,
support the meaningful engagement of youth.
Mr. Hadjichrysanthou (Cyprus): At the outset,
we express our appreciation to the Secretary General’s
Envoy on Youth and her team for the invaluable work
in fostering the position of youth throughout the
United Nations system. My delegation fully subscribes
to the statement delivered by the representative of
the European Union, in its capacity as observer. I
would like to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.
Cyprus is a strong supporter of the full, effective,
constructive and inclusive participation of youth
in decision-making structures. Youth have an
indispensable role to play within the United Nations
system. In this regard, my delegation welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Youth Office (A/77/955), and we are grateful for all the
updates provided in relation to the establishment of the
new Office.
We believe that the establishment of the United
Nations Youth Office based on resolution 76/306 should
effectively integrate the current activities of the Office
of the Secretary General’s Envoy on Youth. The United
4/27

25/07/2023

Nations Youth Office should continue to lead high-level
advocacy and serve as the anchor for United Nations
system coordination and accountability on youth
matters, including peace and security, sustainable
development, humanitarian action and human rights.
Cyprus continues to support the integration of the
current activities of the Office of the Secretary-General’s
Envoy on Youth in the new Youth Office and reiterates
the importance of institutional memory related to youth
issues across the United Nations system.
It is imperative to consider young people’s priorities
and address their obstacles to realizing their full
potential at the local, national, regional and international
levels. Our top priority should be the implementation of
the World Programme of Action for Youth and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Young people
form the backbone of our societies, holding tremendous
potential for positive action and innovative solutions.
We therefore need to recognize and empower youth in
that regard.
We recognize the rich input young people bring as
advocates, experts, activists, scientists, entrepreneurs,
among others. Cyprus is therefore implementing
programmes and specific actions on how to strengthen
youth participation. One concrete example is the
project “Youth Parliament of Cyprus”, an initiative
by two youth non-governmental organizations that
has been institutionalized by the Council of Ministers
of the Republic of Cyprus, providing a permanent
space for the young people of Cyprus to present
their ideas and proposals to policymaking and
decision-making structures.
The launch of the Youth2030 agenda in 2018, as
well as the dedicated track on Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982), provide us with great momentum for
meaningful youth engagement at all levels. I take this
opportunity to express once more our appreciation
to the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth for her
participation in the event “Youth of Cyprus celebrate the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations”. That
event, organized by the Cypriot youth non-governmental
organization “Cyprus Youth DiplomaCY” in December
2020, with the support of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
gave our youth the opportunity to express — directly
and at the highest level — their views on the United
Nations they want. Events and initiatives of civil
society, like the one just mentioned, highlight the
importance of youth as meaningful and equal partners
for a transformative future.
23-21810

25/07/2023

Allow me to conclude by saying that we must
mainstream youth voices, initiatives and actions across
the work and outcomes of the United Nations system.
There is no issue that does not affect youth or to which
youth have nothing to contribute. To quote former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, when addressing a
youth audience: “You are never too young to lead, and
we are never too old to learn”.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting today. Allow
me also to thank the Secretary- General for the report
(A/77/955) that informs our discussions here today,
as well as for the work done over the past year to
operationalize the United Nations Youth Office.
As correctly stated by the Secretary- General, it
is our duty as humankind to act and think today “for
the long term, to deliver more for young people and
succeeding generations and to be better prepared for the
challenges ahead”. The decision to establish a United
Nations Youth Office was a monumental step towards
achieving that necessary goal. So too are the reported
activities of the United Nations Youth Office to date.
By 2030, young people in Africa are expected
to constitute 42 per cent of global youth. This is a
generation of young people that has lived through and
spearheaded the continent’s meteoric rise, including in
mobile and Internet penetration rates. Today African
youth are increasingly taking an active role in shaping
their future.
In his policy brief, entitled “Meaningful Youth
Engagement in Policymaking and Decision-making
Processes” the Secretary-General outlines three
critical guiding principles towards the meaningful
and genuine positioning of youth as equal partners in
decision-making, namely resources, institutionalization
and accessibility. Strengthening the involvement of
young people in decision-making processes across
all levels contributes to the overarching objective
of fostering inclusive and effective multilateralism
capable of tackling the complex challenges confronting
the world today.
From our own context, in Namibia, we have seen
the benefits of empowering young people and having
them sit at the table as able decision makers. That has
resulted an increase in representation of young people
in both houses of our bicameral Parliament as able
representatives of their constituencies. Young people
must be offered the necessary funding and education,

A/77/PV.94

and decision-making processes must be made accessible
to all young people, without coercion or discrimination.
Therefore, I would like to reiterate some of the
important calls made by Member States and young
people from around the world during the consultations
that led to the establishment of the United Nations
Youth Office, particularly as efforts to get the office
running are under way.
First, there is a need to manage a robust hiring
process for the United Nations Youth Office, including
for the position of Assistant Secretary-General for
Youth Affairs.
Secondly, the Office must build the capacity to host
professional development opportunities for youth at the
national and regional levels.
Thirdly, there are also valid expectations that
the inclusion of those who are marginalized during
their engagement in operational functions, such as
eliminating digital barriers to ensure young people’s
meaningful participation, will take centre stage.
The youth look to us to bequeath them a sense of
belonging and ownership in a world that takes them
and their interests into consideration. As a developing
country in Africa, for us, involving young people in
politics and society is not merely a question of inclusion,
but one that is vital for economic growth, innovation,
peace and security.
Ms. Mousa (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, my country’s delegation would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening a general debate on
this important item for the first time.
My delegation also takes note of the SecretaryGeneral’s report (A/77/955) entitled “United Nations
Youth Office”.
The delegation of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
welcomes the establishment of the United Nations
Youth Office and supports the operational steps taken
to date to establish the new Office and to carry forward
its main mandates. My delegation appreciates the
efforts of the Office of the Secretary-General’s Envoy
on Youth in that regard.
Young people are half of the present and all of
the future. In that regard, I emphasize my country’s
support for all efforts to promote the participation,
empowerment and involvement of young people in the
United Nations system. Those efforts are consistent

23-218105/27

A/77/PV.94

with my country’s national priorities, where young
people under the age of 30 constitute more than 63 per
cent of the total population.
The youth in my country are receiving the attention
of their leadership in the development process and
opening our prospects for cooperation with the world
by promoting the culture of dialogue and the values
of tolerance and moderation, while building on the
goals and programmes of the Saudi Vision 2030,
which relies on young people in many of its initiatives
and objectives, as well as in the many opportunities
that depend on gender equality and contribute to the
realization of their aspirations.
The Youth agenda is given the highest priority
in my country. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia led the
international efforts undertaken by the Group of 20 (G20) through our presidency of the Group in 2020. We
adopted the G-20 road map, which sets forth a 15 per
cent reduction of marginalized youth in the labour
market by 2025.
In that context, while my country reiterates its
support for the United Nations Youth Office and the
efforts made in that regard, we stress the need to
build those efforts on comprehensive, complementary
steps that take into account the diverse priorities and
aspirations of all young people, various economic and
social aspects, and the cultural specificities and diverse
social values of young people from different countries
and geographical regions.

25/07/2023

we stand a much better chance of making this world a
better place for now and for future generations.
Having had the privilege, together with Ambassador
Osama Mahmoud Abdelkhalek Mahmoud of Egypt, to
co-facilitate resolution 76/306, which established the
Youth Office, and to listen to young people from across
the world, Guyana and I are very pleased to note the
progress that has been made thus far. We are mindful
that this is a transitional report, since it has been only
six months since the transition to the new Youth Office
began. However, we are of the view that the two tracks
of the transition process signal that the United Nations
is on the right track in establishing the Office and
ultimately advancing the youth agenda. We note that
the Office is likely to be up and functioning by the end
of this year.
Guyana has taken note of the many activities in
which the Office of the Secretary-General’s Envoy on
Youth has been engaged over the reporting period, and
indeed, over the past few years. We take this opportunity
to thank the Envoy, Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake,
and her team, for their tireless efforts in advancing
the youth agenda, including through United Nations
system coordination and during this ongoing transition
process. I believe we can all agree that the amplification
of youth voices has exponentially increased across the
United Nations system.

In conclusion, my delegation looks forward to the
prominent and promising role that the United Nations
Youth Office will play and to the positive impact the
Office is expected to have on the international system
in support of sustainable development plans, in line
with resolution 76/306.

The functions of the new Youth Office are ambitious,
as they should be. In view of the cross-cutting issues
that affect our young people, prioritizing will present
a challenge. However, as the Office moves forward, it
will be necessary to prioritize the priorities, choosing
those that have the greatest chance of effecting real and
positive change, at the country level and throughout the
United Nations system, while being mindful of regional
and national needs.

Mrs. Rodrigues-Birkett (Guyana): I thank the
Secretary-General for his report on the activities of the
new United Nations Youth Office (A/77/955). Indeed, I
wish to recall that the establishment of the new Youth
Office is the first deliverable from the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations in his report, Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982). It is appropriately and fittingly so,
as we seek to capitalize on the abundance of enthusiasm,
boldness and energy of the 1.8 billion young people
across the world, while recognizing and addressing
the obstacles to their flourishing. By creating the
opportunities for them to be fully engaged and involved,

The establishment of the Youth Office by the General
Assembly demonstrates the collective commitment of
Member States to ensuring the meaningful engagement
and involvement of youth in all spheres, including in
the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
However, the ultimate success of the Youth Office, as
the Secretary-General aptly recalled in the report, will
be dependent on the resourcing of its operations and the
overall contribution of the United Nations system to a
more peaceful, sustainable, just and equal world, where
young people are supported, empowered, engaged and
equipped to fulfil their potential.

6/27

23-21810

25/07/2023

As for Guyana, over 60 per cent of its population are
young people, and their engagement and involvement
in the country’s development are largely mainstream.
Nevertheless, we recognize the importance of intentional
and targeted engagement of youth across ministries. We
have established a Presidential Youth Advisory Council
through the President’s Office, providing young
people with the opportunity to be directly involved in
informing policies and programmes. In the Ministry
of Housing, we have established a home-ownership
programme for young professionals. We have increased
the resources allocated to the Ministry of Youth, and
we have established a young influencers’ programme
in the Ministry of Human Services.
Guyana reaffirms its commitment to continue
doing its part, and we pledge our support in working
with the new United Nations Youth Office and all
Member States, including by sharing best practices.
Ms. Matos Menéndez (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): I am pleased to welcome the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Youth
Office (A/77/955). Nearly a year ago, we adopted
resolution 76/306, establishing that important office,
a major achievement that compels us even more to
acknowledge and value the immeasurable contribution
made by young people and the organizations they
lead. Their unique vision and perspectives enrich our
understanding of global challenges. Young people are
essential partners in the quest for effective solutions.
In that regard, I would be remiss in failing to
highlight the arduous and commendable work carried
out over a decade by the Secretary-General’s Envoys
on Youth. Their efforts have been crucial for the United
Nations youth agenda and for youth in general, leaving
an unimpeachable, admirable legacy. It is important to
underscore that the new United Nations Youth Office is
being built on the accomplishments of the Office of the
Envoy on Youth. The establishment of the Youth Office
should effectively incorporate existing activities and
anchor matters related to youth, ranging from peace
and sustainable development to humanitarian and
human rights issues, preserving the Office’s culture,
innovative approaches and vital activities.
Upon review of the report, it is encouraging to note
the complementary, coordinated approach of the United
Nations Youth Office, working closely with a wide
range of United Nations system entities. We therefore
hope that future reports of the Secretary-General
continue to encompass in a holistic manner the progress

A/77/PV.94

and challenges related to youth issues throughout the
United Nations system, thus ensuring that the actions
undertaken are coherent and effective. In addition, we
recognize the significant progress achieved in promoting
the active, equitable and meaningful participation
of young people in decision-making and in mandates
related to youth within the United Nations system.
The implementation of the United Nations Youth
Strategy 2030 has gained momentum, and efforts
to accelerate its implementation, tackling critical
obstacles and gaps, deserve our recognition. The bid to
prioritize policies, processes and platforms that promote
the meaningful participation of young people in all
areas in terms of decision-making attests to a genuine
commitment to inclusion and collaborative efforts.
Moreover, we also highly value the initiatives led by
young people towards meaningful engagement on key
issues, including at the 2023 Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) Summit and through the SecretaryGeneral’s Youth Advisory Group on Climate Change.
Those actions reflect a determined dedication to
ensuring that the voices of young people are heard in
policymaking on global challenges.
In terms of combating abuse and harassment, we
welcome the virtual training and guidelines provided
for youth speakers. The creation of the fictional avatar,
“Nova”, to protect the identity of young activists
participating in dialogues, is worth emulating. For
example, it could be used for testimonies of victims and
survivors of sexual violence or human trafficking.
I would also like to highlight the impressive work
of the 17 Young Leaders for the SDGs, an initiative that
has placed young people at the centre of achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals. I am convinced that
the new United Nations Youth Office will continue to
drive and promote those valuable initiatives. It is the
responsibility of all of us as an international community
to join efforts and collectively strengthen those types
of initiatives.
Despite the progress made, we recognize that there
are still challenges that need to be addressed. It is essential
to ensure a broader and more diverse representation of
young people in decision-making processes, including
in peace processes. The Secretary-General’s policy
brief on meaningful youth engagement in policymaking
and decision-making processes includes suggestions
that we aim to promote, in collaboration with the Youth
Office. Those recommendations can provide a road

23-218107/27

A/77/PV.94

25/07/2023

map for addressing various challenges with regard to
youth participation.

equal participation of young people from all countries,
especially developing countries.

In conclusion, the Secretary-General’s report
reflects comprehensive efforts to support and promote
meaningful engagement with young people. The Office
of the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth has proven to
be a driving force towards a more inclusive, sustainable
and peaceful world for youth. We are convinced that this
new Office will continue on that path. The Dominican
Republic reiterates its commitment to continuing its
determined efforts in support of the United Nations
Youth Office.

Thirdly, we support the establishment of the Youth
Office as soon as possible. China thanks the SecretaryGeneral for his report (A/77/955), which gives an
update on the progress made in the preparation of
the Office, and we look forward to the early and full
operationalization of the Office, so that it can play
a greater role in promoting the broad and in-depth
participation of young people in United Nations affairs.
We hope that the composition of the Youth Office
will be geographically balanced and that more young
people from developing countries will be invited to join
the Office.

Ms. Zhang Sisi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
has always attached great importance to and supported
young people’s active participation in United Nations
affairs. We welcome the establishment of the United
Nations Youth Office and the General Assembly’s
thematic discussions on relevant issues.
At present, the world has entered a new era,
unseen in a century, of turmoil, change and accelerated
evolution. More than ever, the international community
should listen to the voices of young people, believe
in their strength and provide resources and create
conditions for them to realize their potential. In that
regard, China would like to share the following points.
First, we must recognize the important role of
youth in advancing development. We need to amplify
young people’s role as a driving force for social change,
economic growth and technological innovation and
help them to further demonstrate their resilience in
poverty reduction and eradication, climate change
and post-pandemic recovery, so that they may
contribute to the realization of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Secondly, a broad platform should be created
for young people, especially those from developing
countries, to participate in United Nations activities.
China appreciates the positive efforts made by the
Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth in promoting
youth participation, and it encourages the Youth Office
to consolidate existing resources, innovate working
methods and provide more opportunities for young
people, especially those from developing countries,
to participate in United Nations internships and
employment opportunities, on the basis of projects
such as the young professionals programme. More
opportunities and platforms should be provided for the
8/27

China, which attaches great importance to youth
development, successfully hosted the World Youth
Development Forum and launched the international
initiative on priority youth development and the Action
Plan for Global Youth Development. The Action Plan
calls for a hundred model youth-development projects
from around the world, aims to nurture outstanding
young talent for sustainable development and focuses on
capacity-building exchanges, the sharing of practices,
project promotion and other activities. We welcome the
active participation of young people from all countries
of the world in writing a new chapter of solidarity and
cooperation among the world’s youth.
Ms. Qureshi (Pakistan): The meaningful
participation and engagement of youth in all its
forms is crucial to achieve sustainable and inclusive
development and counter the enormous challenges that
the world is facing today. The Office of the SecretaryGeneral’s Envoy on Youth, while transitioning to the
United Nations Youth Office, will provide a strong
foundation for building a more peaceful, sustainable,
just and equal world in future — a world in which
young people are supported, empowered, engaged and
equipped to fulfil their potential.
In order to enable greater collaboration,
coordination and accountability across the United
Nations system, advance youth issues and promote
meaningful youth engagement, the Office of the
Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth has continued to
coordinate the implementation of the United Nations
Youth Strategy. At the entity level, evidence-gathering,
capacity-building, knowledge exchange and advocacy
and communication are improving. It is encouraging
that, at the country-team level, in 2022, meaningful
youth engagement increased from 7 per cent to
23-21810

25/07/2023

44 per cent, United Nations support for Governments
increased from 17 per cent to 38 per cent, and support
for projects led by country teams increased from 30 per
cent to 53 per cent. However, there are sizable variations
across countries and regions and across United Nations
entities and country teams.
Almost 68 per cent of the total population of
Pakistan is under 30 years old, qualifying it as a
young nation. Pakistan sees this youth bulge as an
opportunity to channel youth potential for dynamic
growth and a sustainable future for the nation. Pursuant
to the demographic trends, the Government of Pakistan
launched the Prime Minister’s Youth Programme in
2013. The Programme focuses on four core areas for
intervention: education, employment, engagement and
environment. These four core areas will contribute to
attaining the Sustainable Development Goals, creating
an inclusive society and ensuring the country’s
economic development. A digital youth hub is being
developed via the Programme’s web portal and mobile
app. A few initiatives under these four core areas
are noteworthy.
The right to education was declared as a fundamental
right through an amendment to Pakistan’s Constitution.
Approximately 400,000 people have been professionally
trained, free of cost, in technology and conventional
trades. A national youth employment initiative is in
process to identify 2 million direct job opportunities
by creating linkages between academia and industry.
Approximately 73.55 billion rupees have been disbursed
to deserving youth under the Prime Minister’s Youth
Business and Agriculture Loan Scheme. Pakistan is
ensuring the meaningful engagement of young people
across the country by enabling their participation in
policymaking processes through the National Youth
Council and Youth Parliament.
We take note of the report of the Secretary-General
(A/77/955) on the United Nations Youth Office. We
appreciate the work of the Office of the Secretary
General’s Envoy on Youth and welcome its integration
into the United Nations Youth Office. And while we
support and commend all the good work that these
Offices have been engaged in, my delegation suggests
the following measures to enhance the outcomes of the
Youth Office and its programmes.
First, in recruiting the staff for the United Nations
Youth Office, adequate geographical representation
must be taken into account in order to have a more
inclusive and diverse workforce. Secondly, adequate

A/77/PV.94

funds must be made available for developing countries
in order to enable their youth to participate more
effectively and efficiently in youth-led and youthoriented United Nations processes. Thirdly, the
development agenda must take into account the issues
relevant to the Global South and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Fourthly, United Nations
communication and outreach must be enhanced to
increase the participation of developing countries
so that they can also avail themselves of such
opportunities as internships and events and sessions
relevant to youth. Finally, country teams may also be
facilitated in the Global South to include the youth of
those regions in briefings on the United Nations Youth
Strategy and bilateral support for the Sustainable
Development Goals.
Ms. Alameri (United Arab Emirates): Let me begin
by thanking the Secretary-General for his relevant
policy briefs, as well as his transitional report on the
United Nations Youth Office (A/77/955).
The United Arab Emirates acknowledges the
significant progress that has been made since January
2023 through the efforts of the Office of the SecretaryGeneral’s Envoy on Youth, in collaboration with other
Secretariat offices and departments, to advance the
transition process to the new United Nations Youth
Office. We are pleased with the smooth roll-out of the
two-track implementation process and look forward
to the full recruitment of staff and to finalizing the
transition of responsibilities from the Office of the
Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth to the new United
Nations Youth Office.
As we have mentioned before during the numerous
consultations on the establishment of the United
Nations Youth Office, the importance of youth in our
region cannot be understated. In the Middle East and
North Africa, 55 per cent of the population is under 30
years old, and these young people have emerged as a
catalysing force for positive change, driving towards a
more prosperous and stable future for themselves and
their communities.
Young people will have to bear the consequences of
our actions today. Our planning and decision-making
cannot afford to ignore their interests or exclude
them from the conversation. If young people are able
to meaningfully contribute to these processes, then
together we can build a better world for them and for
generations to come.

23-218109/27

A/77/PV.94

Likewise, the engagement of youth is a high priority
for my country. In February 2016, the United Arab
Emirates appointed its first Minister of Youth, who
at the time was 22 years old and one of the youngest
ministers in the world. The United Arab Emirates
also enacted a national youth strategy and continues
to engage youth in Government through its federal
youth circles.
Given the great importance placed on the
engagement of youth at all levels, we would like to
reiterate our full support to the United Nations Youth
Office, as it will promote the meaningful, inclusive and
effective engagement of youth with Member States and
throughout the work of the Organization.
Ms. Pongor (Hungary): Hungary aligns itself with
the statement made earlier by the representative of
European Union and wishes to add some remarks in its
national capacity.
First of all, we wish to thank the Secretary-General
for the report (A/77/955) and express our appreciation to
team members in the Office of the Secretary-General’s
Envoy on Youth for all their hard work and commitment
throughout the past years to raising the matter of
youth to the top of the United Nations agenda. We are
especially thankful to the United Nations Youth Envoy,
Her Excellency Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake, for her
leadership, which will leave a strong legacy on which
the new Youth Office can build.
Hungary is a strong supporter of the youth agenda
at the United Nations. We believe that the perspectives,
experiences and expertise of young people greatly
benefit the Organization. We therefore advocate the
integration of a youth perspective and the participation
of youth across all the work of the United Nations
system and intergovernmental processes. We salute the
significant progress made in United Nations country
teams and United Nations entities in that regard. The
United Nations Youth Delegate Programme is also an
important means for participation, which we wish to
see strengthened and expanded.
Hungary strongly supports the newly established
Youth Office, which should be given all necessary
resources to fulfil its important mandate. We emphasize
the importance of ensuring continuity between the work
of the Youth Envoy and that of the new Youth Office,
including by integrating the Youth Envoy’s Office
into the new Youth Office, as set out in resolution
76/306. That requires continuing to build on existing
10/27

25/07/2023

initiatives, sustaining the work undertaken thus far by
the Office of the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth,
and maintaining institutional memory.
We welcome the publication of the SecretaryGeneral’s policy brief entitled “Meaningful Youth
Engagement in Policymaking and Decision-making
Processes”, as well as the consultations organized by the
Office of the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth in its
preparation. The policy brief includes a list of important
proposals that we support and on which we stand ready
to engage in order to start their implementation. We
very much look forward to the opportunity to discuss
and take forward those proposals.
In conclusion, Hungary wishes to reiterate its
support for the Youth Office and looks forward to its
full establishment and the successful continuation of
its crucial mandate.
Mr. Greco (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement made by the representative of the European
Union. I would like to add the following remarks in my
national capacity.
Italy welcomes the decision by the General
Assembly to establish the United Nations Youth Office
as a dedicated office for youth affairs in the United
Nations Secretariat. We look forward to the role of
the Office in promoting and in strengthening youth
engagement, participation and active contribution
to the United Nations processes. We would like to
reiterate our gratitude to the Office of the SecretaryGeneral’s Envoy on Youth for the excellent work done
and to Ms. Wickramanayake for being, , through her
commitment and dedication, a source of inspiration for
so many young persons around the world.
We take note of the efforts aimed at ensuring a
smooth transition from the Office of the SecretaryGeneral’s Envoy to the new Youth Office while, at
the same time, advancing the implementation of an
agenda that has become more and more central, as we
build our common vision for the future, as the report
of the Secretary-General (A/77/955) has shown. In this
perspective, it will be crucial for the new Office to
build upon the knowledge, initiatives and institutional
memory of the Office of the Secretary-General’s Envoy
on Youth, which will help to consolidate the results
achieved and ensure their sustainability, in the spirit of
resolution 76/306.
Investing in youth means investing in our future and
in the future of the planet. We welcome the Secretary23-21810

25/07/2023

General’s policy brief entitled “Meaningful Youth
Engagement in Policymaking and Decision-making
Processes”, as well as the references to youth in the
Secretary-General’s recent policy brief on a New
Agenda for Peace. We concur with the idea that a truly
transformative agenda can be achieved only through
the effective and constructive participation of young
people and if our collective commitment to sustainable
development, peace and security, human rights and
gender equality is reaffirmed, and new solutions are
called for.
Italy is a staunch supporter of the Youth Delegate
Programme. Every year, our youth delegates join our
Permanent Mission’s team in New York and contribute
with their ideas, speeches and the joint initiatives
they undertake with their peers. We hope to support
the strengthening of the youth and peace and security
agenda and the work of the younger peacebuilders and
young leaders for peace, recalling the importance of
working at the local and community levels and with
civil society. In this spirit, we look forward to our
continued work together on youth affairs, building on
this momentum to advance United Nations work for
and with youth.
Mr. Rizal (Malaysia): At the outset, Malaysia
thanks the Secretary-General for his report (A/77/955)
on the United Nations Youth Office.
Ten months ago, the General Assembly adopted
the momentous resolution 76/306, which decided to
establish the Youth Office as a dedicated office for
youth affairs in the United Nations Secretariat. It was
a significant milestone, in line with the commitment
to listen to and work with youth, as outlined in the
declaration on the commemoration of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations (resolution 75/1),
adopted in September 2020, as well as the proposal
outlined by the Secretary-General in his report, Our
Common Agenda (A/75/982), with a view to ensuring
that the voices of youth are more systematically
integrated across the United Nations system.
We note that efforts have been under way since
early this year vis-à-vis the establishment of the Youth
Office, particularly with regard to recruitment and
transition of responsibilities. We wish to underscore
the following points as the process of establishing the
Office is still ongoing.
First, it is imperative that the Office become
operational at the earliest opportunity. In this regard,

A/77/PV.94

we note that recruitment for the 16 regular budget posts
of the Office is ongoing, that at least half of the posts,
including the post of Assistant Secretary-General, will
be occupied by the fourth quarter of 2023, and that the
full complement of 16 staff will be onboarded by the
end of the year.
Secondly, it is of paramount importance that
the recruitment of personnel for the Youth Office
take into account gender parity, as well as age
and geographic representation. This diversity in
representation would help to ensure the Office’s
effectiveness in representing the views of youth around
the world, not from a specific hemisphere.
Thirdly, it is crucial that the Youth Office
implement the mandates outlined in paragraph 3
of resolution 76/306 to advance youth engagement,
discourse, involvement and representation within
United Nations forums.
Fourthly, the Youth Office should streamline efforts
vis-à-vis youth within the United Nations system to
optimize resources and avoid duplication. The Office
must be able to utilize frameworks and resources
under other relevant United Nations entities, including
the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, the
Children’s Fund and the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women.
Lastly, the annual consideration of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the Youth Office should also serve
as an opportunity for Member States to engage in
dialogue with the Office towards advancing the youth
agenda within the United Nations. It should be an
opportunity for the Office, as well as Member States,
to offer insights and suggestions in order to improve
each other’s efforts vis-à-vis youth within the United
Nations sphere.
There is a proverb in the Malay language — “Pemuda
harapan bangsa, pemudi tiang negara”, which, loosely
translated, means, “Youth are the hope of the people
and pillar of the nation.” Accordingly, it is imperative
that we undertake efforts to empower our youth at
the national, regional and international levels, as they
will be the leaders of tomorrow. The quest for the
achievement of world peace, economic advancement
and social justice will be possible through meaningful
engagement with youth.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Malaysia’s full
commitment to the youth empowerment agenda.
Accordingly, the General Assembly may be assured of

23-2181011/27

A/77/PV.94

Malaysia’s unwavering support for the Youth Office
and other youth-empowerment initiatives within the
United Nations.
Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon) (spoke in French):
There is no longer any need to stress the importance of
youth. In the case of Cameroon, an entire framework
and programmes are dedicated to young people,
consisting of, for example, the Ministries of Youth and
Civic Education and of Employment and Vocational
Training, the National Youth Council, which happens
to be headed by a woman, the President’s Guarantee
Fund for young entrepreneurs, which is endowed with
sufficient resources, and, finally, the Youth Parliament,
which our Parliament convenes every year so that young
people can become familiar with parliamentary issues.
We do not believe that young people are mere
spearheads for the nation’s future or that they represent
its potential. Young people are already the nation
in the present, as they already occupy numerous
decision-making positions. That is why we attach
importance to the issue within the framework of the
United Nations. We are pleased that resolution 76/306
is up and running. Yesterday, we had the SecretaryGeneral’s Envoy on Youth. Today, and going forward,
we have the United Nations Youth Office, which
represents a step forward in the consideration we give
to youth in terms of the activities of the United Nations.
We can unreservedly say that, in its work, the Office
must consider all young people collectively throughout
world. As we know, the world is diverse and changing,
and the Office must reflect its diversity. Appointments
must be made based on the principle of equitable
geographical distribution. Resolution 76/306 charges
the Office with meeting the ultimate goal of advocating
the inclusion of youth in United Nations activities.
In that regard, young people are faced by several
challenges that they must overcome through their
abilities. One such challenge is the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. There
is much to be done, and young people are equipped
to do it. The hallmark traits of youth are enthusiasm,
energy, innovation, technological savvy and overall
emotional purity with regard to their intellectual and
moral integrity. They must be enabled to manifest
these qualities.
Accordingly, we also believe that young people
must be aware of the fact that they are an integral part
of the world and the countries of the world and that they
12/27

25/07/2023

must commit themselves together with their elders. At
a certain point, youth is no longer a matter of age. It is
a perennial state of mind, heart and conscience, upon
which wrinkles have no bearing. The young will also
become old and must therefore learn to be old.
The role of the young is to cause the old to age, and
the role of the old is to cause the young to age. The link
is circular between the young and the old. One sustains
the other. According to an African proverb, a seated
old person sees farther than a child standing on top of a
mountain. The Office must be aware of the fact that the
fountain of perpetual youth can also be found in old age
blessed with experience. Only a tree firmly entrenched
in the nurturing ground can reach out to conquer the
sun. Young people can reach out to conquer the sun
only if they emulate such a tree, which sinks its roots
in the nurturing ground — in the values culled by the
experience of their elders.
It is in that spirit and in that spirit alone that we
in Cameroon believe that opportunities to build our
countries and the world as a whole are to be celebrated,
with everyone — youth, adults, the elderly, women and
men — venturing forth in these endeavours, more and
more deeply, together, hand in hand.
Mr. Riva Grela (Uruguay): I do not want to delay
the much-anticipated adoption of the draft resolution
under agenda item 14, which will take place in a few
minutes. I will therefore be brief.
(spoke in Spanish)
We thank the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth
and her team for the work done both in leading the Office
and facilitating the transition process. We welcome
the report of the Secretary-General (A/2023/995) on
the United Nations Youth Office, which represents a
milestone in the journey that began with the adoption
of resolution 76/306 last year.
Uruguay would like to reiterate that the participation
of youth in the implementation of public policies is
key to creating more inclusive and equitable societies.
Young people make up a significant percentage of
the population, and therefore their perspectives,
needs and aspirations must be taken into account in
Government decision-making. Involving young people
in that process not only empowers them as responsible
citizens, but also fosters the creation of more effective
and relevant policies to address the challenges facing
present and future generations.
23-21810

25/07/2023

Youth participation in the implementation of public
policies is also essential to strengthen democracy by
allowing them to have an active voice in setting the
political agenda and evaluating Government strategies.
This approach promotes a greater sense of ownership and
civic responsibility among young people. In addition,
their participation contributes to the identification of
innovative and creative solutions to complex problems
facing society.
We believe that the creation of the Youth Office
will provide us with a new opportunity to strengthen
the role of young people in policy implementation. But
countries must work towards the genuine representation
of young people in their vision, prioritizing their own
agenda and avoiding practices whereby young people
are simply invited to have a say on the agenda of adults.
Uruguay has taken steps forward in the search
for concrete systems to help its young people find
their voice. To that end, we are taking a three-pronged
approach of, first, inviting young people into the
domain of State participation; secondly, of bringing the
State to those places where young people are already
present, such as educational, social and sports centres
and approaching them; and thirdly, making use of data
with the utmost respect for the right to privacy but with
the aim of understanding the trends in young people’s
lives and needs. Only with a holistic and integral vision
will we be able to get closer to the vision of our young
people and their views on current problems. That is
why we need investment and stable and predictable
public policies.
We do not expect the United Nations Youth Office
to solve all the problems facing the world, but we do
expect the Office to address those challenges with
boldness, tenacity, dedication and commitment — the
same principles that guide both the youth movement
and the actions of the United Nations. That can serve as
an example of what needs to be changed and reformed
at this moment in time.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, the youth
population is close to 160 million people. In several
countries of the region, the proportion of young people
will continue to increase significantly. In addition to
the persistent structural gaps that exist among youth,
we would also highlight inequalities in education and
in the development of labour skills. Those inequalities
require urgent solutions if we are to move forward on
the path to sustainability with equality.

A/77/PV.94

There is no doubt that young people can provide
innovative and extremely valuable solutions to address
the great challenges facing our region arising from the
need to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. In that regard, we stress the importance
of Latin America’s voice being represented in our
Youth Office, in accordance with the aforementioned
principle of equitable geographic inclusion.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
The Assembly has thus concluded its stage of its
consideration of agenda item 134.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolution (A/77/L.89)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco to introduce draft resolution
A/77/L.89.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): It is my
pleasure to introduce to the Assembly draft resolution
A/77/L.89, entitled “Promoting interreligious and
intercultural dialogue and tolerance in countering hate
speech”. The draft resolution is a continuation of the
historic resolution 73/328, the first of its kind on hate
speech adopted in 2019, and the subsequent resolution
75/309, which in 2021 proclaimed 18 June of each year
as the International Day for Countering Hate Speech.
The new text, presented under agenda item 14,
is aimed primarily at strengthening our collective
commitment to promoting a culture of peace and
non-violence for the good of humankind and future
generations, and to reiterate the importance and
obligation of collectively combating hate speech in all
its forms and manifestations. This matter of priority is
all the more pressing, given that recent months have
been marked by an exponential exacerbation and
alarming rise in hate speech and intolerance.
In accordance with the instructions of His Majesty
King Mohammed VI, Commander of the Faithful,
the Kingdom of Morocco became aware at an early
stage of the danger of hate speech conveyed by violent
extremism, obscurantism and populism, as well as
racism of all kinds. Therefore, in his royal address
delivered at the opening ceremony of the ninth Global
Forum of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations,

23-2181013/27

A/77/PV.94

held in Fez in November 2022, His Majesty the
King stressed:
“Never before has our civilization been so
exposed; never before has our ‘living together’
come under such threat on a daily basis; rarely
has the ‘other’ been perceived with such a level
of suspicion or used to stir up fear and foment
hatred. Radical positions are permeating the debate
and cancelling out moderate voices; religions are
too often manipulated, when they are not simply
stigmatized. Populism is rocking societies and
inventing questions without answering them, except
to brandish migration as a scarecrow or an electoral
weapon and to turn migrants into scapegoats”.
In order to face up to the many dangers, the
Sovereign has called for a vision of solidarity in the
world. In his royal address to the participants of the
Parliamentary Conference on Interfaith Dialogue
under the theme of “Working together for our common
future”, which was held in Marrakech in June 2023, His
Majesty the King emphasized:
“[T]he bleak picture reflected by the conflict
of beliefs in the world today must not obscure a
brighter reality, nor the bold initiatives launched to
strengthen communication and interaction between
the components of the international community
and followers of different faiths and to help to
cultivate in everyone a spirit of tolerance, a climate
of understanding and the ideal of coexistence”.
In the light of that message of peace, tolerance and
solidarity, this draft resolution stems from the humanist
vision of human and inter-State relations based on
religious coexistence and intercultural harmony. It is
the result of three years of substantial negotiations and
several bilateral discussions over the past two months.
To that end, the Moroccan facilitator has adopted a
transparent, open and inclusive approach with the aim
of uniting all those of goodwill around the noble and
humanist cause of this draft resolution.
The current text that I have the honour of presenting
to the Assembly draws on its strength and reaffirms
that hate speech and all forms of intolerance associated
with it could contribute to the outbreak, intensification
and recurrence of conflicts, while also undermining
initiatives to fight against the root causes of conflict and
prevent and resolve conflict, as well as efforts aimed at
reconciliation, reconstruction and peacebuilding.
14/27

25/07/2023

Furthermore, the draft resolution notes with
deep concern the increasing number of cases of
discrimination, intolerance and violence targeting
members of the many religious communities, including
cases motivated by Islamophobia, antisemitism and
Christianophobia, as well as acts of violence motivated
by discrimination against persons belonging to religious
minorities. In addition, the text strongly deplores all
violent acts singling out people because of their religion
or beliefs and all those targeting religious symbols,
holy books, homes, businesses, property, schools,
cultural centres or places of worship, in violation of
international law.
Moreover, the draft resolution sets out three
specific actions of multilateral engagement, for which
the United Nations will act as a catalyst, to strengthen
our collective efforts to counter hate speech, racism
and discrimination.
First, we must commit to elaborating an
intergovernmentally agreed definition of hate speech
that can help in countering it, in accordance with
international law.
Secondly, it requests the Secretary-General to
convene, in 2025, a global conference on promoting
interreligious and intercultural dialogue and tolerance
in countering hate speech.
Thirdly, it urges Member States and social media
companies to take active measures to counter hate
speech and address its increasing spread and promote
users’ access to effective reporting channels, in a
manner consistent with international human rights law.
I will conclude by expressing the heartfelt gratitude
of the delegation of Morocco to all delegations that,
throughout the negotiation process, contributed to the
enrichment of the draft resolution in a constructive
fashion. I also wish to warmly thank the delegations
that have already co-sponsored this initiative. I am
counting on the support and the co-sponsorship of other
delegations to ensure that the draft resolution can be
adopted by consensus.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/77/L.89.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
23-21810

25/07/2023

A/77/L.89 and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Afghanistan,
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Burundi, Cameroon, Chad, China, Côte
d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
the Gambia, Guatemala, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New
Guinea, the Philippines, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
the Sudan, Surinam, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Türkiye,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Yemen
and Zimbabwe.
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote before the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
I give the floor to the representative of Spain to
introduce a draft oral amendment.
Ms. Jimenez de la Hoz (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by highlighting that the European
Union supports all efforts to promote tolerance and
respect for cultural diversity and religious pluralism.
We recognize that interreligious, interfaith and
intercultural dialogue plays a positive role in countering
hate and incitement to violence.
With regard to draft resolution A/77/L.89, our
key concern is focused on the thirteenth preambular
paragraph and the reference to acts of violence against
religious symbols and holy books as a violation of
international law. While we agree that they are deeply
offensive and disrespectful, those are not violations
of international law. Freedom of religion and belief is,
like all other human rights, an individual right that can
be exercised along with others. It does not protect a
religion or belief as such or its symbols, nor does it ban
criticism of religions or beliefs.
For those reasons, on behalf of the European
Union, we propose the following draft oral amendment.
In the thirteenth preambular paragraph, we request the
elimination of the last part, specifically the concrete
reference to “in violation of international law”. The rest
of the paragraph would remain the same.
Mr. Croker (United Kingdom): I would just like
to support the draft oral amendment proposed by the
European Union.

A/77/PV.94

While we appreciate efforts to try to find consensus
on draft resolution A/77/L.89, we regret that the
compromise proposals suggested have not been taken
on board. During negotiations, we were clear that the
language of the thirteenth preambular paragraph that
suggests that acts of violence against religious books
and symbols are in contravention of international law is
factually inaccurate.
We also feel that the thirteenth preambular
paragraph as drafted does not strike the right balance
between freedom of expression and freedom of religion
and belief, and therefore, given that our concerns
have not been addressed, we will be supporting
the draft oral amendment.
I will make a further statement later, but just to
reassure colleagues, we remain committed to the freedom
of religion and belief and the freedom expression.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/77/L89, entitled “Promoting interreligious
and intercultural dialogue and tolerance in countering
hate speech”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The present oral
statement is made in the context of rule 153 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly. It has been
distributed to Member States.
Under the terms of operative paragraph 14 of the
draft resolution, the General Assembly would request the
United Nations Secretary-General to convene, within
existing resources, in the year 2025, a global conference
on promoting interreligious and intercultural dialogue
and tolerance in countering hate speech that involves
United Nations entities, Member States, political
figures, religious leaders, faith-based organizations,
media, civil society and other relevant stakeholders.
The activities referred to in operative paragraph
14 of the draft resolution would entail new activities
in 2024 and 2025 related to the convening of a
global conference on promoting interreligious and
intercultural dialogue and tolerance in countering
hate speech for the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, as well as additional conference

23-2181015/27

A/77/PV.94

servicing workload for the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management.
The activities would include the planning,
organizing and servicing, including interpretation
services, of a one-day conference in Geneva, as well as
travel for 10 participants to attend the conference.
In accordance with established practice, the date
of the conference would be determined in consultation
with the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management (DGACM) in Geneva. Should
the General Assembly adopt the draft resolution on
promoting interreligious and intercultural dialogue and
tolerance in countering hate speech, the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, DGACM and
any other office involved will make maximum efforts
to prepare, organize and service the conference to the
extent it can do so within existing resources.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, reference is made
to operative paragraph 11 of resolution 69/250 and
subsequent resolutions, the most recent of which is
resolution 76/237, in which the Assembly invited
Member States to include in new legislative mandates
adequate information on the modalities for the
organization of conferences or meetings.
The President: I call on the representative
of Morocco on a point of order.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
requested the floor to respond to the statement made
by our colleague from Spain, who spoke on behalf of
the countries of the European Union and the United
Kingdom, seeking to orally amend the draft thirteenth
preambular paragraph of draft resolution A/77/L.89.
I would first state that we are a bit surprised
and very sorry that this draft oral amendment was
introduced, because the draft preambular paragraph in
question, with its reference to international law, does
not add anything new.
I would remind the Assembly that the language
of the draft thirteenth preambular paragraph is taken
verbatim from the ninth preambular paragraph of
resolution 73/328 and the tenth preambular paragraph
of resolution 75/309. Indeed, the phrase “in violation
of international law” was included in both of those
resolutions, which were on hate speech. However, with
the addition of the reference to religious symbols and
holy books, the promoters of the draft oral amendment
now do not want it to refer to international law.
16/27

25/07/2023

I would also note that the reference to religious
symbols and holy books was not included in the zero
draft of draft resolution L.89. We did not want to
make a reference to them, but developments in some
countries forced the Arab and Muslim worlds to react.
Individuals were burning copies of the Qur’an, the holy
book of 2 billion Muslims, in front of embassies. The
latest such act took place this morning. These acts are
repeated approximately every two to three days, as if
the world needed them. Apparently, the reactions of our
States, with communiqués and declarations, and even
the reactions of those countries that do not want this
draft paragraph to be retained, have not been enough
to stop those who perpetrate these acts of desecration
and attacks on religious symbols and holy books. In this
regard, we are talking about holy books in the plural. We
are not just talking about the Qur’an, but also the Torah
and the Gospels. We defend them all. We all have an
obligation to respect the religious sentiments of others.
Burning a holy book is not freedom of expression;
it is an attack on people’s religious dignity. As I said
earlier, it is an attack on the faith of billions of human
beings. As Rousseau once said, one person’s freedom
ends where another’s begins. An attack on religious or
canonical freedom is a denial of the religion of others.
It denies the other faith. An attack or desecration or
deprivation of a religion’s holy book is a denial of that
religion — and a negation of all those who believe in
or practice that religion. It is therefore inappropriate
to consider any such acts to be a form of freedom of
expression. I would like to recall that, a few years ago,
when terrorists were trying to distribute instruction
manuals for building artisanal bombs and other
explosive devices for suicide bombers, we said we
had to be careful and ban that activity, even though
we had said that freedom of expression was an issue.
It took the emergence of Da’esh, it took a war, it took
the destruction of a country, it took thousands of
innocent people losing their lives for this form of socalled freedom of expression — to be able to say or
write whatever you want — to be questioned. Today, as
long as the expression does not affect or harm others,
it is protected by freedom of expression, but now these
how-to guides on bombs and explosive devices are
forbidden. Even terrorist thought or travelling with or
talking to a terrorist is now banned under international
law. It took us nearly 15 years to get to that point. Will
it also take 15 or 20 more years of deaths of innocent
victims for us to finally say that burning holy texts is
not covered by freedom of expression?
23-21810

25/07/2023

I do not want to keep hammering away, but I would
like to repeat that we are sorry to see the proposed
draft oral amendment, which we vigorously reject.
We would like to ask all of those who believe in
coexistence among religions, who defend the freedom
of religion, who oppose Islamophobia, antisemitism,
attacks against Christianity, and any form of racism
or discrimination based on colour, ethnicity or place
of origin, or on gender, who are moved by the spirit of
living in harmony with others and the desire to preserve
our humanity, which has suffered so much and which is
facing so many other challenges — to vote against the
proposed draft oral amendment. It is my hope that, after
voting on the proposed draft oral amendment, we will
then together — collectively — vote in favour of draft
resolution A/77/L.89.
As I said previously, Morocco initiated this draft
resolution to be part of a continuum of resolutions
on hate speech. We are very proud of our initiative,
which has been three years in the making, but when,
once again, we talk about holy scriptures, we are not
defending our Qur’an: we are defending the holy books
of all the States Members of the United Nations present
in this Hall. It is a moral duty, a political duty. I think it
is fair to say that all of our religions call for coexistence
and acceptance of the other. As I stated, accepting
for someone to burn the books of another religion is
simply a rejection, denial and condemnation of the
other. The world needs hope, coexistence, tolerance,
understanding and, above all, solidarity in the face
of fascism, extremism, populism and all who seek to
undermine harmony and coexistence among people,
religions, cultures and civilizations.
In conclusion, this is an appeal to all those who
have supported us thus far and, we hope, all others, to
vote against this draft oral amendment, which removes
an important element from the thirteenth preambular
paragraph of draft resolution A/77/L.89.
The President: The representative of Spain has
proposed a draft oral amendment to draft resolution
A/77/L.89.
In accordance with rule 90 of the rules of procedure,
the Assembly will first take a decision on the draft oral
amendment submitted by the representative of Spain.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat to read out the text of the thirteenth
preambular paragraph as it would stand according to
the oral proposal by Spain.

A/77/PV.94

Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The representative of
Spain has requested the deletion of the last five words
in the thirteenth preambular paragraph, namely “in
violation of international law”. The paragraph would
then read as follows:
“Strongly deploring all acts of violence against
persons on the basis of their religion or belief,
as well as any such acts directed against their
religious symbols, holy books, homes, businesses,
properties, schools, cultural centres or places of
worship, as well as all attacks on and in religious
places, sites and shrines”.
The President: The Assembly will now proceed to
take a decision on the draft oral amendment.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Cambodia, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta,
Monaco,
Montenegro,
Netherlands
(Kingdom of the), Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Against:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda,
Argentina,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon,
Chad, China, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea,
Gambia, Guatemala, Guyana, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New
Guinea, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, South Africa, Sudan,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Tunisia, Türkiye, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, Uzbekistan, Yemen, Zimbabwe

23-2181017/27

A/77/PV.94

25/07/2023

Abstaining:
Australia, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Georgia, Kenya, Madagascar, Mexico,
Mozambique, Nepal, New Zealand, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Republic of Korea, Togo, Uruguay
The drafat oral amendment to draft resolution
A/77/L.89 was rejected by 44 votes to 62, with
24 abstentions.
The President: We shall now proceed to take a
decision on draft resolution A/77/L.89.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
adopt draft resolution A/77/L.89?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 77/318).

A/77/L.89

was

adopted

The President: Before giving floor to speakers in
explanation of vote or position after the voting, may
I remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Bauwens (Belgium): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
Let me start by saying that the EU supports all
efforts to promote tolerance and respect for cultural
diversity and religious pluralism. We recognize that
interreligious, interfaith and intercultural dialogue
plays a positive role in combating hatred, incitement
and violence.
Let me also recall that the EU made its position
clear at the urgent debate in the 12 July Human Rights
Council — burning a book that is regarded as holy
by many, is offensive, disrespectful and a clear act
of provocation.
The EU opposes all forms of incitement to
violence or hatred and hate speech, online and offline,
but we also stand for the right to freedom of opinion
and expression. In compliance with article 20 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, EU
member States prohibit any advocacy of national, racial
or religious hatred that might constitute incitement to
discrimination, hostility or violence.
Striking a balance between the enjoyment of
freedom of expression and the protection of the right
18/27

to freedom of religion or belief has been a difficult
topic of discussion within the United Nations for
decades. In 2011, a delicate balance was found, which
allowed us to pursue a consensual approach through
Human Rights Council resolution 16/18, which, in
turn, led to important achievements such as the Rabat
Plan of Action, the Istanbul Process for Combating
Intolerance, Discrimination and Incitement to Hatred
and/or Violence on the Basis of Religion or Belief and
the Beirut Declaration on Faith for Rights. All these
documents share the premise that the threshold for
unlawful incitement must be set high, based on an
analysis of the context, and that limitations of freedom
of expression must remain the exception.
Hate speech is a cross-cutting phenomenon and, as
such, needs to be addressed through a comprehensive
approach, tackling all aspects and grounds of
discrimination and violence. We regret that the draft
before us focuses on hate speech in the limited context
of religious hatred. We appreciate that the facilitator,
Morocco, organized informal consultations, in which
the EU engaged constructively. The EU made several
proposals aimed at improving the text, and we are
disappointed to see that there were not all taken on
board. We also regret that there was no willingness to
allow for more time to continue the negotiations.
Regrettably, the text in front of us falls short
of fully meeting the requirements of international
human rights law. One key concern is the thirteenth
preambular paragraph and the references to violent acts
against religious symbols and holy books as a violation
of international law. While we agree that it is deeply
offensive and disrespectful, it is not a violation of
international law. Freedom of religion or belief, like all
other human rights, is an individual right that can be
exercised in community with others. It does not protect
a religion or belief, as such, or its symbols, nor does it
prohibit the criticism of religions or beliefs.
For these reasons, the EU had no other choice than
to propose a draft oral amendment to the thirteenth
preambular paragraph, whereby we call for the deletion
of the phrase “in violation of international law”. For
those reasons, the EU strongly disassociates itself from
the last part of the thirteenth preambular paragraph.
With those clarifications, the EU joined consensus,
despite our reservations.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): Promoting interreligious
and intercultural dialogue and tolerance in countering
hate speech is crucial to achieve a climate of mutual
23-21810

25/07/2023

respect and understanding, peaceful coexistence and
cooperation. No act of violence, based on any religion
or belief, can be tolerated or justified in any case.
Human rights and fundamental freedoms must
be universally protected and promoted. At the centre
of the Polish legal systems lies the recognition of
the inalienable dignity of every human being, both
believers and non-believers. Respect for human
dignity, in our tradition, is not at odds with freedoms
in public life. Those freedoms allow for the acceptance
of, and respect for, differences among religions and
for dialogue in many dimensions — artistic, scientific
and spiritual — and regarding key values of various
religions. Believers and non-believers alike can
participate in that dialogue.
Having led the initiative to declare the International
Day Commemorating the Victims of Acts of Violence
Based on Religion or Belief, Poland calls for efforts to
protect individuals and their dignity to be intensified.
We strongly condemn all acts of discrimination or
violence against individuals based on their religion or
belief. Dialogue and education can be powerful tools in
addressing and facing challenges caused by hate speech,
both online and offline. In that context, we underline
the need to counter the spread of disinformation and
misinformation. We believe that interreligious and
intercultural dialogue is essential to promote social
cohesion, peace and development.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that our efforts on a
global and local level must be grounded in human rights
and international human rights law. Only by acting
together and strengthening our partnership will it be
possible to promote the values of respect, tolerance,
non-discrimination, pluralism and freedom of opinion
and expression and to counter hate speech narratives.
Ms. Pongor (Hungary): Hungary aligns itself
with the statement made on behalf of the European
Union and wishes to add the following remarks in its
national capacity.
Hungary is firmly committed to promoting
interreligious and intercultural dialogue and tolerance
with a view to countering hate speech, incitement and
violence, and we support all efforts in that regard. In
line with article 20 of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, any advocacy of national,
racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to
discrimination, hostility or violence shall be prohibited
by law. Certain violent acts referred to in resolution

A/77/PV.94

77/318, albeit deeply offensive and disrespectful, may
not be a violation of international law.
At the same time, Hungarian law contains very clear
provisions on such acts. According to our criminal code,
a person destroying or damaging an object of religious
worship is guilty of vandalism and shall be punished
by imprisonment for up to three years. Furthermore,
our criminal code sanctions antisocial conduct capable
of causing alarm in members of national, ethnic, racial
or religious groups by targeting persons belonging
to those respective groups. Our legal system also
contains provisions on incitement against a community,
sanctioning, among other things, incitement to violence
or hatred against a religious group or a member of such
a group. Hungary is also deeply committed to the right
to freedom of religion or belief, which can be exercised
individually or in community with others. It is in that
spirit that we joined consensus on the resolution.
Mr. Al Hassan (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): I deliver
this statement on behalf of the delegation of my country,
the Sultanate of Oman.
I wish to begin by saying that this is an important
day in United Nations history, with the achievement of
an international consensus in support of the resolution
77/318, just adopted. By adopting the resolution on this
important occasion, the Organization has assumed full
responsibility. My country, the Sultanate of Oman, was
one of the sponsors of the resolution, introduced under
agenda item 14, and voted in favour of it. We thank the
delegation of the Kingdom of Morocco for continuing
to sponsor the resolution and for the thoughts, contents
and recommendations contained therein.
We believe that a culture of peace must be built
on mutual respect and that sacred symbols must not
be attacked. We stress that doing so is a form of hate
speech that must not be allowed in this Organization.
In our view, burning the holy books of any religion or
faith is harmful, improper and irresponsible behaviour
that is indicative of hatred and cannot be interpreted as
acceptable under any pretext. Its perpetrators must be
held accountable. We call for an end to such acts, which
harm us all and do not support mutual understanding
and coexistence among peoples.
In recent years, we have noticed the steady rise of
Islamophobia in many countries, leading to increased
acts of hatred associated with direct and indirect
violence. My country, the Sultanate of Oman, supports
coexistence, mutual understanding and respect. We call

23-2181019/27

A/77/PV.94

for putting an end to the burning of holy books of any
religion, including the Holy Qur’an, as such acts do not
contribute to achieving a world free of hatred.
We also reject the politicization of this issue,
namely, attacks on beliefs and religions, as well as
their followers. Such acts constitute a violation of
international law and of the lofty and noble principles
upon which this Organization has been founded. Such
acts cannot be justified under any pretext, including
the freedom of expression. We call upon the SecretaryGeneral to monitor such phenomena of hatred and to
make available the necessary financial resources to
report on them in future reports. We in this Organization
are striving to build bridges of cooperation and mutual
understanding, not the contrary. That is our message.
We welcome the statement delivered by the
representative of the European Union concerning its
condemnation of such acts. We consider such acts to
be contrary to international law and the fundamental,
noble and lofty principles on which this Organization
was founded.
Ms. Korac (United States of America): The United
States strongly condemns acts of hate and continues
to underscore the harm they can cause to individuals.
We expressed our deep concern regarding the 28 June
desecration of the Holy Qur’an, and we repeat those
sentiments again today. The United States categorically
calls out anti-Muslim hatred whenever it occurs. As
President Biden stated in May,
“confronting Islamophobia is a priority for my
Administration. Standing up against anti-Muslim
hate is essential to who we are as a country founded
on freedom and justice for all”.
We find the act of desecrating any religious text
to be abhorrent, and we stand in solidarity with our
partners in the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC) and with all people wishing to live their lives
in accordance with their religious identities or beliefs
without discrimination. Twenty-five years ago, President
Clinton signed the International Religious Freedom Act
into law. At that time, he noted that freedom of religion
was a bedrock American belief, saying,
“when we promote religious freedom, we also
promote freedom of expression, conscience and
association and other human rights”.
We are proud of our leadership role in promoting the
values enshrined in Human Rights Council resolution
20/27

25/07/2023

16/18, which carefully navigates the relationship between
freedom of religion or belief and freedom of expression
and was negotiated at senior levels with members of
the OIC and adopted by consensus in 2011. Prior to that
watershed moment, some perceived those two rights to
be in conflict. The resolution made clear that they are
in fact complementary. That remains our approach to
this issue, and we hope the international community
continues to reaffirm that approach. Regarding today’s
resolution 77/318, we appreciate Morocco’s leadership
and recognize the critical importance of this topic.
While we support the resolution, we continue to have
concerns that it does not represent the range of views
in this organ on countering hate speech in line with
respect for human rights.
First, we regret that the resolution cited language
from Security Council resolution 2686 (2023) that
includes acts of extremism without a clear link to
violence. Human rights and fundamental freedoms are
under assault, including by Governments seeking to
infringe on those rights under the cover of combating
extremism. It is of the utmost priority for the United
States not to grant license to States to repress dissenting
views under the pretext of countering extremism or
maintaining peace or societal harmony. For years, the
United Nations has appropriately focused on addressing
violent extremism, including in the Secretary-General’s
Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism and in
the existing commitments Member States have made
to prevent and counter violent extremism. Opinions
and beliefs must be protected, even if characterized
as extreme.
With regard to operative paragraph 2, we note
that the term “hate speech” generally encompasses
a wide breadth of speech, most of which is protected
by freedom of expression. By expressing support for
countering hate speech, we are in no way supporting
efforts to criminalize such speech. Any effort to counter
hate speech must be carried out in a manner consistent
with respect for human rights, including the freedom
of expression.
Finally, the United States has concerns about
the approach that the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations has taken with respect to freedom of
expression, including during the forum held in Fez
in November 2022. In particular, the Fez declaration
purports to recognize moderation as a societal value.
Unfortunately, many Governments touting the virtues
of moderation have used the term as a justification to
23-21810

25/07/2023

bar dissent and place undue legal limits on expression
and, in particular, religious expression. The United
States joins others in disassociating from the thirteenth
preambular paragraph, given that the draft oral
amendment to correct the language therein was not
adopted today. Despite those concerns, the United States
did ultimately join the consensus today on resolution
77/318, as we remain committed to working with the
international community to promote tolerance and
respect for all human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Ms. Kasahara (Japan): My delegation would like
to make a brief explanation of vote. Japan is a staunch
supporter of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
which underpin the values contained in the promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue and tolerance
in countering hate speech. In the light of those values,
Japan joined the consensus on resolution 77/318.
However, my delegation regrets the lack of dialogue
and the manner in which the resolution was facilitated.
Japan is always ready to engage constructively in the
consultative process and is determined to promote
interreligious and intercultural dialogue to counter
hate speech.
Ms. Rizk: (Egypt): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate the Kingdom of Morocco and its
delegation and to thank them for their efforts in leading
the negotiations on this important and timely resolution
(resolution 77/318) in good faith and in an attempt to
arrive at consensus at an early stage.
My delegation supports the resolution adopted
today. It not only addresses the linkage between
interreligious and intercultural dialogue in countering
hate speech but is also a very timely resolution. In
recent months, the global community has witnessed
a recurrence and upsurge in acts of incitement and
violence driven by hatred against Islam and its
followers — namely, Islamophobia. Just today, the
Egyptian embassy in Denmark witnessed another
incident of burning the Holy Qur’an, which Muslims
consider as part of their identity. That and previous
heinous acts not only constitute an affront to the
feelings of almost 2 billion Muslims around the globe,
but also constitute a violation of the rights of Muslim
communities in the countries in which such acts occur,
in particular the right to freedom of religion or belief.
Such acts cannot and should not be justified under the
guise of freedom of expression.
As we heard earlier in the interventions by our
fellow Member States, article 20 of the International

A/77/PV.94

Covenant on Civil and Political Rights clearly states
that any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred
that constitutes incitement, hostility or violence shall
be prohibited by law. In that connection, my delegation
emphasizes that the latest acts of burning the Holy
Qur’an or any other attacks on holy books is indeed
a violation and a manifestation of anti-Muslim and
anti-religious hatred and sentiment. They are indeed
acts of incitement, hostility and violence that should be
prohibited by law — and they take place in countries
that claim that the establishment and enforcement of the
rule of law is the basic tenet of human rights and modern
democracy. Accordingly, such countries are required
by their obligations under international human rights
law, as well as their own claimed values of democracy
and human rights, to establish in their legal systems
the means and the provisions to prevent and establish
accountability for such acts. No statement or oral
amendment, be it hostile or not, would absolve Member
States from their legal obligations in that regard.
Accordingly, Egypt voted against the draft oral
amendment proposed in the Hall, but co-sponsored and
voted in favour of resolution 77/318.
Mr. Akbulut (Türkiye): We thank Morocco for its
work as facilitator and for its efforts to make resolution
77/318 a document that reflects the current realities.
Today hate crimes, racism and xenophobia
have reached unprecedented levels. Unfortunately,
Islamophobia is among the most common forms of
hatred and racism. Muslims increasingly face systemic
practices of denial of freedom of religion, hate crimes
and various manifestations of Islamophobia. As a
result, the desecration of the Holy Qur’an and mosques
and the violation of freedom of religion are on the
rise. The despicable attacks perpetrated by anti-Islam
instigators in Europe against the Holy Qur’an are
blatant displays of hatred, intolerance, xenophobia and
discrimination. We strongly condemn those repeated
vile attacks. Allowing those abhorrent acts can never
be justified under the pretext of freedom of expression.
On the contrary, they are flagrant violations and indeed
abuses of democratic freedoms and basic rights. Sacred
values and symbols should be free from the reach of
provocateurs, fanatics and opportunists. We call on all
countries and the United Nations to take concrete steps
against the deplorable acts of violence, discrimination
and intolerance based on religion, particularly the
increasing manifestations of Islamophobia.

23-2181021/27

A/77/PV.94

The General Assembly’s designation of 15 March
as the International Day to Combat Islamophobia was
a landmark step. Earlier this month, on 12 July, Human
Rights Council resolution 53/1 was adopted, defining
attacks on the Holy Qur’an as religious hatred. We would
like to highlight the growing role of the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations in preventing and ending hate
speech through its mandate, which includes, among
others, the promotion of mutual understanding among
different cultures and religions. The Alliance, its
programmes and initiatives, such as the #SpreadNoHate
initiative, aim to alleviate tensions among and within
societies with a view to creating a basis for harmonious
and peaceful coexistence. Türkiye will continue its
firm support for all international efforts to eliminate
that scourge, which threatens the common values that
bind us together.
Mr. Pedroza (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
condemns all incidents of intolerance, discrimination
and violence against people based on their religion
or beliefs in any region of the world. Peru therefore
supported the adoption of resolution 77/318. We need to
combat religious intolerance and ensure respect for the
rights of all people, regardless of borders.
In accordance with the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights, States have the duty to
prohibit any advocacy of national, religious or racial
hate that constitutes incitement to discrimination,
hostility or violence. Everybody has the right to freedom
of thought, conscience, religion and belief — rights that
continue to be the foundation of democratic, pluralistic
and inclusive societies.
Finally, we would like to recall that the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, a historic milestone that
brings together peoples and nations, proclaims that
global freedom, justice and peace are rooted in the
recognition of the intrinsic dignity and the equal and
inalienable rights of all.
Mr. Chaudhary (Pakistan): My delegation wishes
to express its profound satisfaction about the adoption
of resolution 77/318.
The text adopted today resonates with Human
Rights Council resolution 53/1, on religious hatred,
adopted recently in Geneva. That landmark resolution,
presented by Pakistan on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, condemned all advocacy and
manifestations of religious hatred, including recent
public and premeditated acts that have desecrated
22/27

25/07/2023

the Holy Qur’an. The resolution called for countries
to adopt laws enabling them to bring to justice those
responsible for such acts.
Islamophobia is on the rise, with repeated incidents
of desecration of the Holy Qur’an. Those acts are
not just a provocation of the feelings of more than
2 billion Muslims, but are also a step to sabotage
interfaith harmony and peace. Such incidents are also
a manifestation of racial hatred and xenophobia, and
the absence of preventive legal deterrence, inaction
and shying away from speaking out against those acts
encourages further incitement to hatred and violence.
We therefore strongly echo the views of those who have
expressed their support for today’s resolution, including
the thirteenth preambular paragraph.
Finally, my delegation wishes to note that the
text adopted today does not seek to curtail the right
to free speech but tries to underline the special duties
and responsibilities of the international community to
safeguard interfaith peace and harmony.
Ms. Wegter (Denmark): I am pleased to deliver
this explanation of vote on behalf of the Nordic
countries — Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and,
my own country, Denmark.
The Nordic countries would like to underline that
we oppose all forms of incitement to violence or hatred
and hate speech, both online and offline. In compliance
with article 20 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, we prohibit advocacy of national
racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to
discrimination, hostility or violence. We support efforts
aimed at promoting tolerance and respect for cultural
diversity and religious pluralism. We recognize that
interreligious, interfaith and intercultural dialogue
play positive roles in combating hatred, incitement and
violence. We also staunchly support the right to freedom
of thought, conscience and religion for all individuals,
including the right to manifest, observe and practise a
religion or belief.
Burning the Qur’an or any other holy book is
offensive, disrespectful and a clear act of provocation.
We condemn such acts and strongly disassociate
ourselves from them. They are disgraceful and shameful,
disrespect the religion of others, hurt many people and
create divisions among various religions and cultures.
Yet we also stand for the right to freedom of opinion
and expression, which constitutes an essential pillar of
free, open democracies. In that regard, we emphasize
23-21810

25/07/2023

the need to carefully distinguish between acts that are
offensive and morally reprehensible, yet legal, and acts
that constitute incitement to discrimination, hostility or
violence and are, therefore, unlawful.
Fortunately, we have several international standards
and a rich normative framework from which to draw
when making that often very difficult distinction. They
include Human Rights Council resolution 16/18, the
Rabat Plan of Action, the Istanbul Process framework
and the Beirut Declaration on Faith for Rights. We
invite all to make use of that framework in a spirit of
cooperation and mutual respect. This is the time to stand
together across religious and political beliefs. In doing
so, we demonstrate to the few individuals responsible
that our unity will not be challenged by their senseless
and disgraceful provocations.
As mentioned by the representative of the European
Union, we regret the fact that resolution 77/318
focuses only on hate speech in the context of religious
hatred, rather than as a cross-cutting phenomenon.
We appreciate the fact that the facilitator organized
informal consultations on those very important issues,
but regret that there was insufficient time to reach a
fully consensus-based outcome, which, indeed, would
have been preferable.
A key concern is the thirteenth preambular
paragraph and the reference to violent acts against
religious symbols and holy books as a violation of
international law. While we agree that those acts are
deeply offensive and disrespectful, they are not a
violation of international law. Freedom of religion or
belief is, like all other human rights, an individual right.
It does not protect religion or religious symbols as such,
nor does it prohibit the criticism of religions or belief.
For those reasons, the Nordics disassociate themselves
from the reference to a violation of international law
in the thirteenth preambular paragraph. With that
clarification, the Nordic States join the consensus.
Ms. Zoghbi (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank the Kingdom of Morocco
for introducing resolution 77/318, entitled “Promoting
interreligious and intercultural dialogue and tolerance
in countering hate speech”. We supported the resolution,
as Lebanon is a symbol of coexistence among religions
and cultures.
In the light of the recent acts of desecration of
the Holy Qur’an, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
Emigrants of Lebanon issued a statement, in which

A/77/PV.94

it stressed that the Lebanese people denounce and
condemn the desecration, once again, of the Holy
Qur’an, which is an ongoing violation of the feelings
and dignity of Muslims. We have called for appropriate
measures to be taken to put an end to actions that
exacerbate feelings of hatred, racism in all its forms,
incitement to violence and denigration of religion.
In conclusion, Lebanon is an example of religious
and cultural pluralism, as well as a source of diversity,
richness and coexistence. It sends a message of tolerance
and fraternity to peoples of all walks of life.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): Mexico thanks Morocco for its work
in facilitating resolution 77/318, on promoting
interreligious and intercultural dialogue in countering
hate speech. We believe that the text is a milestone
in promoting the rights and development of peoples
and a step towards the elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and other forms of
intolerance. We also thank the facilitator for including
in the resolution some of the suggestions made by
our delegation.
Mexico’s position is clear. We are strongly opposed
to any act of discrimination, intolerance or violence
directed at any individual because of their religion or
belief. We specifically condemn the recent burning
of the Qur’an, which is an attack on people’s dignity
and human rights. In a world in which violence is
a latent threat, we must work hard to put an end to
discrimination based on religion or of any other sort.
Regrettably, for my country, Mexico, the resolution is
limited in scope as it does not include protection for all
people, based on the many factors of identity. Often,
hate speech becomes language that reflects xenophobia
and discrimination directed at migrants and refugees.
Similarly, violence experienced by people of various
sexual orientations or gender identities is encouraged
through derogatory language, rooted in intolerance
and hate.
All people, regardless of their identity, can be the
target of hate speech. For that reason, Mexico believes
that the resolution should have a broad focus that leaves
no one outside of its necessary sphere of protection.
Hate speech directed at one person is hate directed at
all people.
Ms. Naric (Switzerland) (spoke in French): In the
fight against hate speech, interreligious and intercultural
dialogue and the promotion of tolerance are imperative.

23-2181023/27

A/77/PV.94

We firmly believe that such approaches are key to
combating discrimination, intolerance, incitement to
hatred and violent extremism. Switzerland condemns
in the strongest terms such manifestations in all their
forms and thanks Morocco for introducing resolution
77/318 on this important and topical subject. We must
discuss the need to limit the freedom of expression in
certain cases in order to protect individuals, as set out
in articles 19 and 20 of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights. We underscore that any limit
must be provided for by law and must be necessary and
proportionate. However, it is imperative to distinguish
between the protection of people belonging to a specific
religion against hatred, violence and discrimination
and the protection of religions, holy books and
religious symbols against defamation. The defamation
of religions, or religious defamation, are not legal
concepts recognized under the normative framework of
international human rights law.
Mr. Kuzmenkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the delegation of Morocco
for taking this very important initiative, which led
to the adoption of resolution 77/318, on promoting
interreligious and intercultural dialogue and tolerance
in countering hate speech. We were pleased to join the
consensus on the document, which makes a significant
contribution to the development of international
cooperation in the area.
Islamophobia, Christianophobia and antisemitism
are particularly dangerous today. We are concerned
about recent trends in certain European countries
involving the burning of holy books. Such attacks on a
religion and the dignity of its believers is a rejection of
all religions and an attack on, affront to, and violation
of, the right to the freedom of religion. Such actions
are manifestation of extremism that undermine human
rights and fuel conflict. We condemn the position taken
by States that, instead of protecting the right of freedom
of religion, actually condone and encourage such
extremists, while shielding them from punishment.
As such, those States contribute to the continuation of
human rights violations. We call on European countries
to act in a civilized manner and show tolerance for and
respect the representatives of other religions. Tolerating
extremism is unacceptable. Impunity for such acts,
such as the burning of holy books, is likely to have
disastrous ramifications.
Ms. Alawadhi (United Arab Emirates): The United
Arab Emirates takes the floor in explanation of vote
24/27

25/07/2023

after the voting on the draft oral amendment on the
thirteenth preambular paragraph of resolution 77/318,
entitled “Promoting interreligious and intercultural
dialogue and tolerance in countering hate speech”,
which was adopted today by consensus.
It is regrettable that a draft oral amendment was
proposed to a traditionally consensual resolution,
especially since the Kingdom of Morocco, as facilitator,
spared no effort in accommodating and bridging the
widely differing views of all delegations. We voted
against the draft oral amendment because we strongly
believe that the freedom of expression must not be used
as an excuse to fuel hatred among people and societies.
Hatred should not have any place in our world today.
The United Arab Emirates stresses the need to
respect religious symbols and holy books in order to
avoid incitement and polarization at a time when the
international community needs to work together to
reaffirm its commitment to upholding the universal
principles of tolerance and peaceful coexistence. Once
again, we appreciate the Kingdom of Morocco for its
leadership and the successful adoption of the resolution,
which the United Arab Emirates proudly co-sponsored.
Ms. Zhang Sisi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Morocco for introducing resolution 77/318,
entitled “Promoting interreligious and intercultural
dialogue and tolerance in countering hate speech”,
and for working on behalf of all parties to enhance
tolerance and mutual learning among civilizations in
order to respond to and eliminate hate speech. China
actively supports the resolution and is honoured to have
co-sponsored it.
The world today is faced with many complex
problems and interconnected crises and challenges,
underneath which lie long-term accumulaed trust
deficits. Not long ago, President Xi Jinping proposed
the Global Civilization Initiative, which advocates
respect for the civilizational diversity of the world,
the promotion of the shared values of humankind, the
importance of the heritage and innovation of civilizations
and robust international people-centred exchanges and
cooperation. The Initiative is yet another important
public good that China has offered in a new era for the
international community. We stand ready to join hands
with all parties to promote tolerance, coexistence,
exchanges and mutual learning among civilizations,
including by giving full play to the role of interreligious
and intercultural dialogue as bridges of communication
and a means for eliminating all forms of hate speech,
23-21810

25/07/2023

xenophobia, racism and related intolerance. We firmly
reject imposing one’s own values and models on others,
inciting civilizational conflicts, stoking ideological
confrontation and eroding mutual understanding and
cooperation among civilizations.
China supports the holding of an urgently needed
debate at the fifty-third session of the Human Rights
Council concerning the recent incidents involving
the burning of the Qur’an in certain countries
and the adoption of resolution 53/1, submitted by
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. Islamic
civilization has made major contributions to the world’s
civilizations. The faith and religious sensibilities of
Muslims should be respected. China opposes all forms
of Islamophobia and believes that the freedom of speech
should not be used as a reason to fuel civilizational
conflict or create civilizational antagonism. We support
Morocco, which, in the light of the views of the majority
of Member States, included language on Islamophobia
and the condemnation of, inter alia, acts of violence
against holy books. We congratulate Morocco on the
consensual adoption of the resolution. We hope that
the relevant countries will show the needed political
will, inter alia, take concrete actions, resolve the
deep-seated issues of rhetoric and behaviours based
on discrimination and xenophobia and promote the
understanding of, and respect for, different religions
and civilizations.
Mr. Rizal (Malaysia): At the outset, my delegation
would like to express its heartfelt appreciation to the
Kingdom of Morocco for introducing this important
resolution, again this year, to the General Assembly.
We appreciate the focused conduct of the negotiations
of the text and the willingness of the facilitator to
take into consideration recent developments that are
pertinent to the draft resolution.
It is unfortunate that a drafta oral amendment was
introduced to the thirteenth preambular paragraph.
My delegation very vividly remembers the calls
made by a number of delegations for stronger human
rights language during the negotiations on the draft
resolution. Yet, on violations of holy books, which is an
integral component of the right to freedom of religion
and belief, the desire for stronger language on human
rights is somewhat subdued.
While acknowledging that the exercise of freedom
of speech and expression is a fundamental human
right, we strongly disagree with the notion that the
defamation of religion is not an infringement of human

A/77/PV.94

rights. The defamation of any religion constitutes a
derogation of the right to freedom of religion or belief
and is intimately linked to the incitement of racial and
religious hatred.
My delegation has consistently stressed that rights
should not be in competition with one another, nor
should one right be seen as superior to another. The
exercise of the freedom of speech and expression entails
responsibility and accountability, which are critical
components in countering hate speech. It is imperative
that we uphold all human rights on an equal footing
and address all human rights issues in an impartial,
non-discriminatory and objective manner.
It is on the basis of those considerations that we
advocated for and supported the insertion of “holy
books” in this draft resolution and voted against the
draft oral amendment introduced.
My delegation firmly believes in the principles of
tolerance and mutual understanding and the importance
of addressing acts that clearly seek to provoke and
incite racial and religious hatred. It is our hope that we
will be able to make progress within the United Nations
forums in countering hate speech, especially on the
basis of religion and belief, towards achieving a true
advancement of human rights.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
I call on the representative of the United Kingdom
on a point of order.
Mr. Croker (United Kingdom): I would like to
confirm that, having spoken earlier in the debate, I am
unable to make a further statement now. Therefore, in
order to disassociate my delegation from the thirteenth
preambular paragraph and operative paragraph two, I
would need to send a written statement, which could
be circulated, for the official record, alongside a
broader statement.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 14.
Agenda item 126 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
The President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/77/L.88, entitled
“Supporting the United Nations International School

23-2181025/27

A/77/PV.94

25/07/2023

in enhancing international education and promoting
multicultural interaction”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors draft
resolution A/77/L.88: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Chad, Chile, Denmark, Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, the Gambia, Georgia, Guatemala, Iceland,
Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Panama, Qatar, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Somalia, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Sweden, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, the United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan
and Yemen.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.88?
Draft resolution A/77/L.88
(resolution 77/319).

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 126.
Agenda item 128 (continued)

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/77/L.85?
Draft decision A/77/L.85
(decision 77/562).

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft decision A/77/L.86, entitled
“Participation of non-governmental organizations,
civil society organizations, academic institutions and
the private sector in the high-level meeting on the fight
against tuberculosis”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/77/L.86?
Draft decision
(decision 77/563).

A/77/L.86

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft decision A/77/L.87, entitled
“Participation of non-governmental organizations, civil
society organizations, academic institutions and the
private sector in the high-level meeting on pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/77/L.87?
Draft decision A/77/L.87
(decision 77/564).

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 128.

Global health and foreign policy

Agenda item 133 (continued)

The President: The General Assembly will resume
its consideration of agenda item 128, entitled “Global
health and foreign policy” to take action on three
draft decisions, issued as A/77/L.85, A/77/L.86 and
A/77/L.87.

Impact of rapid technological change on the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
and targets

We shall now proceed to consider draft decisions
A/77/L.85, A/77/L.86 and A/77/L.87, one by one.
Delegations wishing to make a statement in explanation
of vote before the voting on any of the three draft
decisions are invited to do so now in one intervention.
The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft decision on A/77/L.85, entitled “Participation
of non-governmental organizations, civil society
organizations, academic institutions and the private
sector in the high-level meeting on universal
health coverage”.
26/27

Draft resolution (A/77/L.84)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico to introduce draft resolution
A/77/L.84.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour to introduce draft resolution
A/77/L.84, entitled “Impact of rapid technological
change on the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals and targets”, for the consideration
of the General Assembly. This draft resolution, which
Mexico has the honour to introduce for the fourth
time, consists of technical updates, since we recognize
that substantive issues related to the impact of rapid
23-21810

25/07/2023

technological change on sustainable development are
addressed in broader forums, such as the discussions
on the Global Digital Compact, whose negotiations
will take place within the framework of the 2024
Summit of the Future. In that process, Mexico will
advocate for the incorporation of important elements
already contained in the draft, such as universal,
affordable and meaningful connectivity; capacitybuilding to adapt to technological change; digital
public goods; strengthening digital cooperation; and
the debate on the use of emerging technologies, such as
artificial intelligence.
We are convinced that global collaboration is
essential to develop effective solutions that enable us
to face technological challenges in a comprehensive
manner. Mexico expresses its sincere thanks to all
Member States for their active participation in the
negotiation process. That participation was essential
in order to adequately reflect in the text how we can
meet the challenges posed by rapid technological
progress to our joint pursuit of sustainable and
equitable development.
My country reiterates the importance of fully
implementing the mandates established in General
Assembly resolutions. Without meeting that basic
requirement, it is not possible to ensure appropriate
follow-up to the work arising from those documents,
especially on the rapidly evolving issue of technological
change. It is essential that the decisions adopted in
the General Assembly be translated into concrete
compliance and tangible progress towards the
objectives that unite us. In that regard, Mexico calls for
the United Nations system to comply, in time and form,
with the decisions reached by the Member States in this
forum. The mandates contained in General Assembly
resolutions are an integral part of multilateral norms,
and failure to heed them undermines not only the
follow-up and strengthening of substantive issues, but
also the soundness of the resolution itself.
Mexico recognizes that accelerated technological
progress can be an ally in the effort to implement the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, facilitating
the rapid and broad application of innovative solutions

A/77/PV.94

to address economic, social and environmental
challenges. However, it is also critical to carry out an
in-depth assessment of the impact of that accelerated
progress on sustainable development so that we can
ensure the comprehensive benefit of those innovations
in the interest of all.
The resolution we are adopting today constitutes an
important step in our joint pursuit of a more prosperous
and sustainable future. Mexico will continue to reiterate
time and again its commitment to continue working
to implement effective solutions that will allow us to
confront challenges and seize the opportunities that
technological change presents us with. We know that
we have the support of the Assembly and of the United
Nations entities that support the mandates contained in
this resolution.
The President: The General Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/77/L.84,
entitled “Impact of rapid technological change on the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
and targets”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to the delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/77/L.84: Georgia, Guatemala, Indonesia,
Paraguay, Singapore and Türkiye.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.84?
Draft resolution A/77/L.84 was adopted (resolution
77/320).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 133?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

23-2181027/27
