A/66/PV.98

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

98th plenary meeting

Thursday, 23 February 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In the absence of the President, Mr. Zinsou (Benin),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 138 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/66/668/Add.4)
The Acting President (spoke in French): Before
proceeding to the items on our agenda, I should like, in
keeping with established practice, to draw the attention
of the General Assembly to document A/66/668/Add.4,
in which the Secretary-General informs the President
of the General Assembly that, since the issuance of his
communication contained in document A/66/668/Add.3,
Palau has made the payment necessary to reduce its
arrears below the amount specified in Article 19 of the
Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in document
A/66/668/Add.4?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(j) Appointment of the judges of the United Nations
Appeals Tribunal

(Qatar)

Memorandum by the Secretary-General
(A/66/682)
Report of the Internal Justice Council (A/66/664)
The Acting President (spoke in French): As
indicated in document A/66/682, since the terms of
office of judges Jean Courtial, Kamaljit Singh Garewal
and Mark P. Painter are due to expire on 30 June 2012,
it will be necessary during the sixty-sixth session for
the General Assembly to appoint three judges to the
Appeals Tribunal to fill the resulting vacancies. In
accordance with paragraph 4, article 3, of the statute of
the Appeals Tribunal, the term of office of the judges
will be seven years, beginning on 1 July 2012.
As also indicated in document A/66/682, in
accordance with paragraph 2, article 3, of the statute of
the Appeals Tribunal, its judges shall be appointed by
the General Assembly on the recommendation of the
Internal Justice Council in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 62/228. No two judges shall be of
the same nationality.
The names of the candidates recommended for
appointment to the Appeals Tribunal are listed in
document A/66/682, and their profiles are contained in
document A/66/664.
In order to be eligible for appointment, paragraph
3, article 3, of the statute of the Appeals Tribunal
requires that a person shall be of high moral character
and possess at least 15 years of judicial experience in
the field of administrative law, or the equivalent within
one or more national jurisdictions.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-23919 (E)

*1223919*

A/66/PV.98

Paragraph 4, article 3, of the statute of the Appeals
Tribunal further provides that a judge of the Appeals
Tribunal shall be appointed for one non-renewable term
of seven years.
In document A/66/682, it is proposed that the
General Assembly proceed to appoint the judges of
the Appeals Tribunal by way of an election, bearing
in mind paragraph 58 of resolution 63/253, in which
the Assembly called on Member States, when electing
judges to the United Nations Dispute Tribunal and
the United Nations Appeals Tribunal, to take due
consideration of geographical distribution and gender
balance.
If there is no objection, may I take it that the General
Assembly agrees to the proposal?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in French):
Consistent with the practice of the General Assembly,
the candidates who obtain the largest number of votes
and a majority of the votes of those present and voting
shall be considered elected and thereby appointed by
the Assembly to the Appeals Tribunal. Balloting shall
continue, in accordance with the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly, until as many candidates as are
required for the seats on the Appeals Tribunal to be
filled have obtained, in one or more ballots, a majority
of the votes of the members present and voting.
Consistent with past practice, if in the case of a tie
vote it becomes necessary to determine the candidate
to be elected or who will proceed to the next round of
restricted balloting, there will be a special restricted
ballot limited to those candidates who have obtained an
equal number of votes.
May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to
those procedures?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in French): The
General Assembly will now proceed to the election of
three judges of the United Nations Appeals Tribunal.
Only those candidates whose names appear on the
ballot papers are eligible for election. Representatives
are requested to indicate the candidates for whom they
wish to vote by placing crosses against their names
on the ballot papers. Each representative may vote for
not more than three candidates for appointment to the
Appeals Tribunal.

2

The election will be held in accordance with the
relevant rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
Therefore, in accordance with rule 92 of the rules of
procedure, the election shall be held by secret ballot
and there shall be no nominations.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like to
remind members that, pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order
on the actual conduct of the voting. In addition, ballot
papers will only be given to the representative seated
directly behind the country’s nameplate.
We shall now begin the voting process. Members
are requested to remain seated until all ballots have
been collected.
Ballot papers will now be distributed. May I
request representatives to indicate the candidates for
whom they wish to vote by placing crosses against their
names on the ballot papers.
May I also remind representatives that they may
vote for not more than three candidates for appointment
to the Tribunal. A ballot will be declared invalid if
more than three names are marked for appointment to
the Appeals Tribunal.
At the invitation of the Acting President, Ms. Daniel
(Botswana), Ms. Kamis (Brunei Darussalam),
Ms. Reyes (Honduras), Mrs. Griffin (Lithuania),
Mr. Adejola (Nigeria) and Mr. Kunz (Switzerland)
acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 10.40 a.m. and
resumed at 11.15 a.m.
The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members present:
Required majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Rosalyn M. Chapman (United States of
America):
Richard Lussik (Samoa):
Jean Courtial (France):
Moses Chinhengo (Zimbabwe):

170
0
170
0
170
86
112
97
94
78

12-23919

A/66/PV.98

Alessandra Greceanu (Romania):
Vagn Prusse Joensen (Denmark):

64
47

Having obtained the required majority and the
largest number of votes, Ms. Rosalyn M. Chapman
(United States of America), Mr. Richard Lussick
(Samoa) and Mr. Jean Courtial (France) were duly
appointed judges of the United Nations Appeals
Tribunal for a seven-year term commencing on
1 July 2012.
The Acting President: On behalf of the General
Assembly, I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the judges on their appointment, as well as
to thank the tellers for their efforts.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to conclude its consideration of sub-item (j) of agenda
item 115?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 124 (continued)
United Nations reform: measures and proposals
Draft resolution (A/66/L.37)
The Acting President (spoke in French): Members
will recall that the Assembly considered this item in a
joint debate with agenda items 14 and 117 and sub-item
(a) of agenda item 123, at its 72nd plenary meeting, on
2 December 2011.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Russian Federation to introduce draft resolution
A/66/L.37.
Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): On behalf of the delegation of the Russian
Federation and the group of sponsors, I have the honour
to introduce the draft resolution contained in document
A/66/L.37. This initiative is interregional in nature. In
addition to the Russian Federation, the sponsors also
include Algeria, Belarus, the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, China, Cuba, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Nicaragua, Pakistan, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, Viet Nam and Zimbabwe.
The sponsors of the draft resolution attach great
importance to the effective functioning of human rights
treaty bodies — one of the cornerstones of the universal
system for promoting and upholding human rights. One

could say without exaggeration that the activities of the
human rights treaty bodies constitute one of the more
successful chapters in the history of intergovernmental
engagement in the humanitarian sphere.
At the same time, we are aware of the difficulties
that the system faces at the current stage of its
development. It is no secret to anyone that treaty bodies
are functioning more or less tolerably only because
States are not fully meeting their obligations to submit
periodic reports under the relevant treaties on schedule.
We cannot conclude that such a situation is a
normal one. Any system must work effectively, not in
spite of but because of the principles laid out in it. It
is that concern for the effectiveness of human rights
treaty bodies that is at the very heart of our initiative
today. We are also certain that the time has come to
put the ongoing disparate discussions on the subject
of perfecting the activities of treaty bodies on an
intergovernmental footing at the General Assembly. It
is unacceptable to ignore the views of Member States.
At the same time, we strongly disagree with those
that, during the consultations and in contacts with us,
have supported Geneva and not opted for the General
Assembly as the venue for the future intergovernmental
process. It has therefore been proposed to us to exclude
a considerable number of States from that process that
are not represented in Geneva. Unlike those making
such proposals, it is important to the sponsors that
we hear the views of all States during the upcoming
negotiations.
From the outset, the process of negotiating the draft
resolution was open and transparent. For our part, we
have sought to reflect the comments and proposals of
all interested parties in the text. The proof of that is
in the current text of the draft resolution. Even a rapid
assessment will show that it does not contain any
paragraph from the original version of the document
circulated by us in December. Before the Assembly
is the outcome of our joint work. In that regard, we
would like to express our true appreciation to those
delegations that have constructively helped to find
mutually acceptable solutions.
The delegation of the Russian Federation is of the
view that the adoption of the draft resolution with the
broadest possible support and the launching of the
relevant intergovernmental process of the General
Assembly will clearly strengthen the human rights
treaty body system and enhance the effectiveness of

12-239193

A/66/PV.98

the international regime in promoting and protecting
human rights in general.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We shall
now proceed to consider draft resolution A/66/L.37,
entitled “Intergovernmental process of the General
Assembly on strengthening and enhancing the effective
functioning of the human rights treaty body system”.
Before giving the floor to the speakers in explanation
of vote before the vote, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Guerber (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland has always defended the vision of a world in
which human rights are not only universally respected,
but also universally observed. That is why we are
convinced that effective and credible instruments to
monitor human rights agreements are necessary.
It is indisputable that human rights treaty bodies
need to be strengthened, in particular by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
providing adequate financial resources. It is necessary
to resolve, in particular, issues of consistency,
coordination and duplication among treaty bodies,
causing a greater administrative burden for Member
States in connection with the drafting of reports and
the delay in their consideration by treaty bodies.
The treaty body system has a value that should
be protected at all costs, namely, the independence
and expertise of those bodies that, unencumbered,
pronounce on the human rights situation in the various
States parties with regard to their respective human
rights obligations. From the beginning, Switzerland
supported the inclusive process, launched in 2009 by
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, which enables us to consider improvements to
be made to the system. However, we cannot support an
initiative that would compromise the independence of
its bodies and their experts.
Switzerland recognizes that, once the outcomes
of the process started by the High Commissioner have
been issued, an intergovernmental process that respects
the relevant competencies of the General Assembly, the
Human Rights Council and States parties to the various
human rights treaties can be launched in an appropriate
form. However, the current draft resolution does not
adequately meet those conditions.

4

We thank the authors of the draft resolution for
having taken into account some objections, but regret
the fact that a number of significant concerns expressed
by certain delegations, including ours, were not taken
into consideration. Switzerland has therefore decided to
abstain in the voting on the draft resolution.
Mr. Sammis (United States of America):
The United States requested this vote today after
consultation with a large group of countries that have
significant substantive and procedural concerns over
draft resolution A/66/L.37.
We continue, in particular, to have significant
concerns about the timing and the content of the
intergovernmental process set out in it. We also think
that the text inadequately addresses the important
concerns raised by civil society organizations and
others regarding their participation in the proposed
process.
The United States, along with many other Member
States, has been disappointed at the lack of flexibility
that the sponsors have shown during the final stages
of the negotiations on the draft resolution. They
unfortunately rejected a number of constructive
proposals that would have allowed it to be adopted by
consensus — as the United States would very much
have preferred.
The current text requires further consideration and
improvement through continued negotiations. It sets up
a comparable process to one already under way under
the auspices of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), while
leaving the timeline and the relationship between the
two processes unclear.
The United States looks forward to participating in
the intergovernmental process envisioned in the draft
resolution. At the same time, we believe that the new
intergovernmental process in New York should not begin
until after the presentation of the report of the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in June.
The OHCHR has led an extensive multi-stakeholder
process, with the participation of States parties to the
human rights treaties, treaty body experts, national
human rights institutions and civil society. The United
States was pleased to submit our views in writing to
the OHCHR in advance of our participation in the
7-8 February consultations in Geneva. It also looks
forward to the April consultations here in New York.

12-23919

A/66/PV.98

While decisions on the strengthening of the treaty
body system are a matter for States parties to decide,
the United States believes that the OHCHR should be
given the time to complete its process of soliciting input
from States and other stakeholders and to inform the
intergovernmental deliberations.
We should make additional efforts to avoid
duplication of work, redundancies and the waste of
resources in New York and Geneva. We should also
provide a clear timeline for the completion of the
process. While OHCHR is conducting consultations
and issuing its report, the intergovernmental process
should not be started. We hope that the OHCHR
report will fully reflect the perspectives expressed in
Geneva, and we do not think that there is a need for
any alternate consultation process under the auspices
of the presidency of the Human Rights Council at this
time. Moreover, we do not view the draft resolution as
providing a mandate for any such consultation process.
As the process moves forward, it is important for
States members of the United Nations to respect the
independence of the treaty bodies and the role of the
States parties themselves in deciding on issues related to
the scope and implementation of the respective treaties.
In that regard, this process should avoid proposals that
would endanger that independence or that would require
treaty amendments.
For the avoidance of doubt, I would like to underline
that the United States does not interpret any element
of the draft resolution as altering the existing legal
competencies of the relevant institutions, including the
General Assembly and any conferences of States parties
that would be convened with respect to each treaty.
As we discuss the various proposals in more depth
and look for ways to strengthen the treaty body system,
we believe that it would be useful to better understand
the budgetary implications of each proposal. In our view,
throughout the discussion of the range of proposals,
detailed budgetary analysis would help to better inform
our discussions. That is yet another reason why the
intergovernmental process should not begin until
OHCHR has completed its report, as we understand that
the report will include budgetary information that will
better inform these discussions.
Having requested this vote, the United States
intends to abstain. We encourage other countries that
share our concerns to do so as well.

The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote before the
voting.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/66/L.37, entitled “Intergovernmental
process of the General Assembly on strengthening and
enhancing the effective functioning of the human rights
treaty body system”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, in addition to those delegations listed
in the draft resolution contained in document A/66/L.37,
as well as those mentioned during the introduction of
the draft resolution, Bangladesh has also become a
sponsor of the draft resolution.
The Acting President (spoke in French): A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Grenada, Guyana,
Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania, Mongolia,
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger,
Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
None

12-239195

A/66/PV.98

Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Draft resolution A/66/L.37 was adopted by 85 votes
to none, with 66 abstentions (resolution 66/254).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Nigeria, the
Philippines and South Africa advised the Secretariat
that they had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President (spoke in French): Before
giving the floor to speakers in explanation of vote, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Staur (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Iceland and Montenegro; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as the Georgia and the Republic
of Moldova align themselves with this statement.
I take the floor in explanation of vote following
the adoption of resolution 66/254, entitled
“Intergovernmental process of the General Assembly
on strengthening and enhancing the effective
functioning of the human rights treaty body system”.
At the outset, we express reservations with regard to the
proposal made by the main sponsor for a comprehensive
intergovernmental process to discuss reform, rather than
the strengthening of the human rights treaty bodies.
Our concerns, many of which remain, are due in
particular to the complex and independent nature of

6

the treaty body system and the need to respect the
competencies of different stakeholders, including the
States parties to each convention, the treaty bodies
themselves and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights.
We support the treaty body strengthening process
facilitated by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, which has made
a significant contribution to raising the awareness
of States and other stakeholders with regard to the
challenges faced by the treaty body system and
involving them in a transparent and participatory
consultation process.
We look forward to the publication of the High
Commissioner’s report and believe that our discussions
on the role of the General Assembly should have been
postponed until her report is made available. We regret
that the sponsors could not agree to that.
Many aspects of the functioning of the treaty bodies
are matters for those bodies to decide for themselves, as
provided for in the relevant conventions. We appreciate
that attempts to promote gradual improvement
and harmonization of working methods are being
undertaken by the treaty bodies in accordance with the
report of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. We
are concerned that the work already under way might
be undermined by an intergovernmental process that
goes beyond what we see as its purview with respect to
the treaty bodies.
We acknowledge the efforts of the main sponsor
in the course of negotiations on the resolution to meet
a number of our concerns that were raised in relation
to its initial draft. We also recognize the addition of
language to ensure that the ongoing consultations of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights are taken
into account by the General Assembly. However, we
regret that there could be no agreement on including
in the resolution specific language on the competencies
of different stakeholders — a fundamental assumption
that was not disputed during the negotiations. We
remain concerned that those competencies will inform
and frame the discussion in the General Assembly,
including possible outcomes.
Further, we are concerned that paragraph 6
of the resolution does not sufficiently ensure the
multi-stakeholder participation necessary for the
process to be inclusive and transparent. Civil society
has an essential role to play in the context of a

12-23919

A/66/PV.98

well-functioning treaty body system, and therefore, in
our forthcoming consultations in New York, the EU
does not interpret paragraph 6 as requiring additional
negotiations among States regarding the arrangements
that will allow the process to benefit from the input and
expertise of all stakeholders.
Also, given that the report of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights has been announced
for June, we know that it might be too early for the
intergovernmental process to provide recommendations
during the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly.
Over the past month, we have worked sincerely
and hard for a consensual agreement on the text and
regret that the sponsors of the resolution chose a course
that would lead to divisions on an issue of shared and
important concern to all. The States members of the
European Union abstained in the voting on the resolution.
It is the view of the EU that the General Assembly
process should commence only once the report of the
High Commissioner on the process facilitated by her
is available. Moreover, we underline the need for the
competencies of various stakeholders, including the
States parties and the treaty bodies themselves, to be
fully respected in the forthcoming intergovernmental
process.
The EU encourages the President of the General
Assembly to take measures to ensure that our
deliberations on this matter are appropriately timed,
transparent, inclusive and respectful of the competencies
of various stakeholders in matters regarding the human
rights treaty bodies.
Mr. Mac-Donald (Suriname): I am speaking
on behalf of the 14 States members of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM).
CARICOM would like to express its appreciation to
the delegation of the Russian Federation for introducing
this initiative and for conducting open and inclusive
consultations on resolution 66/254, which was just
adopted. We believe that sincere efforts were made to
take the concerns of all delegations into consideration.
CARICOM countries, the majority of which are not
represented in Geneva, welcome the opportunity that
the resolution provides for the General Assembly, with
its universal membership, to consider the important
issue of improving the effectiveness of the human rights
treaty body system.

The establishment of an intergovernmental
framework to seriously consider the challenges this
system is faced with is long overdue. CARICOM is
therefore of the view that, while discussions regarding
the strengthening of the treaty body system have been
ongoing for almost three decades, it is high time for
the General Assembly to launch a structured, open,
transparent and inclusive discussion.
The expansion of the treaty body system over the
past 10 years has increased the ratification of human
rights instruments, leading to an increased workload
for the various treaty bodies without a corresponding
increase in human and budgetary resources, which only
highlights the necessity for the General Assembly to
assume its responsibility and initiate intergovernmental
discussions. It will be recalled that Member States are
the main beneficiaries of the outcomes of the work
of the treaty bodies and, as such, bear the primary
responsibility for realizing the human rights obligations
monitored by these bodies.
CARICOM is therefore pleased that, with the
adoption of this resolution, an intergovernmental
process has been launched, to commence no earlier than
April 2012. During the consultations for the resolution,
all Member States acknowledged the important role
of States in the process, and we therefore call on all
Member States to constructively participate in the
discussions of this intergovernmental process.
CARICOM, for its part, is strongly committed to
participate constructively and meaningfully in these
discussions, and we look forward to considering all
relevant proposals, including those made during the
informal reflection process undertaken by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
In closing, I would like to reiterate our strong
support for the resolution and once again to thank
the delegation of the Russian Federation for bringing
this important issue to the attention of the General
Assembly.
CARICOM also would like to state that it regrets
that the resolution could not be adopted by consensus.
Mr. De Léon Huerta (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico abstained in the voting on resolution 66/254
because we believe that, although it establishes a
process of discussion on how we can strengthen the
human rights treaty body system, we nevertheless
feel that some aspects of the text should have been

12-239197

A/66/PV.98

revised to stipulate more clearly the parameters and
competencies of the process. We sincerely thank the
Russian Federation and the sponsors for all of their
work on the resolution and for having considered some
of the proposals that my delegation presented during
discussions on the subject.

on resolution 66/254 on the intergovernmental process
of the General Assembly on strengthening and
enhancing the functioning of the human rights treaty
body system, for which we voted in favour. We have
closely followed this process from the beginning, and
we welcome the progress it has made.

In particular, we note that in paragraph 6 we should
have liked to see established from the very outset the
fact that the process of discussion will include the
direct and substantive participation of experts from
the treaty bodies, non-governmental organizations and
national human rights institutions, because those actors
play a fundamental role in fulfilling the obligations
established by the human rights treaties. One of our
priorities in the following stages of this process will
be to ensure that methods of direct participation are
established so that all of these actors can participate
in accordance with established practice, for example,
during the negotiation of the Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities. The legitimacy of this
entire exercise will depend, to a large extent, on that.

El Salvador attaches great importance to the
comprehensive strengthening of the treaty bodies
including, among other things, strengthening them
financially to allow them to function more effectively
and productively; strengthening the composition of
the treaty bodies; and strengthening the preparation
of reports and the generation of basic information that
avoids duplication and optimizes efforts and dialogue
between States parties and treaty bodies.

With regard to paragraph 1, we should have
liked to have seen clearly established the different
competencies of the General Assembly, States parties
and the treaty bodies. It is our understanding that
the General Assembly has direct competence only to
adopt measures that correspond to the financing of
the human rights treaty bodies and that, with regard to
any other matter, the provisions, responsibilities and
competencies established by the treaties themselves
must be respected, as they confirm, among other things,
the autonomy of the treaty bodies to determine their own
working methods. We also consider that the report to be
presented by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights to the General Assembly, which is
the outcome of wide-ranging consultations with various
sectors, should be the basis for our future discussions.
Mexico is party to most of the human rights treaties
and their respective additional protocols. In fulfilling
our obligation to present reports, we have benefited
from the frank dialogue and the recommendations of the
respective committees. That is why we sincerely hope
that this process of reflection can generate the necessary
agreement to strengthen the important system for the
promotion and protection of human rights that we have
been constructing over the course of many years.
Mr. Escalante Hasbún (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): El Salvador regrets that there was no consensus

8

El Salvador would like to highlight the work carried
out by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, who, since October 2009, has called on
States to reflect on how they can optimize conventional
systems in order to improve coordination among the
various mechanisms and their interaction with the
special procedures and the Universal Periodic Review
mechanism.
As the resolution just adopted clearly indicates, we
are now launching a new stage of this process in which
States, which are primarily responsible for promoting
universal respect for and observance of human rights
and basic freedoms, will take up the work carried out
by the Secretary-General, as reflected in document
A/66/344, and by the High Commissioner included in
her report, which we hope to receive in June, together
with the various consultations held throughout the
world, including those to be held here in New York in
April.
As many delegations have stated throughout
the consultation process conducted by the High
Commissioner, in order to make the human rights treaty
body system more effective, there is a need for sufficient
additional resources that take into account both the
current and future needs of the system, including from
within the regular budget of the Organization, provided
that such allocations do not jeopardize funds intended
for development.
As everybody knows, one third of the States parties
present their reports on time. Even despite the low
number of reports, the treaty bodies face significant
structural problems in handling their current workload.
In 2011, an average of 250 reports were awaiting review.

12-23919

A/66/PV.98

Along with improving the effective functioning
of the treaty bodies, we should also keep in mind the
importance of improving the internal capacities of
States parties with respect to the drafting of reports,
for which technical support is needed from the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. We
consider this to be of particular importance in the case
of countries emerging from long periods of crisis or
conflict.
El Salvador is an increasingly active participant in
the international human rights framework. In recent
years, we have taken on new positions before committees
and commissions in the development and presentation
of reports and in advancing the implementation of the
resolutions, recommendations and decisions of the
treaty bodies, as well as by the Inter-American human
rights system. In our relationship with human rights
treaty bodies, El Salvador will continue to demonstrate
full respect, shoulder its responsibilities and present
information in a timely manner that reflects the reality
on the ground.
At the same time, we are already working at the
national level to implement the follow-up measures
that have been recommended. By the same token,
and as promised in the context of the commitments
that we made in the Universal Periodic Review, El
Salvador will undertake a multisectoral process of
internal consultation, with the participation of civil
society, in order to examine the compatibility of each
international instrument under study with the various
norms contained in our Constitution.
I would like to conclude by expressing our support
for the open-ended intergovernmental process, which
will have a channel of direct communication with the
Human Rights Council, and which we hope will also
benefit from the experience of other non-State actors.
El Salvador will participate as an active member in the
intergovernmental process, which we trust will bring
us closer to a more effective human rights treaty body
system that will ultimately benefit Member States and
our respective peoples.
Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein
considers the treaty body system to be one of the
most important achievements of the United Nations
human rights system. We have engaged actively and
constructively in efforts to strengthen that system in the
framework of the multi-stakeholder process initiated
by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human

Rights in 2009. In that regard, we look forward to the
consultations with Member States in April in New
York, as well as to the report of the High Commissioner
detailing proposals put forward in the course of that
process.
On the basis of that report, intergovernmental
consultations will, we hope, allow for a comprehensive
discussion of the issues at hand and lead to concrete
agreements and proposals to the different stakeholders
involved. It is of fundamental importance that the
intergovernmental process respect the different legal
competences of treaty bodies, States parties to human
rights treaties and the General Assembly. Any possible
outcome of the intergovernmental consultations will
have to make a clear distinction between proposals
addressed to different stakeholders, taking into account
their legal competences. Only with an agreement on that
important principle can we enter into constructive and
good faith consultations on the technical and political
substance.
Liechtenstein is concerned that such an agreement
was not reached in resolution 66/254. The independence
of the treaty bodies is essential to the implementation
of their respective mandates as defined in the relevant
treaties. Changing the mandate of treaty bodies
lies within the sole competence of States parties.
Liechtenstein will firmly oppose any attempt to limit
the independence of treaty bodies.
Strengthening the effectiveness and efficiency of
the treaty body system is a responsibility shared by
many stakeholders. It is therefore important that the
upcoming intergovernmental consultations benefit from
the active participation of all stakeholders, in particular
treaty bodies and their members, but also civil society
and representatives of rights holders. We trust that the
facilitators soon to be appointed by the President of the
General Assembly will take the necessary steps in that
regard.
The resolution adopted today is the result of
intensive and generally constructive deliberations.
Liechtenstein thanks the Russian Federation for an
open and transparent consultation process and for
accommodating a considerable number of proposals.
However, given the fruitful discussions on the
substantive matter of the resolution, we had hoped to be
given more time to bring the different positions closer
together. It is unfortunate that a hastily voted outcome

12-239199

A/66/PV.98

puts at jeopardy the important results already achieved
in the ongoing process.
Liechtenstein will continue to attach high
importance to strengthening the treaty body system.
On the basis of the concerns expressed above, however,
Liechtenstein abstained in the voting on the resolution.
Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica is genuinely committed to improving and
strengthening the treaty body system. Our country is
party to 10 instruments that establish bodies to oversee
their implementation. We support intergovernmental
discussions to strengthen those bodies, with the broad
participation of their own experts, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
civil society, national human rights organizations, the
academy and other relevant actors.
As soon as the Russian Federation announced its
initiative, our delegation raised serious and, we believe,
well-founded doubts and registered our observations on
a number of points, especially on the text’s failure to
distinguish among the legal competences of the various
actors connected to the issue, in particular with respect
to the crucial role of the conferences of States parties
and of the treaty bodies themselves.
With the aim of achieving substantial improvements,
Costa Rica took an active and constructive part in the
negotiations from the beginning. We thank the Russian
Federation for its efforts to respond to our concerns.
Unfortunately, the concerns we considered to be most
important are not sufficiently reflected in the text that
was presented. We are particularly concerned by the
lack of distinction among the legal competencies of the
different actors connected to the issue. That is reflected
in a mandate that is totally open to the process of
intergovernmental discussion. From our point of view,
such openness may undermine the process itself and the
possibility of achieving positive results.
We believe that the possibilities for agreeing on
a clear framework for a process on this issue in the
General Assembly would have been greater if we had
waited for the promised report from the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, which will take only a few months. The quality
of the results could have benefited from our clear
commitment to waiting for that report before beginning
our consultations.

10

For all those reasons, we abstained from supporting
the resolution. We understand that the deliberations
to be conducted at this session will not have a single
starting negotiation text and that they will be held on
the basis of hearings that rely essentially on the contents
of the Secretary-General’s report mentioned in the
resolution (A/66/344) and on the forthcoming report by
the Office of the High Commissioner. By virtue of the
text just adopted, we also understand that any possible
recommendations arrived at during that process may
contravene neither the obligations of the States parties
nor their established legal competences, and that they
may not in any way affect the independence of the
treaty bodies. My country will participate actively in
this process in order to work towards a result that in
effect will strengthen treaty bodies.
Mrs. Ortigosa (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay voted in favour of resolution 66/254, which
establishes an intergovernmental process at the General
Assembly aimed at strengthening and improving the
effective functioning of human rights treaty bodies.
My
delegation
participated
actively
and
constructively in the negotiations. We put forward
alternative formulas to address those points where
there were differences. With a view towards consensus,
we demonstrated flexibility with regard to our initial
positions in areas critical for our country. While we
appreciate the flexibility shown during the process
by the delegation of the Russian Federation, we regret
that there were no additional informal meetings, which
could have produced agreement on those points where
there were still differences.
In that regard, my delegation wishes to express its
deep concern at the inability to reaffirm the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, even though that is the
basic document of all human rights instruments, and
even though it has met with no objections and has been
reaffirmed many times.
We also regret the absence from the final text of
any reference to two fundamentally important issues
relating to the role of treaty bodies, namely, the way
such bodies contribute to the development of human
rights law, and the need to harmonize differing
interpretations of the provisions of international human
rights instruments.
In the view of my delegation, retaining the reference
in paragraph 1 to conducting negotiations, rather than
consultations, implies that we are prejudging the

12-23919

A/66/PV.98

outcome of the consultative process that has been carried
out by the High Commissioner for Human Rights. In
that paragraph, we would have preferred the inclusion
of a reference to differentiated legal competencies.
That is a proposal we have supported and insisted upon
throughout the course of the discussions.

of the international system for the promotion and
protection of human rights is facing various challenges
because of the increasing demands to which it is being
subjected. We also recognize that, in the resolution we
have just adopted, great improvements were made from
the text that was initially proposed for negotiation.

For those reasons, my delegation reiterates the
need to keep in mind that, even after final agreements
are reached, the forums wherein the decision-making
process takes place by which those agreements are
carried out vary: in the Committees themselves, with
their own rules of procedures and working methods,
when it comes to United Nations treaties and general
norms; at the various review conferences of States
parties, when it comes to amending treaties, where all
States and other stakeholders set out their views on how
to rationalize the system and make it more coherent,
efficient and effective; and at the General Assembly,
which approves the relevant financial resources.

However, we cannot help but regret the fact that
the resolution contains no explicit recognition of the
differentiation of legal competencies among the various
players involved in the process, namely, the General
Assembly, the States parties to the various treaty bodies
and the treaty bodies themselves. We also believe that a
discussion of this nature should be open and inclusive,
taking into account the contributions of experts from
the treaty bodies as well as civil society and other key
actors in the system. That is not guaranteed in the
resolution.

With regard to the participation of non-governmental
organizations, it is certainly an improvement that input
will no longer be limited to those organizations that
have been accorded official, consultative status at the
Economic and Social Council. However, the stipulation
that separate, informal arrangements should be
established neither clearly establishes nor ensures that
the intergovernmental process will not receive the full
benefit of meaningful input from treaty bodies, national
human rights institutions and non-governmental
organizations. My delegation expresses its concern
about that language, which fails to take into account the
history of consultative processes that have been opened
to such stakeholders without such a limitation.
Meanwhile, it also is not clear to my delegation
how the intergovernmental process in New York will be
linked with the work done in Geneva, except through
bilateral contact between the Presidents of the General
Assembly and the Human Rights Council, which we do
not believe are sufficient in this case.
Finally, my delegation is also concerned at the
apparent intent to establish an artificial deadline
to finalize negotiations and reach agreement on
recommendations.
Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Argentina voted in favor of resolution
66/254 because we believe that it is important to have
an in-depth discussion on the strengthening of human
rights treaty bodies. One of the most important tools

For Argentina, any discussion or negotiation on
strengthening the bodies created by treaties carried out
by the General Assembly must respect the various legal
competencies, ensure the independence of the bodies
and be guided by the notion that its final result should
serve to improve the enjoyment of human rights by all
citizens whose States are party to the treaties. Likewise,
we consider it critical that the intergovernmental process
complement and take into account the initiatives and
efforts of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and involve consultation with multiple stakeholders on
how the system can be strengthened. We will participate
in debates related to the process to begin following the
adoption of the resolution while bearing in mind those
considerations and understandings.
Finally, as I mentioned a few moments ago, we
ask that the informal arrangements referred to in
paragraph 6 of the resolution ensure broad and adequate
participation of all stakeholders referred to therein.
Ms. Burgess (Canada): Canada has been a
champion of the international system for the protection
and promotion of human rights since its inception with
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Canada
is party to the seven core international human rights
instruments. As a State party to those instruments,
Canada is committed to the principles of the treaty
body system, in particular the central role played by
the treaty bodies in monitoring States’ implementation
of their international human rights obligations, which
Canada takes very seriously. The Government of

12-2391911

A/66/PV.98

Canada therefore strongly supports efforts to strengthen
the treaty body system.
Canada is of the view that for such a process
to be successful and productive, it should be based
on consensus. We are therefore disappointed that a
resolution on such an important issue had to be adopted
by a vote. Canada is disappointed with the negotiation
process, which did not take on board in a meaningful way
the views of a diverse group of countries. Unfortunately,
this process allowed for limited opportunity to fully
discuss the second version of the Chair’s text, despite
reasonable efforts by a broad cross-section of States to
suggest minimal changes that would have, in our view,
strengthened the text and set the process off on a more
positive basis.
From the beginning, Canada was of the view that
such a resolution should come after the conclusion of
the process undertaken by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, so that
its recommendations could appropriately inform the
subsequent intergovernmental deliberations.
Canada is also of the view that resolution 66/254
should have more clearly recognized the importance
of the different legal competencies, States parties’
obligations under these instruments and the important
role that the treaty bodies themselves should play in this
process. Those elements are integral to ensuring that
the subsequent intergovernmental process is productive
and leads to actual strengthening of the treaty body
system. For those reasons, Canada abstained in the
voting.
Canada looks forward to constructively engaging
in the intergovernmental process that is established by
resolution 66/254.
Mrs. Smith (Norway): Norway sees the work of
the treaty bodies as a cornerstone of the international
system for monitoring States’ compliance with human
rights obligations. We support all efforts to streamline
the work of the treaty bodies to increase the efficiency,
accessibility and impact of the treaty body system.
We have engaged actively and constructively
in efforts to strengthen the effectiveness and
efficiency of the treaty bodies in the framework of the
multi-stakeholder process initiated by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
in 2009. We look forward to the High Commissioner’s
report, which is scheduled to be issued in June. We

12

would have preferred that the intergovernmental
process in New York would have started after we had
time to study the forthcoming report.
Furthermore, resolution 66/254 should have
reflected more clearly the different legal competencies
of treaty bodies, States parties to human rights treaties
and the General Assembly.
Last but not least, we remain concerned about the
important stakeholders having an opportunity to take
part in the intergovernmental process.
For those reasons, Norway felt compelled to
abstain in the voting on the resolution. However, we
will engage constructively and in good faith in the
forthcoming consultations with Member States. On the
basis of the High Commissioner’s report and with the
input of all relevant stakeholders, we can hope to have a
comprehensive discussion of the issues at hand.
Any possible outcome of the intergovernmental
consultations will have to make a clear distinction
between proposals addressed to different stakeholders,
taking into account their legal competencies. We also
believe that it is important that non-governmental
organizations, national human rights institutions and
members of treaty bodies be given an opportunity to
participate in a meaningful way in the consultations.
We hope for the necessary flexibility in that regard.
Mr. Tagle (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
abstained in the voting that has just taken place on
resolution 66/254. Chile recognizes the efforts of the
sponsors, and especially of the Russian Federation, in
attempting to accommodate the concerns and proposals
of other Member States. However, in the opinion of my
delegation, those efforts were not sufficient to eliminate
the concerns of the delegations of Chile and other
States, which would have made it possible to adopt the
resolution by consensus.
Moreover, Chile would like to highlight the
process begun by the High Commissioner for Human
Rights in Geneva in order to improve the way in which
the treaty bodies function. We await the report to be
submitted by the High Commissioner. We hope that the
intergovernmental process in New York will begin once
that report is available.
We regret that a proposal was not agreed to on
including in paragraph 1 of the resolution that the process
should take place in accordance with the respective
legislative mandates of the main stakeholders. Chile is

12-23919

A/66/PV.98

a staunch defender of the independence of treaty bodies,
including when it comes to establishing their own
working methods. Likewise, the General Assembly has
its own competencies and special working methods, and
those are relevant to ensuring that appropriate funds are
provided, so that bodies can carry out their functions
in accordance with current and future mandates of
Member States. But it cannot intervene in the way in
which the treaty bodies work. The competencies of the
General Assembly are different from those of the treaty
bodies, as are the competencies of the States that are
parties to the various treaties.
Chile hopes that the intergovernmental process will
provide for the active participation of treaty bodies, civil
society and non-governmental organizations. We would
have liked that to have been made clear and explicit
in the resolution, and not as stipulated in paragraph
6, where the President of the General Assembly is
asked to put in place informal arrangements so that
the intergovernmental process can benefit from the
specialized knowledge of those institutions.
Chile
will
participate
actively
in
the
intergovernmental consultation process that will begin
shortly. We hope that the negotiations will lead to a
final consensus agreement, which, unfortunately, was
not the case with regard to this resolution. We also hope
that the future agreement will take due account of the
competencies of the treaty bodies and of the human
rights system in general.
Ms. Rodríguez Pineda (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala is convinced of the need to
strengthen the system of bodies created under human
rights treaties. We would like to thank the High
Commissioner for Human Rights for her efforts to help
Member States in this effort as part of her mandate.
We view this process as one of strengthening, but not
one of substantial reform. Guatemala abstained in the
voting on resolution 66/254. In addition to supporting
the process that was begun in Geneva, and which will
continue in New York in April, we would have preferred
more clarity with regard to the various competencies
of the General Assembly and those of States parties to
each human rights treaty.
Guatemala is convinced of the importance
and valuable contribution of the broadest possible
participation by all interested parties. However, we
recognize the intergovernmental nature of the process

for decision-making, which will lead us to strengthen
the treaty bodies, which we all designed.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote following
the voting.
We shall now hear general statements.
Ms. Li Xiaomei (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
supports the adoption of resolution 66/254, entitled
“Intergovernmental process of the General Assembly on
strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning
of the human rights treaty body system. China wishes
to reiterate its views on reforming the human rights
treaty bodies as follows.
First, States parties are decreed as human rights
treaty bodies, shouldering the primary responsibility
for fulfilling treaty obligations. They will also be the
executioners of the outcomes of the reform of human
rights treaty bodies. Therefore, the process of the
reform of the human rights treaty bodies should fully
reflect the ownership of Member States and respect the
opinions and suggestions of States parties.
Secondly, given the plethora of challenges facing
the treaty bodies, such as low efficiency, overload of
work and excessive burdens on States parties, China
supports the necessary reforms of the treaty bodies.
Such reforms should ensure that treaty bodies comply
with the principles of objectivity and fairness, carry out
their work in strict accordance with existing mandates,
promote constructive dialogue and collaboration
between the treaty bodies and States parties and avoid
overlapping mandates, instances of encroachment and
tendencies towards politicization and selectivity.
Against that backdrop, China supports the General
Assembly incorporating the reform process of treaty
bodies into the intergovernmental process. It is hoped
that the President will as soon as possible launch
the relevant intergovernmental negotiation process,
conduct in-depth discussions on strengthening and
enhancing the effective functioning of the human rights
treaty body system, and generate the broadest possible
consensus, thereby laying a solid foundation for the
healthy development of the treaty body system. China
will raise some specific reform proposals during the
intergovernmental negotiation process.
Mr. Khan (Indonesia): Indonesia conveys its
appreciation to the President of the General Assembly
for convening this meeting to adopt resolution 66/254,

12-2391913

A/66/PV.98

entitled “Intergovernmental process of the General
Assembly on strengthening and enhancing the effective
functioning of the human rights treaty body system”. I
particularly wish to commend the excellent facilitation
by the delegation of the Russian Federation, which
conducted many informal consultations and the various
negotiators that went into formulating the text.
Indonesia became a sponsor of the resolution based
on the merit of the subject matter at hand, as reflected
in document A/66/344, entitled “Measures to improve
further the effectiveness, harmonization and reform of
the treaty body system”, in which the Secretary-General
conveys his proposals relating to the human rights treaty
bodies on improving their effectiveness and identifying
efficiencies in their working methods, while bearing in
mind budgetary constraints and the specific burdens on
each treaty body.
I am particularly pleased that the report also refers
to the ongoing treaty body strengthening process led by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, who most recently conducted
consultations in Geneva from 7 to 8 February,
focusing on, inter alia, the strengthening of personnel
and financial capacities, as well as the reporting and
dialogue process among Member States and treaty
bodies. I am certain that the consultations in New York
scheduled by the High Commissioner, to be conducted
from 2 to 3 April, will further advance our effort in that
endeavour.
Our task as States is to undertake an
intergovernmental treaty body strengthening process
based on a multi-stakeholder approach in order to
strengthen and enhance the effective functioning of the
human rights treaty body system. That would, in turn,
complement and enhance our own efforts as States
in the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms within our own countries.
Finally, Indonesia remains highly committed to
its ratification or accession to all international human
rights treaties as a continued Government priority. For
that reason, Indonesia will continue to constructively
support any and all efforts aimed at strengthening the
treaty body system.
Ms. Belskaya (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): Belarus
sponsored resolution 66/254 and highly appreciates the
initiative of the Russian Federation to strengthen the
human rights treaty body system. The initiative is timely
and relevant. Strengthening the human rights treaty

14

body system of the United Nations and enhancing its
activities is a key component of overall United Nations
reform. We are convinced that an important factor in
successfully and effectively addressing the issue is the
active participation of Member States in crafting ways
to strengthen the human rights system.
My delegation is pleased to note that the resolution
will launch an intergovernmental consultation process
on an open, comprehensive and inclusive basis. The
process will enable full consideration of the concerns
and views of all States. The format for consultations
and negotiations set out in the resolution will guarantee
its success by ensuring that the views of all States
are considered. The balance struck in the resolution
will also make it possible for the contributions of all
partners to the process, including the participants in
the process carried out under the auspices of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights in Geneva, to be considered.
My country is certain that as a result of constructive
and transparent negotiations, the General Assembly
will reach agreement on decisions aimed at effectively
addressing the fundamental issues involved in
enhancing the format and methodologies of the human
rights treaty negotiating bodies. We call on all Member
States to take active part in the negotiation process,
which is aimed at truly contributing to strengthening
the human rights treaty body system.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote.
I shall now make a few comments on behalf of the
presidency.
“The General Assembly has adopted
this
morning
resolution
66/254,
entitled
‘Intergovernmental process of the General
Assembly on strengthening and enhancing the
effective functioning of the human rights treaty
body system’.
(spoke in English)
“According to Article 1 of the Charter of the
United Nations, one of the purposes of the United
Nations is to achieve international cooperation
in promoting and encouraging respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all without
distinction as to race, sex, language or religion.
This has been among the principle aims of Member

12-23919

A/66/PV.98

States and all bodies of the United Nations system
throughout its history.
“We should also recognize the valuable
contribution in that regard of the human rights
treaty body system. It is true that the functioning of
the treaty body system has been one of the success
stories of the United Nations, yet that system
needs to be strengthened. Discussions on how to
strengthen the treaty bodies have been ongoing for
quite some time now, including in the framework
of a process of reflection initiated by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
“Therefore, it is high time to give the lead
on that issue to Member States and the General
Assembly. Given the universal membership and
representation of the Assembly, it is unquestionable

that it is the best possible forum for undertaking
an intergovernmental process of negotiations
aimed at strengthening and enhancing the effective
functioning of the human rights treaty body system.
“My Office looks forward to undertaking
the tasks assigned to it under the resolution. I
believe that the practical implementation of the
resolution will serve as an important contribution
to strengthening the international promotion and
protection of human rights.”
(spoke in French)
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 124.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

12-2391915
