102

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

Noting that social disparities are not peculiar to the
developing countries and are a reflection of the injustices and inefficiency of the present world economic
system,
Emphasizing the interdependence of economic and
social development in promoting comprehensive growth
with justice and the importance of harmonizing this
process of development with the evolution of each
country's values and structures,
Having considered the 1974 Report on the World
Social Situation,88
1. Reaffirms the right and responsibility of each
State and people to determine freely its own objectives
of social development, to set its own priorities and to
decide in conformity with the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations the means and methods of their
achievement without any external interference;
2. Notes with satisfaction the policies and programmes adopted by many developing countries, within
their over-all development plans, despite the grave financial and other external constraints, to promote comprehensive social development in various fields, especially to improve the conditions in the particularly
disadvantaged sectors of their societies;
3. Recognizes the need for continued efforts at the
national level towards the promotion of social progress
and development aiming at the fulfilment of basic needs
of all segments of the population through measures
leading to:
(a) More equitable redistribution of income and_
wealth;
( b) The elimination of hunger and malnutrition;
( c) A reduction of unemployment and underemployment;
(d) The improvement of the distribution of health,
housing, education and other social services;
4. Welcomes the active participation and growing
involvement of the people of all sectors of society, including the youth and women, in the programmes of
socio-economic development in developing countries;
5. Reaffirms the urgency of observing the principles
and implementing the decisions regarding the establishment of the new international economic order, as well
as the targets and policy measures of the International
Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade, as a necessary pre-condition for
the success of measures to eradicate poverty and to ensure real social progress in developing countries;
6. Reaffirms also that the elimination of imperialism, colonialism, aggression, foreign occupation, all
forms of discrimination and apartheid and threats
against national sovereignty and territorial integrity is
a pre-condition for social and economic progress;
7. Affirms that the need to eliminate social disparities in developing countries is an important reason
for the developed countries to increase their commitment to achieving the goals of development co-operation
and of the new international economic order;
8. Deeply deplores the lack of response from some
of the developed countries to measures designed to
establish the new international economic order;
9. Urges the organizations of the United Nations
system to take into consideration Economic and Social
33 Ibid.

Council decision 162 (LXI) of 3 August 1976, bearing
in mind the close interrelationship between international
economic relations and the world social situation;
10. Urges those developed countries that have not
done so to respond in a spirit of co-operation and interdependence to ensure sustained socio-economic development in the developing countries;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
issue the report on the world social situation every four
years, taking into consideration the provisions of the
present resolution, and to give an account of the measures taken by Governments to implement these provisions.
97th plenary meeting
13 December 1976
31/85.

Torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the Protection of All
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, unanimously adopted in its resolution 3452
(XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Recalling also its resolution 3453 (XXX) of 9 December 1975, in which it requested the competent
bodies to conduct further work on the elaboration of:
(a) A body of principles for the protection of all
persons under any form of detention or imprisonment,
( b) A draft code of conduct for law enforcement
officials,
( c) Principles of medical ethics relevant to the protection of persons subjected to any form of detention
or imprisonment against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 1993
(LX) of 12 May 1976 and resolution 10 (XXXII)
adopted by the Commission on Human Rights on 5
March 1976,34
Welcoming the work of the Committee on Crime
Prevention and Control at its fourth session, in particular with respect to a draft code of conduct for law
enforcement officials as well as the range of application
and the implementation of the Standard Minimum Rules
for the Treatment of Prisoners,811
Noting further the decision of the Sub-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities at its twenty-ninth session to appoint a Rapporteur to prepare the first draft of a body of principles
for the protection of all persons under any form of
detention or imprisonment, and resolution 3 A (XXIX)
of 31 August 1976 in which the Sub-Commission recommended the appointment of a working group to
analyse the material received in connexion with its
annual review of developments relating to the question
of the human rights of persons subjected to any form
of detention or imprisonment,36
34 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council
Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 3 (E/5768), chap.
sect. A.
3 5 First United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime
and the Treatment of Offenders: report by the Secretariat
(United Nations publication, Sales No. 1956.IV.4), annex I.A.
3 G See E/CN.4/1218, chap. XVII.

xx:

VI.

ResolutioW! adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reiterating its belief that further efforts are needed
to help ensure adequate protection for all against torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment,
1. Calls upon Governments, as well as intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned
with human rights, to give maximum publicity to the
Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Being
Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
2. Invites the Economic and Social Council to give
due priority to the examination of the draft code of
conduct for law enforcement officials proposed by the
Committee on Crime Prevention and Control, 37 in order
that the Council at its sixty-second session and the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session may take
further steps with a view to the adoption of this instrument;
3. Also invites the Economic and Social Council
to consider with due priority the recommendation of
the Committee on Crime Prevention and Control at its
fourth session, contained in new draft rule 95 of the
Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners,88 seeking to assure the applicability of the Standard Minimum Rules to all persons arrested or imprisoned with or without charge and conviction, as well
as the draft procedures for the effective implementation
of the Rules;89
4. Requests the Commission on Human Rights,
through the Economic and Social Council, to submit
a comprehensive report on the elaboration of a body
of principles for the protection of all persons under any
form of detention or imprisonment to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session;
5. Invites the World Health Organization to prepare a draft code on medical ethics relevant to the protection of persons subjected to any form of detention
or imprisonment against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and to
bring it to the attention of the General Assembly at its
thirty-second session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment".
97th plenary meeting
13 December 1976
31/86.

Status of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and the Optional Protocol
to the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights

The General Assembly,
Having noted the report of the Secretary-General
on the status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, 40
37 See E/CN.5/536,
38 /bid., para. 95.

39 Ibid.,

annex VI.

40 A/31 /202.

annex V.

103

Recalling its resolutions 2200 A (XXI) of 16 December 1966 and 3270 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974,
and in particular its belief that the entry into force of
the International Covenants on Human Rights will
undoubtedly enhance the ability of the United Nations
to promote and encourage respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all, and thus contribute
greatly to the co-operation of States in the attainment
of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations,
Bearing in mind the important responsibilities of the
Economic and Social Council in the implementation of
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights,
Recognizing the important role of the Human Rights
Committee in the implementation of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
Convinced that the International Covenants on Human Rights constitute the first all-embracing and legally
binding international treaty in the field of human rights,
Expressing its appreciation to those States which have
become parties to the above instruments,
1. Welcomes with deep satisfaction the entry into
force of the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
as a major step in the international efforts to promote
universal respect for and observance of human rights
and fundamental freedoms;
2. Recognizes that such resources as may be necessary should be allocated to enable the Secretary-General
to provide the appropriate staff and facilities for the
effective performance of the functions of the Human
Rights Committee under the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol
thereto;
3. Recognizes that appropriate arrangements should
be made to enable the Human Rights Committee to hold
sessions at such intervals and of such duration as may
be necessary for it to carry out in an efficient manner
the functions entrusted to it under the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional
Protocol thereto;
4. Endorses the appeal to States made by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 1988 (LX)
of 11 May 197 6 that they include in their delegations to
the sessions of the Council at which reports of States
parties to the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights are examined experts competent in the subject-matter of the relevant reports;

5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session a report
on the status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional
Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights;
6. Invites once again all States to become parties
to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and'
Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol thereto.

97th plenary meeting
/3 December 1976
