S/2006/344

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 May 2006
English
Original: French

Letter dated 30 May 2006 from the President of the Security
Council addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Security Council have
decided to send a mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo from 10 to 12
June 2006. The mission will be headed by Ambassador de La Sablière, of France.
The members of the Security Council have approved the mandate of the mission,
which is annexed hereto.
At the conclusion of the consultations among the members, it was agreed that
the composition of the mission would be as follows:
Ambassador Jean-Marc de La Sablière (France), head of mission
Ambassador Basile Ikouebe (Congo)
Ambassador Lars Faaborg-Andersen (Denmark)
Ambassador Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana)
Ambassador Shinichi Kitaoka (Japan)
Counsellor Vitaliano Gallardo (Peru)
Ambassador Peter Burian (Slovakia)
Ambassador Augustine P. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania)
Minister William J. Brencick (United States of America)
I should be grateful if you would have the text of the present letter and its
annex circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Basile Ikouebe
President of the Security Council

06-36722 (E) 310506 310506

*0636722*

S/2006/344

Annex
Security Council mission on the electoral process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo: Kinshasa, 11 and 12 June 2006
1.
The Security Council mission will welcome the progress achieved in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo since the previous mission (4-10 November
2005): enactment of the electoral law, establishment of the electoral timetable and
publication of the names of candidates for the presidential and legislative elections.
2.
The mission will pay tribute to the Congolese nation, which has demonstrated
its commitment to the democratic process under way. It will reiterate the Security
Council’s support for this process, which began with the Global and All-Inclusive
Agreement on the Transition in the Democratic Republic of the Congo of 17
December 2002, and which should lead to the establishment of democratic and
sustainable institutions. It will commend the work of the Independent Electoral
Commission and the other institutions in support of democracy, and will assure them
of the Council’s full support.
3.
The mission will emphasize that the Transition, which has now entered its last
phase, will not be complete until free elections open to all have taken place. While
noting that the postponement of the first round of elections to 30 July 2006 was due
to technical constraints, the mission will stress the importance of the polls taking
place within the time limits set by the Independent Electoral Commission. It will
refer to the unprecedented efforts made by the international community, in particular
the United Nations, to support that process. It will call on Congolese stakeholders to
commit themselves unequivocally and with an inclusive approach, in particular by
ensuring that the electoral timetable is strictly adhered to.
4.
The mission will encourage the transitional authorities to increase their efforts,
with support from the International Committee in Support of the Transition (CIAT)
and the international partners of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
guarantee the democratic character of the electoral process. It will stress the
importance of equitable access by candidates to the media, impartial monitoring of
the legality of the elections, and voter education. In this context it will commend the
proposal to designate a Panel of Wise personalities.
5.
The mission will underline its concerns about the security situation during the
electoral period and stress that the elections must take place in a peaceful
environment with the police ensuring law and order at polling stations. In that
regard, it will commend the efforts undertaken by the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the European Union.
6.
The mission will stress that the elections are not an end in themselves, but an
essential stage in ongoing efforts towards national reconciliation and reconstruction
of the country. It will call on all Congolese stakeholders to commit themselves, once
the Transition has ended, to continuing to work together in the nation’s interest and
to upholding standards of good governance and transparent economic management.
It will reiterate the concerns of the Security Council, which will remain valid
following the elections, in particular the integration of the army and the police, the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of former combatants, the
disarmament, repatriation and resettlement of foreign armed groups, and the ending

2

S/2006/344

of impunity for violations of human rights and international humanitarian law. It
will express the willingness of the international community, in particular the United
Nations, to maintain its cooperation with the Democratic Republic of the Congo on
a long-term basis.

3
