asdf

United Nations

A /66/PV.130

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-sixth session

130th plenary meeting
Monday, 17 September 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 11.30 a.m.
Agenda item 39
The situation in the occupied territories
of Azerbaijan
The President: In connection with this item, I
have received a letter dated 3 August 2012 from the
representative of Azerbaijan, in which he requests that
the consideration of this item be deferred to the sixtyseventh session of the Assembly.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to defer
its consideration of the item and to include in the draft
agenda of the sixty-seventh session an item entitled “The
situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan”?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 39?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 40
Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte
The President: Members will recall that, at its 2nd
plenary meeting, on 16 September 2011, the General
Assembly decided to include this item in its agenda on
the understanding that there would be no consideration
of this item by the Assembly until further notice.
In connection with the item, I have received a note
verbale dated 16 August 2012 from the Permanent

(Qatar)

Mission of the Comoros to the United Nations
requesting the inclusion of this item in the provisional
agenda of the sixty-seventh session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to include an item entitled “Question of the Comorian
island of Mayotte” in the draft agenda of the sixtyseventh session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 40?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 42
The situation in Central America: progress in
fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy
and development
The President: Members will recall that, at
its 2nd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2011, the
Assembly decided to include item 42 in the agenda of
the sixty-sixth session, in accordance with decision
60/508, of 31 October 2005. In that decision the
General Assembly decided that this item shall remain
on the agenda for consideration upon notification by a
Member State. Accordingly, this item has been included
in the draft agenda of the sixty-seventh session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 42?
It was so decided.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-51073 (E)

*1251073*

A/66/PV.130

Agenda items 43 to 48
Question of Cyprus
Armed aggression against the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas)
The situation of democracy and human rights
in Haiti
Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi
nuclear installations and its grave consequences
for the established international system
concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and
international peace and security
Consequences of the Iraqi occupation of and
aggression against Kuwait
The President: Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2011, the
Assembly decided to include items 43 to 48 in the
agenda of the sixty-sixth session, in accordance with
paragraph 4 (b) of the annex to resolution 58/316, of
1 July 2004. In that resolution the General Assembly
decided that those items shall remain on the agenda
for consideration upon notification by a Member State.
Accordingly, those items have been included in the
draft agenda of the sixty-seventh session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda items
43 to 48?

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of agenda item 125
and to include it in the draft agenda of the sixty-seventh
session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 125?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 153
Financing of the United Nations Mission in
East Timor
The President: Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2011, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the sixty-sixth session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer consideration of this item to the sixty-seventh
session of the General Assembly. May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to defer consideration
of this item and to include it in the draft agenda of its
sixty-seventh session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 153?
It was so decided.

It was so decided.
Agenda item 162 (continued)
Agenda item 125
Follow-up to the recommendations on
administrative management and internal oversight
of the Independent Inquiry Committee into the
United Nations Oil-for-Food Programme
The President: Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2011, the General
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the sixty-sixth session.
In connection with this item, I have received a
letter dated 14 September from the representative of
Costa Rica, in which he requests that consideration of
the item be deferred to the sixty-seventh session of the
Assembly.

2

Financing of the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan
The President: Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2011, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the sixty-sixth session.
Members will also recall that, under agenda item
162, the Assembly adopted resolution 66/244, at its
93rd plenary meeting, on 24 December 2011.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer consideration of this item to the sixty-seventh
session of the General Assembly. May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to defer consideration

12-51073

A/66/PV.130

of this item and to include it in the draft agenda of its
sixty-seventh session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 162?
It was so decided.
Agenda items remaining for consideration during
the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly
The President: I should like to remind delegations
that the following agenda items, on which action has
been taken at previous meetings, have remained open
for consideration during the sixty-sixth session of the
General Assembly: items 9, 11, 14, 15, 22, 22 (a), 30, 31,
34, 34 (a), 36, 37, 64, 70, 70 (a), (b) and (c), 110, 111, 113,
114, 114 (a) and (c), 115, 115 (f) and (i), 116, 117, 120,
123, 123 (a) and (b), 125, 127, 128, 129 and 131 to 165.
As members are aware, these items have been
included in the provisional agenda of the sixty-seventh
session of the General Assembly with the exception of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 114, entitled “Election of
twenty-nine members of the Governing Council of the
United Nations Environment Programme”; sub-item (i)
of agenda item 115, entitled “Appointment of the judges
of the United Nations Dispute Tribunal”; agenda item
133, entitled “Programme budget for the biennium 20102011”; agenda item 134, entitled “Proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2012-2013”; agenda item 151,
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo”;
and agenda item 155, entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda items
9, 11, 14, 15, 22, 22 (a), 30, 31, 34, 34 (a), 36, 37, 64, 70,
70 (a) to (c), 110, 111, 113, 114, 114 (a) and (c), 115, 115
(f) and (i), 116, 117, 120, 123, 123 (a) and (b), 125, 127
to 129 and 131 to 165 at the present session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to include agenda items 9, 11,
14, 15, 22, 22 (a), 30, 31, 34, 36, 37, 64, 70, 70 (a), (b)
and (c), 110, 111, 113, 114, 114 (a), 115, 115 (f), 116, 117,
120, 123, 123 (a) and (b), 125, 127 to 129, 131, 132, 135

12-51073

to 150, 152 to 154 and 156 to 165 in the draft agenda of
the sixty-seventh session?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly concluded its consideration of agenda item
27 and its sub-items at its 89th plenary meeting, on
19 December 2011. In order for the Assembly to take
action on the draft resolution, it will be necessary to
reopen consideration of agenda item 27. May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to reopen its
consideration of agenda item 27?
It was so decided.
The President: Members will further recall that
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2011, the
General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 27 to
the Third Committee. To enable the General Assembly
to take action expeditiously on the document, may
I also take it that the Assembly wishes to consider
agenda item 27 directly in plenary meeting and proceed
immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 27 (continued)
Social development
Draft resolution (A/66/L.59/Rev.1)
The President: I would like to make an oral revision
to draft resolution A/66/L.59/Rev.1, as follows. All
preambular paragraphs in the text should be deleted.
We shall now proceed to take action on draft
resolution A/66/L.59/Rev.1, entitled “Global Day of
Parents”, as orally revised.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/66/L.59/Rev.1, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/66/L.59/Rev.1, as orally revised,
was adopted (resolution 66/292).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position on the resolution just
adopted, may I remind delegations that explanations of
position are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.

3

A/66/PV.130

Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica welcomes the attention that you have
given, Mr. President, to the issue of the family. We
should have preferred the text we have adopted to
have benefitted from an open consultation process,
particularly since the subject is of interest to everybody.
Although, like other countries of our region, we did
have an opportunity to submit written proposals, we
did not have an opportunity to personally explain our
proposals and concerns on the subject. My delegation
considers it important that the proclamation of a Global
Day of Parents be an element of the global human rights
instruments relating to the subject and such important
concepts as the best interests of the child.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Chile supported the consensus adoption
of resolution 66/292, “Global Day of Parents”. In Chile,
article I of the Political Constitution of the State, on
institutions, provides that families are the central
nucleus of society. However, like the delegation of
Costa Rica, my delegation should have wished to
participate in informal consultations to discuss the
best methods and actions to contribute to promoting
those important ideas. We should remember in that
regard that an entire international framework embodies
the concepts made up of the principal human rights
instruments, particularly the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and the Universal Declaration itself, the
former providing as fundamental principal the best
interests of the child.
Mr. Emiliou (Cyprus): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union and its member
States. We acknowledge the important work you have
done over the past year, Mr. President, and thank you
for your active engagement with the United Nations
membership.
With regard to resolution 66/292 on the Global Day
of Parents, we joined the consensus, but we would like
to make three points. First, although we appreciate that
ultimately we were able to submit amendments, we
regret that, despite similar requests from other groups
of countries, the call for informal consultations was not
heeded.
Secondly, there is no evidence that the proclamation
and dedication of “days”, “years” or “decades” has an
impact on policy.

4

In fact, the United Nations already celebrates the
International Day of Families, on 15 May, which, in our
view, includes the interest of parents worldwide.
Thirdly, we regret the choice of 1 June for the Global
Day of Parents for it is in many countries in Europe and
around the world a well-established day dedicated to
children. No substantial reasons were given to explain
why the United Nations needed to proclaim a new day
on 1 June.
In view of the full protection of the rights of the
child, we understand that this resolution fully complies
with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and
the outcome of the twenty-third special session of
the General Assembly, as well as the Programme of
Action of the International Conference on Population
and Development and the key actions for its further
implementation.
Mr. Guerber (Switzerland): I have the honour
to make this statement following the adoption of
resolution 66/292, on behalf of Iceland, Liechtenstein,
New Zealand, Norway and Switzerland. We would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for having postponed the
date for the adoption of this resolution, which has given
us more time to reflect upon your proposal. We joined
the consensus on the resolution. However, we would
like to clarify our position on three points.
Firstly, we strongly regret that no open informal
consultations took place on such an important topic, as
various opinions coexist on the issue among the United
Nations membership. Secondly, we do not see added
value in the introduction of a new Global Day of Parents,
since an International Day of Families already exists
that allows for the recognition of the roles of parents
and other important caregivers. Finally, with respect to
the proposed date for the new Global Day, we believe
that 1 June is not a felicitous date, as it conflicts with
the International Children’s Day celebrated in many
countries. We believe that this day should continue to
be exclusively devoted to children around the world and
their respective rights and needs.
Mr. Butt (Pakistan): I have the honour to deliver
this explanation of position on resolution 66/292.
We welcome your initiative, Mr. President, to
proclaim 1 June as the Global Day of Parents to be
observed annually by the General Assembly. Such
recognition is in order to honour and recognize the

12-51073

A/66/PV.130

valuable contributions made by parents all over
the world belonging to all religions, cultures and
societies. Indeed, the role of parents as the primary
caregivers, teachers and providers of critical support
for the upbringing and development of the child is
well-recognized by the Convention on the Rights of the
Child.
We were therefore happy to see that the first draft
of the resolution acknowledged that goal. The revised
version of the text included some language that, in our
view, did not correspond to the role ascribed to parents
by the Convention. However, we acknowledge your
wise decision, Mr. President, to further revise orally
the revised version, which led to addressing those
anomalies. We are accordingly happy to support the
resolution as adopted
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position following the adoption of the
resolution.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 27?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly concluded its consideration of sub-item (a) of
agenda item 63 at its 122nd plenary meeting, on 23 July.
In order for the Assembly to take action on draft
resolution A/66/L.63, it will be necessary to reopen the
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 63.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen its consideration of sub-item (a) of
agenda item 63?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 63 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support
(a) New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and
international support

item 63 and its sub-items (a) and (b) and agenda item
13 at its 32nd and 33rd plenary meetings, on 11 October
2011. Members will also recall that, under sub-item
(a), the Assembly adopted resolution 66/286 at its
122nd plenary meeting, on 23 July.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/66/L.63, entitled “A monitoring
mechanism to review commitments made towards
Africa’s development”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/66/L.63?
It was so decided.
Draft resolution A/66/L.63 was adopted (resolution
66/293).
The President: I should like to express my sincere
thanks to Ambassador Macharia Kamau of Kenya
and Ambassador Mårten Grunditz of Sweden, the
two co-facilitators of the consultations, who so ably
conducted the discussions and complex negotiations. I
am sure that members of the Assembly will join me in
extending to them our sincere appreciation.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 63 and of agenda item 63 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 121 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly considered, in a joint debate, agenda item 121
and agenda item 120, at its 70th plenary meeting, on
1 December 2011. The Assembly has before it the report
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of
the Work of the General Assembly, which has been
circulated in document A/66/891.
The Assembly also has before it a draft resolution
contained in paragraph 77 of the report of the Ad Hoc
Working Group.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution entitled “Revitalization of the work
of the General Assembly”, contained in paragraph 77
of the report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly.

The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly considered, in a joint debate, agenda

12-51073

5

A/66/PV.130

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 66/294).
The President: I should now like to express my
sincere thanks to Ambassador Susan Waffa-Ogoo of
the Gambia and Ambassador Alexander Lomaia of
Georgia, the two co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working
Group, who have so ably conducted the discussions and
complex negotiations of the Working Group. I am sure
that the members of the Assembly join me in extending
to them our sincere appreciation.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 121?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 124 (continued)
United Nations reform: measures and proposals
Draft resolution (A/66/L.62)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly considered agenda item 124, in a joint debate,
with agenda item 14, agenda item 117, and agenda item
123 and its sub-item (a) at its 72nd plenary meeting, on
2 December 2011, and adopted resolution 66/254 at its
98th plenary meeting, on 23 February 2012.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/66/L.62, entitled “Extension of the intergovernmental
process of the General Assembly on strengthening and
enhancing the effective functioning of the human rights
treaty body system”.
I now give the floor to the representative of Iceland.
Ms. Gunnarsdóttir (Iceland): Allow me to make
a few corrections to the text contained in document
A/66/L.62. These corrections reflect the text as
negotiated.
In the first line of the first preambular paragraph,
the words “by” and “it” should be deleted.
The third preambular paragraph should be deleted
in its entirety and replaced with the following:
“Taking note also of the report of the President
of the General Assembly on the intergovernmental
process of the General Assembly on strengthening
and enhancing the effective functioning of the
human rights treaty body system”.

6

In the first line of the fifth preambular paragraph,
the word “of” should be deleted and replaced by the
word “from”. In the second line, the word “of” should
be deleted, to read “as well as experts”.
In the second line of operative paragraph 1, the
words “in order” should be deleted. In the fourth line,
the word “needed” should be inserted before the words
“to strengthen”.
Finally, in the third line of operative paragraph 2,
the word “considering” should be replaced by the word
“consider”.
The President: I take note of the corrections just
made. The Secretariat will reflect the changes in the
final version of the document.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/66/L.62, entitled “Extension of the intergovernmental
process of the General Assembly on strengthening and
enhancing the effective functioning of the human rights
treaty body system”, as orally corrected.
The Assembly will now take action on the draft
resolution.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/66/L.62?
Draft resolution A/66/L.62, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 66/295).
The President: On this occasion, let me thank the
two co-facilitators, Ambassador Gréta Gunnarsdóttir
of Iceland and Ambassador Desra Percaya of Indonesia,
for their diligence and hard work in tackling this
important issue. I would also like to thank Member
States for their tendency towards a spirit of cooperation
and compromise. That is the way in which we should
go forward, and I sincerely hope that Member States
will continue to build upon what is commonly shared
and to see the big picture in the important task that lies
ahead of them.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of position, may I remind delegations that explanations
are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Russian Federation.
Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I wish to draw the Assembly’s attention to

12-51073

A/66/PV.130

a mistake in the Russian-language text of the draft
resolution.

proposals during future meetings within the framework
of the intergovernmental process.

The phrase “and the contribution” is missing from
the first line of the fifth preambular paragraph.

We believe that strict compliance with the basic
provisions of resolution 66/254 is crucial for the success
of the negotiations ahead of us. Those elements include
maintaining the intergovernmental nature of the process
in the General Assembly, in particular by respecting
the current modalities set out in paragraphs 4 and 6
of the resolution; and the possibility of discussing any
proposal on strengthening and enhancing the effective
functioning of the human rights treaty body system
coming from any State or group of States, which also
follows from the authority of the General Assembly
under the Charter of the United Nations.

(spoke in English)
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the crossregional group that includes the following States:
Belarus, Bolivia, China, Cuba, Iran, Nicaragua,
Pakistan, Syria, Venezuela and my own country,
the Russian Federation. We were pleased to join the
consensus on the adoption of resolution 66/295, entitled
“Extension of the intergovernmental process of the
General Assembly on strengthening and enhancing
the effective functioning of the human rights treaty
body system”. We are particularly satisfied that the
text is fully in line with the provisions of the founding
resolution on the subject, namely, resolution 66/254.
The cross-regional group attaches great importance
to the goal of strengthening and enhancing the effective
functioning of the human rights treaty body system. We
continue to be committed to constructive dialogue and
negotiations aimed at reaching a successful consensus
outcome of the intergovernmental process established
in accordance with resolution 66/254. The group is
convinced that the end result of the process should
contribute to consolidating the capacity of the human
rights treaty body system to fulfil its principle task
under the relevant international treaties, that is, to
assist States parties in implementing their obligations
in accordance with the respective human rights
instruments.
From the beginning of the intergovernmental
process, the cross-regional group has engaged with
other States in a constructive spirit and has made a
number of specific proposals on strengthening the
treaty body system and improving its functioning.
Those proposals — this is by no means an exhaustive
list — include the elaboration of a code of conduct for
members of the treaty bodies and the establishment
of a relevant accountability mechanism for experts;
guaranteeing the observance of the principle of equitable
geographical representation in electing members of
the treaty bodies; strengthening the mechanisms for
meetings of conferences of States parties; and increasing
the transparency of contacts between the treaty bodies
and relevant stakeholders in the process of considering
reports by States parties. The cross-regional group
looks forward to continuing to discuss those and other

12-51073

The cross-regional group would like to take
this opportunity to express its sincere and profound
appreciation to you, Mr. President, to the members
of your team who have been engaged in the
intergovernmental process, and especially to the two
co-facilitators, Ambassador Gréta Gunnarsdóttir and
Ambassador Desra Percaya, for all their efforts and
hard work throughout the intergovernmental process.
We look forward to their reappointment by the President
of the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session.
We equally extend our thanks to the members of the
co-facilitators’ team, in particular Mr. Mochammad
Chandra Yudha and Mr. Ahmad Arief Adnan of
Indonesia and Mr. Thorvardur Atli Thórsson of Iceland.
The cross-regional group fully shares the cofacilitators’ assessment of the overall approach of
Member States during the past months as both positive
and constructive. It is crucial that we continue in
the same spirit and with the same dedication to our
common cause. I ask members to please consider this
statement as a reflection of our group’s commitment
and dedication to the letter and spirit of resolution
66/254, on the intergovernmental process.
Ms. Gunnarsdóttir (Iceland): I am making
this statement on behalf of the co-facilitators of the
intergovernmental process, namely, Iceland and
Indonesia. Allow me, at the outset, Mr. President,
to reiterate our appreciation for the trust and honour
that you have conferred upon us and our countries
to facilitate such an important process related to the
human rights treaty body system.
As laid out in resolution 66/254, we sought,
through the mandate that given us to us by the
President, to conduct open, transparent and inclusive

7

A/66/PV.130

negotiations on how to strengthen and enhance the
effective functioning of the human rights treaty body
system. We therefore sought to provide a common
platform for Member States to discuss and deliberate
upon this very complex but important issue. That
included a series of thematic discussions on issues
related to the reporting process, methods of work, the
capacity to implement and resources, as well as on
the previous reports by the Secretary-General and the
recent report of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights on the outcome of her multistakeholder process.
In addition, during the intergovernmental process we
heard interventions and received written inputs from
non-State actors representing the treaty body system,
national human rights institutions and civil society.
We believe that those interventions and contributions
supported the intergovernmental process by providing
additional information and perspectives that enriched
the discussions. We wish to thank them for sharing
their expertise on this matter.
We would furthermore like to emphasize that, in
the view of the co-facilitators, the overall approach
of Member States during the process was positive
and constructive. Our observation is that, throughout
the negotiations, delegations exhibited a strong
sense of commitment and a spirit of cooperation and
compromise, which we believe sets a positive tone for
future engagement in that process.
Finally, allow me to express the heartfelt
appreciation of the co-facilitators for the contribution
of Member States to the intergovernmental process. As
resolution 66/295, which we have just adopted, states,
strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning
of the human rights treaty body system is a common
goal of us all. This positive atmosphere should allow
the process to advance in a constructive way with
the shared objective of strengthening the treaty body
system as a whole.
Ms. Razzouk (United States of America): The
United States would like to thank the co-facilitators of
this process, the Ambassadors of Iceland and Indonesia,
for all of their efforts. We look forward to continuing
the dialogue on strengthening the treaty body system.
As we said throughout the negotiations, the
United States does not support a code of conduct for
the treaty bodies. We believe that non-governmental
organizations must continue to be included in all
aspects of the discussion throughout this process. We
thank the co-facilitators for bringing forward this text.
8

We will continue to engage with other delegations on
the dialogue going forward.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 124?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly concluded its consideration of agenda item
66 and its sub-items at its 89th plenary meeting, on
19 December 2011. In order for the Assembly to take
action on draft resolution A/66/L.61, it will be necessary
to reopen its consideration of agenda item 66.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen its consideration of agenda item
66?
It was so decided.
The President: Members will further recall that
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2011, the
General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 66 to
the Third Committee. To enable the General Assembly
to take action expeditiously on this item, may I take it
that the Assembly wishes to consider agenda item 66
directly in plenary meeting and to proceed immediately
to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 66 (continued)
Rights of indigenous peoples
Draft resolution (A/66/L.61)
The President: I should now like to make the
following oral corrections to draft resolution A/66/L.61.
The last part of sub-paragraph (j) of paragraph 3
should read:
“submit the proposed list to Member States for their
consideration on a non-objection basis, and bring
the list to the attention of the General Assembly;”.
In paragraph 5, the words “full and effective”
should be deleted. The paragraph should therefore read:

12-51073

A/66/PV.130

“Encourages the participation of indigenous
women, young people, older persons and persons
with disabilities in the World Conference;”
In connection with draft resolution A/66/L.61,
as orally corrected, I now give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Graisse (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
resolution A/66/L.61, entitled “Organization of the
High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly,
to be known as the World Conference on Indigenous
Peoples”, as orally corrected, I wish to put on record the
following statement of financial implications on behalf
of the Secretary-General, in accordance with rule 153
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraphs 1 and 3 (a) of draft
resolution A/66/L.61, as orally corrected, the General
Assembly would decide that the high-level plenary
meeting of the General Assembly, to be known as the
World Conference on Indigenous Peoples, will be held
on Monday, 22 September, and on the afternoon of
Tuesday, 23 September 2014.
The Assembly would also decide that the
organizational arrangements of the World Conference
on Indigenous Peoples shall be as follows. The World
Conference will be composed of two plenary meetings,
in the form of an opening and a closing session,
three interactive round tables and one informal panel
discussion. The opening meeting will start at 9.00 a.m.,
and two round tables will take place simultaneously on
the afternoon of Monday, 22 September.
The opening and closing plenary meetings, as well
as one of the parallel round tables, will require three
meetings with interpretation in all six languages, and
they will use the entitlements of the General Assembly.
Verbatim reports in all six languages will be provided
only for the plenary meetings. The two round tables and
the informal panel discussion will therefore constitute an
addition of three meetings, with interpretation in all six
languages, to the meeting workload of the Department
of General Assembly and Conference Management.
That would constitute an additional requirement to the
amount of $33,300 for meetings in 2014.
Furthermore, additional documentation comprising
32 pages of post-session documentation in all six official
languages would be required in 2014. That would
constitute an additional requirement to the amount of
$62,300 for documentation services in 2014.
12-51073

Consequently, an additional requirement of $95,600
for the biennium 2014-2015 would arise under section 2,
“General Assembly and Economic and Social Council
affairs and conference management”, for meeting
servicing and documentation.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/66/L.61, additional resources in the
amount of $95,600 would be required under the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2014-2015 under
section 2, “General Assembly and Economic and Social
Council affairs and conference management”. That
would require additional appropriations of $95,600 to
be included in the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2014-2015.
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on draft resolution A/66/L.61, entitled “Organization
of the High-level Plenary Meeting of the General
Assembly, to be known as the World Conference on
Indigenous Peoples”, as orally corrected.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/66/L.61, as orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/66/L.61, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 66/296).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position on the resolution just
adopted, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Makriyiannis (Cyprus): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union.
We would like to express our sincere appreciation
for the leadership and extensive efforts of the
co-facilitators, His Excellency Luis-Alfonso de Alba,
Permanent Representative of Mexico, and Mr. John
Henriksen, international representative of the Sami
Parliament of Norway, during the negotiations of
resolution 66/296. We would also like to note our
appreciation for the high degree of professionalism,
openness and creativity on the part of the co-facilitators
and their team throughout this process in bringing
together a number of diverging positions to achieve our
shared goal of providing a basis for a successful World
Conference on Indigenous Peoples. We also note the
close consultations with indigenous peoples conducted
by the co-facilitators. We highly value the outcome
reached in our discussions.

9

A/66/PV.130

The European Union fully supports the World
Conference and the full and effective participation
of indigenous peoples through all stages of the
Conference. We look forward to the participation and
contribution of indigenous peoples at the Conference
and believe that the resolution allows Member States
and indigenous peoples to work closely together
through the preparatory process as well as during the
Conference.
In that regard, we would like to make one comment
on the text just adopted, with reference to the full
participation of civil society in the Conference. We
firmly believe that maintaining a strong and open
dialogue with civil society groups within the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly will be an important
contribution to the Conference. We regret that this
principle could not be fully reflected in the text owing
to the reluctance of some Member States.
We have consistently noted throughout the
consultations on this resolution that the process
of admission for non-governmental organizations
to participate in the World Conference should be
transparent and allow for the full involvement of the
General Assembly. It is our interpretation of operative
paragraph 3 (j) that, within the Assembly, Member
States will receive full information on the applications
and will be able to make a final decision on the
presence of civil society representatives or specific
non-governmental organizations.
We once again thank all colleagues for their efforts
to reach a consensus. We would also like to extend
our warm gratitude to both co-facilitators for their
persistent efforts to accommodate all views expressed in
the negotiations. We highly value the close cooperation
that we have shared throughout this process.
Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The delegation of the Russian Federation
joined in the consensus on the adoption of the draft
resolution contained in document A/66/L.61. We would
like to thank the Permanent Representative of Mexico,
Mr. De Alba, for his efforts to coordinate the difficult
negotiating process on this document.
The Russian Federation sets great store by
international efforts to protect the rights and interests
of indigenous peoples around the world, and we are
convinced that the General Assembly can play a
tangible role in achieving that goal. These were the
deciding factors when we made the decision to support

10

the initiative on the holding of a world conference on
indigenous peoples in the format of a General Assembly
plenary meeting. We believe that the success of the
Conference will depend largely on strict compliance
with the modalities of the forum.
In that respect, we would like to stress that nothing
in this resolution should be construed as annulling or
modifying the existing rules of procedure of the General
Assembly, the status of the General Assembly as the
highest intergovernmental body, or the procedure for
the harmonization of documents for their subsequent
adoption by the Assembly.
The following paragraphs should be viewed from
that perspective: the fourth preambular paragraph
and operative paragraphs 3, 5, 7, 9 and 12. This is
especially the case in the context of accreditation and
of participation in preparing and harmonizing the draft
outcome document of the World Conference.
In conclusion, we would like to note the important
role played by the coordinators of the negotiating
process, as appointed by the President of the General
Assembly, who are charged with facilitating the quest
for mutual understanding among Member States
and ensuring that no unfounded and irresponsible
statements are made that could distort the fundamental
positions of official delegations. Sadly, in this case,
those requirements were satisfied only by the Member
States coordinator. We hope that lessons will be learned
from those negative experiences.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia would like to refer to
draft resolution A/66/L.61, on the organization of the
High-level Plenary Meeting of the sixty-ninth session
of the General Assembly, to be known as the World
Conference on Indigenous Peoples, to be held on 22 and
23 September 2014.
Bolivia would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate and thank Ambassador Luis-Alfonso
de Alba, Permanent Representative of Mexico, and
Mr. John Henriksen, international representative of
the Sami Parliament, who, on behalf of the General
Assembly, guided the informal consultations on the
draft resolution. We are of the view that this document
is the outcome of broad-based, constructive and
transparent negotiations.
For the first time in history, and 69 years after the
founding of the United Nations, a High-level Plenary
12-51073

A/66/PV.130

Meeting of the General Assembly to be known as the
World Conference on Indigenous Peoples will be held
in 2014. It will be the outcome of more than 20 years of
negotiations, which is the time it took to recognize the
rights of indigenous peoples, until finally, in September
2007, the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples was adopted. There can be no doubt
that this Conference will be a new milestone for the
more than 370 million indigenous peoples throughout
the world.
It is important to recall that almost two months
after the adoption of the historic Declaration, during
the Ibero-American Summit of Heads of State and
Government held in November 2007 in Santiago de
Chile, with the support of the Permanent Forum on
Indigenous Issues, our brother, the President of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Evo Morales Ayma, put
forward the idea that the United Nations might organize
a world conference on indigenous peoples. However,
that original idea has only been half fulfilled: although
in 2014 we will hold such a conference, it will take
place in the format of a high-level plenary meeting.
But we are sure that in future the dream of holding a
United Nations conference on indigenous peoples will
be realized.
The modalities resolution that we have just adopted
deals with basic aspects: the date, the format of the
conference and the form that the opening plenary
meeting will take, with the participation of three
indigenous peoples’ representatives and the Chairs of
the Permanent Forum and the Expert Mechanism on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples. Likewise, it sets out the
format for the informal round-table discussions, which
will be co-chaired by Member States and representatives
of indigenous peoples.
A second key element of this modalities resolution
relates to the accreditation of the representatives and
institutions of indigenous peoples, which is a clearly
differentiated process. In operative paragraphs 3 (h),
(i) and (j) of the resolution, for example, it is stated
that non-governmental organizations of civil society,
academic institutions and national human rights
institutions will be included. That definition makes it
clear once again that indigenous peoples can never be
considered non-governmental organizations.
A third element we deem important is the fact that
the 2014 Conference will produce an action-oriented
outcome document aimed at contributing to the
realization of the rights of indigenous peoples, with a
12-51073

view to achieving the objectives of the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and the
goal of promoting the achievement of the internationally
agreed development objectives.
Lastly, we would like to draw attention to the
commitment of the Government of the Plurinational
State of Bolivia and of its indigenous peoples to
participating actively in all of the preparatory processes
and in the 2014 Conference. We can assure the Assembly
of the presence of our President, Evo Morales Ayma,
as the first indigenous constitutional President, at the
opening session of the High-level Plenary Meeting of
the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly, to be
known as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples,
which is to be held on 22 September 2014.
Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): Sweden welcomes the
adoption of the resolution on the modalities of the World
Conference of Indigenous Peoples and, like others, we
would like in particular to extend our gratitude to the
two co-facilitators. We are particularly pleased that
the resolution stresses the importance of including the
participation of indigenous peoples, which is fully in
line with the objective of the United Nations Declaration
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.
The Swedish Government is committed to the active
involvement of indigenous peoples in the preparation
for and in the World Conference. My Government has
therefore decided to contribute $100,000 to the United
Nations Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Populations.
We encourage other Governments that have not already
done so and other stakeholders to consider joining us.
Sweden also sees merit in the General Assembly’s
adoption of a decision, in the near future, setting
out general procedures that would apply to the
participation of indigenous peoples’ representatives
at United Nations meetings, given that indigenous
peoples’ representatives are not always organized
as non-governmental organizations and that issues
affecting them are not limited to human rights.
Ms. Robl (United States of America): The United
States would like to add our thanks to Ambassador De
Alba of Mexico and Mr. John Henriksen for their efforts
in facilitating the discussions of the modalities of the
High-Level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly
to be known as the World Conference on Indigenous
Peoples.
There are more than 370 million indigenous people
who live in some 90 countries around the world. We
11

A/66/PV.130

honour their immeasurable contributions to society and
call upon all States to work together with indigenous
communities to meet our common challenges.
Throughout negotiations on this document, we have
underscored the important role indigenous peoples and
civil society organizations should play through their
participation in that Conference.

We are also concerned with paragraph 12, which
requests the President of the General Assembly, in
consultation with Member States and representatives
of indigenous peoples, to finalize the organizational
arrangements of the World Conference. All decisions
about the World Conference that are not delegated in
this paragraph should remain with the Member States.

The process of admission for civil society
organizations,
including
non-governmental
organizations, to participate in the Conference must be
completely transparent. Paragraph 3 (h) of resolution
66/296 states that indigenous peoples’ organizations
and institutions:

The United States looks forward to continued
cooperation to make the World Conference a productive
session.

“should be invited to submit applications to the
Secretariat through an open and transparent
accreditation procedure, in accordance with the
established practice”.
But we are not aware of a set practice in this
regard. The procedures of the Permanent Forum on
Indigenous Issues and the Expert Mechanism on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples differ from each other.
The resolution does not define a process by which
indigenous groups will be accredited to the High-level
Meeting, and therefore this issue will require further
consideration by Member States, in consultation with
indigenous people and other stakeholders.
We understand paragraph 3 (j) to mean that the list
of non-governmental organizations and other potential
participants will be sent to the General Assembly for its
consideration, where Member States will evaluate any
possible objections made by other States.
Paragraph 9 concerns the World Conference
outcome document. As the World Conference is a
high-level meeting of the General Assembly, Member
States have the responsibility to negotiate the outcome
document and consider it for adoption. However,
indigenous peoples’ input from the preparatory process
and the World Conference itself will be taken into
account during the negotiations. These concepts are
contained in paragraph 9, which refers to:
“inclusive and open informal consultations at an
appropriate date to enable sufficient consideration
by Member States and agreement by the General
Assembly before its formal action at the high-level
meeting”.

12

Ms. Li Xiaomei (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China attaches great importance to the protection of
indigenous peoples’ rights. The World Conference on
Indigenous Peoples will give us a great opportunity to
discuss and deliberate on the protection of indigenous
peoples’ rights. We steadfastly support the convening of
this World Conference and we support the participation
of indigenous representatives in the Conference in
accordance with General Assembly procedures.
With
respect
to
the
accreditation
of
non-governmental organizations, we believe that the
Charter of the United Nations, Economic and Social
Council decision 1996/31 and the relevant procedures
should be strictly adhered to.
Finally, we appreciate the work of the President
of the General Assembly and thank the co-facilitators
and their team for their efforts in the discussion on
resolution 66/296, and we will continue to work with
them.
The President: We have heard the last speaker on
this item.
I should now like to express my sincere thanks
to Ambassador Luis-Alfonso de Alba of Mexico and
Mr. John Henriksen, the two co-facilitators of the
consultations, who so ably conducted the discussions
and complex negotiations. I am sure that members of
the Assembly join me in extending to them our sincere
appreciation.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 66?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

12-51073
