S/PV.8877

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8877

th meeting
Tuesday, 12 October 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

President Kenyatta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kenya)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Muraleedharan
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Diversity, State-building and the search for peace
Letter dated 6 October 2021 from the Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2021/854)

In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the Security Council
addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May 2020
(S/2020/372), which was agreed in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, this official record of the Security Council will be supplemented by
a compilation of annexes (S/2021/868) containing the statements submitted by interested
non-members of the Council.

21-28457 (E)
*2128457*

S/PV.8877

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Diversity, State-building and the search for peace
Letter dated 6 October 2021 from the
Permanent Representative of Kenya
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2021/854)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Rwanda to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Paul Kagame, President of Rwanda. I request the
Protocol Officer to escort the President to a seat at the
Council table.
Mr. Paul Kagame, President of Rwanda, was
escorted to a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
His Excellency Mr. Thabo Mbeki, former President
of South Africa; and Ms. Fawzia Koofi, first woman
Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Afghanistan.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/854, which contains the text of
a letter dated 6 October 2021 from the Permanent
Representative of Kenya addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept note on the item
under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.
The Secretary-General: My thanks to the
Government of Kenya for convening today’s open debate
on the important issue of diversity, State-building and
peace. Your theme, Mr. President, captures a crucial
but often overlooked idea — that peace is not found in a
piece of paper. It is found in people — more specifically,
a diversity of people from different backgrounds coming
together to chart a common course for a country.
2/23

12/10/2021

Parties to conflicts can agree to end hostilities.
They can agree to begin the long process of rebuilding
the country, and they can even join forces to reconstitute
the Government. But, without including a wide range of
diverse voices at every step of the process and bringing
all people along, any peace will be short-lived. Longstanding grievances, inequalities, mistrust and social
divisions do not simply vanish when the fighting stops;
they can easily flare up again. They can be worsened
if people in groups hungry for change do not see their
needs and vision for the future being addressed. We
see that cycle playing out all around us. Each week,
the Chamber echoes with updates on the grinding
conflicts that scar our world and on their devastating
humanitarian toll.
One undeniable trend is the sharp increase in
the number of non-State armed groups at the heart
of conflicts, including rebels, insurgents, militias,
criminal gangs and arms traffickers, terrorists and
extremist groups. Many coalesce around joint identities
or shared beliefs. Others are opportunistic, driven by
the profits of crime or the promise of power. We are
also seeing a rise in military coups and, as the joint
United Nations-World Bank study entitled Pathways
for Peace: Inclusive Approaches to Preventing Violent
Conflict found, many conflicts are deeply rooted in
long-standing inequalities among groups.
People feel excluded and marginalized. They
are denied the same opportunities and justice as
their neighbours because of their culture, race, skin
colour, ethnicity or income. While inequalities exist
in every country, they are particularly rampant in
countries where social services like health, education,
security and justice are lacking and where the scars of
colonialism are still visible, seen in arbitrarily drawn
borders and historical advantages for certain groups
over others.
Against that backdrop. the coronavirus disease
pandemic has compounded inequalities and reversed
development and peacebuilding gains. Those
inequalities and weak governance structures create a
vacuum that is easily filled by the voices of intolerance
and extremism that can lead to violent conflict.
Conversely, inclusion is foundational to resilience and
sustainable peace. Nowhere is that clearer than in the
linkages between women’s inclusion, gender equality
and sustainable peace and security, as the Council will
discuss later this month.
21-28457

12/10/2021

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

As countries look to build sustainable peace,
they need to include and involve all segments of the
population in the process of rebuilding communities and
sustaining peace. That idea is at the heart of the twin
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
adopted at the conclusion of the 2015 (resolution 2282
(2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262) and
2020 (resolution 2558 (2020) and General Assembly
resolution 75/201) peacebuilding architecture reviews.
It is also at the heart of my new agenda for peace,
as part of the report entitled Our Common Agenda.
When we open the door to inclusion and participation,
we take a giant step forward in conflict prevention
and peacebuilding. I want to emphasize three areas
in particular.
First, national institutions and laws must work
for all people. The proposed new agenda for peace
includes a strong emphasis on inclusion at every step
of a country’s journey, whether before, during and
after conflict and once State-building takes hold and
gathers speed.
That means protecting and promoting human rights,
including people’s right to health, education, protection
and opportunity. It means implementing policies and
laws that protect vulnerable groups, including laws
against discrimination based on race, ethnicity, age,
gender, religion, disability, sexual orientation or gender
identity. It means working with all partners to develop
strong national capacities anchored in human rights
that can serve all people equally.
(spoke in French)
Secondly, countries should consider giving more
space to subnational regions. Countries emerging from
years or even decades of instability cannot afford to
ignore the views of broad swathes of the population and
thereby risk stirring up future enmities. Governments
must find new ways to move the population forward
together in unity through constant dialogue while
recognizing and respecting differences, even if that
means devolving certain areas of authority. That is why
the United Nations, through its missions and country
offices, strives to facilitate a constant dialogue between
national institutions and local populations and groups.
That is the condition for all people to contribute to
shaping the future of their country.

S/PV. 8877

(spoke in English)
Indeed, women, young people and the most
marginalized must be involved at every step along the
way. Building and sustaining peace requires their voices
and actions. That is why our peacekeeping operations
and special political missions place strong emphasis on
the greater inclusion and meaningful participation of
women and young people.
In Somalia, for example, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia has trained young
political aspirants from different political parties, and
the Mission has supported the Government and women
leaders in fully implementing the 30 per cent gender
quota in their country’s elections. The Deputy SecretaryGeneral recently travelled there to highlight the critical
importance of women’s leadership in building and
sustaining peace and security. As a global community,
we must continue encouraging and supporting the full
and effective participation of women and young people
on that journey.
For countries emerging from the horrors of
conflict and looking to a better future — indeed, for
all countries — diversity must not be seen as a threat.
It is a source of strength and an anchor of peace and
stability in parts of the world that have seen too little
of either. It is also a rallying point for every person to
contribute to a better future for themselves and for their
societies. As a global community, let us find new ways
to make that happen.
My thanks again to Kenya for highlighting this
important issue.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to the President of the Republic
of Rwanda.
President Kagame: I wish to start by thanking His
Excellency President Uhuru Kenyatta for the invitation
to join the Security Council today and for choosing
such an important and timely topic for this debate.
Peace is much more than the absence of violence.
The precondition for sustainable peace is a shared
understanding of the root causes of conflict by a broad
range of stakeholders in society. Allow me to offer a
few thoughts on what that may entail, informed by
Rwanda’s own recent experience.

21-284573/23

S/PV.8877

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

First, peacebuilding should be understood as an
ongoing process — a constant search for solutions
through dialogue and consensus, as we say in Rwanda.
It may not be possible to prevent all conflict entirely;
in fact, disagreements and grievances will always be
present in one form or another. However, the intensity
and the impact of conflicts can be minimized by
remaining attentive to local needs and expectations.
That means investing in the capacity of institutions
and individuals so that they can deliver the results that
citizens expect and deserve.
Secondly, there is no universal template that can
be transferred automatically from one context to
another. External advice and examples can be helpful
in encouraging reflection and finding new approaches.
We have benefited from various partnerships ourselves
in Rwanda.
Thirdly, we must reckon with the growing power
of social media to exploit vectors of division in society
that can quickly weaken the social fabric.
Finally, peacebuilding is not a purely technical
enterprise. It is deeply political and human and must
take into account the emotions and the memories that
the various parties bring to the table. Multilateral
organizations, such as the United Nations and the
African Union, have a central role to play in many
situations. Civil society groups, particularly those led
by women, also have a key role to play, as do business
leaders. However, even though we have had the
opportunity to learn lessons from previous failures and
successes of peacebuilding processes, the international
community’s toolbox has hardly changed.
Rwanda’s post-genocide trajectory is marked by a
consistent focus on our national unity, inclusion and
service delivery. There are other positive examples from
Africa and beyond. Practical and tangible partnership
is critical. Rwanda’s experience is that no matter how
bad the situation appears, success is always an option.
Let us build on today’s debate and challenge
ourselves to work together to demand better results in
international peacebuilding.
Once again, I commend the Republic of Kenya for
organizing today’s event.
The President: I thank President Kagame for
his statement.
4/23

12/10/2021

I now give the floor to His Excellency former
President Thabo Mbeki.
Mr. Mbeki: First of all, I would like to thank
the Kenyan presidency of the Security Council for its
initiative in convening this high-level open debate on
peacebuilding and sustainable peace, focusing on the
important matter of the relationship between diversity,
on the one hand, and peacebuilding and State-building,
on the other.
As Council members know, a few years ago the
African Union (AU) took the bold decision to silence
the guns by 2020, and this meant that the continent’s
political leadership came to the view that finally Africa
must rid herself of the scourge of war and violent
conflict, which had persisted for almost all of the years
of its States’ independence. In this context, the African
national States and Governments were fully conscious
of Africa’s critical need for the sustainable peace that
the Security Council has convened to discuss.
As Council members also know, over the years
more or less standard procedures have been followed
to resolve conflicts that have broken out, certainly
including those in Africa. The international community
would intervene to ensure that the belligerents
concluded ceasefire agreements. Peacekeepers would
then be deployed to ensure the observance of the
ceasefire. Interim Government arrangements would
then be put in place, and a new Constitution negotiated.
Elections based on that Constitution would take
place to constitute a new Government, after which
the peacekeeping mission would be wound up, peace
having been achieved.
However, and quite legitimately, the question would
arise: will this be sustainable peace? Five years ago,
the World Peace Foundation produced an important
report entitled African Politics, African Peace, acting
on a request from within the African Union peace
architecture that the Foundation should reflect on the
matter of the future of peace missions in Africa. The
report said, inter alia, “Centralizing the ‘primacy of
the political’ within all AU responses is essential” and
insisted on the primary role of politics in the design
and implementation of peace operations. It went on to
say that
“Preventive action to avert political crises and
armed conflicts is the single most essential task for
African peace missions”,
21-28457

12/10/2021

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

adding that
“This demands exceptional access to the highest
level of decision makers along with credibility
and discretion”.
Furthermore, the report said that it agrees with the
United Nations High-Level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations of 2015 about, first, the primacy of politics
in driving the design and implementation of peace
operations, and, secondly, a new and stronger emphasis
on conflict prevention.
As you know, Mr. President, this insistence on the
primacy of politics is to emphasize that the resolution
of conflicts should not be driven simply or mainly by
security considerations. The primacy of politics means
that conflict resolution must address the vital matter of
the root causes of the conflict, and that aims not merely
to silence the guns, important as that is, but to ensure
sustainable peace.
This draws attention exactly to the central matter in
today’s Security Council open debate, that is, the issue
of diversity. Certainly my own personal experience,
derived from involvement in conflict resolution on
our continent, confirms the centrality of the failure
to properly manage diversity as one of the root causes
of civil war and violent conflict, and that experience
relates to such countries as the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Burundi, Côte d’Ivoire and the Sudan. In that
context, I would even recommend a study of the 2004
report of the Sierra Leone Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, which tells the naked truth that it was
as a result of the failure to manage diversity that the
country experienced a very costly 11-year war, which
started in 1991. Similarly, we see a result of the failure
to manage diversity in the violent conflict which has
been, and is still, going on in Cameroon.
Yet another painful example is the ongoing major
military conflict in Ethiopia. As Council members
know, as the African Union’s year to silence the guns,
2020, was coming to a close, this conflict broke out in
the Tigray region. The challenge to properly manage
the very pronounced diversity of Ethiopia constitutes
the very heart of the violent conflict involving Tigray,
and the incontestable truth is that the successful
management of this diversity cannot and will not be
achieved through weapons of war. As many of the
members of the Council have said before, the belligerents
in Ethiopia should enter into a permanent ceasefire and
engage one another in an inclusive national dialogue

S/PV. 8877

precisely to agree on what they should do together to
achieve the very important and noble goal of unity in
diversity. At the end of the Biafra War in Nigeria in
1970, the victorious national leaders announced that
they would follow a policy of no victor, no vanquished.
I believe that this is exactly what Ethiopia needs.
In the end, what I would like to suggest is that, as it
discharges its obligation to maintain international peace
and security, the Security Council should proceed from
a position of acceptance of the primacy of the political.
Its interventions would therefore help to produce
sustainable peace and contribute to State-building by
addressing such challenges as the proper management
of diversity.
The President: I thank former President Mbeki for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Koofi.
Ms. Koofi: It is my honour to join this timely open
debate on peacebuilding and sustainable peace. I would
like to extend my thanks and gratitude to Kenya for
inviting me to brief the Security Council.
The overall theme of this meeting is “Diversity,
State-building and the search for peace”. Diversity
and inclusion are the cornerstone of State- and
peacebuilding. Who appreciates the value of living
in peace and harmony as much as my people in
Afghanistan — those who are born and die in war?
The future of Afghanistan, my country, is the
latest test of whether we can come together as a global
community to uphold the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations in the face of adversity. In
fact, as I speak to the Security Council today, in my
country, the women and men who dedicated their
lives to building peace, to promoting the rule of law,
justice and equality — people who put their own lives
at risk to protect and serve ours — are living under
harsh oppression imposed on them through the power
of exclusion.
What is happening in Afghanistan should be of
concern to all of us. In fact, when I left Afghanistan a
few weeks ago, as I was arriving at the airport, I saw
thousands of people walking in the streets of Kabul.
The city looked like a graveyard of people who were
alive — people who were hopeless, disappointed
and powerless.

21-284575/23

S/PV.8877

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

At the same time, we have to come together to hold
the Taliban accountable for what is happening in my
country. There are serious reports that fundamental
freedoms are being flouted. Women and girls are once
again regarded as second-class citizens. They are
literally making us invisible again.
That situation shows how power imbalances are
at the root of so much conflict and inequality. Let me
mention two specific areas where power structures
cause particular chaos where we need to take action
together to address the harmful outcomes.
The first is close to home, in the relationship
between men and women. The playbook for running
today’s world was written primarily by men with men’s
interests in mind. It presents men as the norm and
women as the exception. In short, the world has been set
up to make it easier for men to perpetuate themselves
in power.
The Sustainable Development Goals — our
common blueprint for building peaceful, prosperous
and inclusive societies — clearly state that gender
equality is a goal in itself and key to achieving the
other 16 goals. In order to achieve that, we should make
our political processes, structures and methods of work
more responsive to women’s needs.
In Afghanistan, for instance, we want direct
face-to-face talks with the Taliban. The United Nations
can include us in its own mediation teams. It can also
facilitate a meeting of a delegation of our women with
the Taliban. We want to do it for our sisters back home.
For years, women in Afghanistan have been advocating,
lobbying and demanding the meaningful participation
of women, youth and victims of war as a prerequisite
for the success of the peace process. We were told,
“The decisions have not made; once the decisions
are made, we will include you.” Let us be part of the
decision-making. Do not decide on our behalf. Let us
make decisions together with men in order to make the
decisions sustainable, meaningful and acceptable to
all. If women were only listened to and if the people
of Afghanistan were only given more time to negotiate
their future, we could have avoided the situation that
we face now. Even if we had an agreement between the
warring parties that was 50 per cent acceptable by all
sides, it would be much better than the chaotic situation
that we face now.
As every Council member engages with the
Taliban caretaker establishment, no matter what the
6/23

12/10/2021

strategic focus is, please remember that there are some
16 to 17 million women and girls in Afghanistan who
do not know what tomorrow holds for them. That is
heartbreaking. As a woman who has spent and lived
all my life in Afghanistan, after 20 years of investment
of blood and treasure, it breaks my heart to start
from scratch.
Another area where power imbalances can do harm
is when they are directed — or rather, misdirected — at
minorities. All countries in the world include persons
belonging to national, ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities. Although situations greatly vary, common
to all is the fact that too often minorities face multiple
forms of discrimination, resulting in marginalization,
exclusion, forced displacement and migration. Look
at the situation in Afghanistan: thousands of people
from religious minorities and other minority groups
are forced to flee their villages and left with no home
and no future. Only people who live in that situation
understand the pain of being homeless and having
no identity.
Achieving the effective participation of minorities
and ending their exclusion requires that we embrace
diversity through the promotion and implementation
of international human rights standards. There can
be no place for discrimination, which scars societies
and pushes communities to grow further apart. The
public platform Council members enjoy comes with a
responsibility to use it, and to use it wisely. As political
and diplomatic leaders, Council members have the duty
to bring in those who are different, rather than to push
them out. At a time when our societies are increasingly
divided, Council members can promote the essential
values of respect, compromise and dialogue.
As a country of minorities, of several ethnic and
linguistic groups living together for centuries during
conflict and peace, inclusivity through the meaningful
participation of all groups and power structures is
more relevant today than at any other time in my
country. People in my country today want meaningful
representation. That is the message I wanted to
convey to the Taliban during my negotiations with its
representatives. I wanted to tell them that Afghanistan
today is a transformed Afghanistan. The Taliban needs
to adapt to the new realities of Afghanistan. The fact
that there are thousands of people every day using their
civic rights and protesting against what is happening
in the country is a small example of how the current
generation has transformed.
21-28457

12/10/2021

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The main lesson from the past 150 years of my
country’s history is that a durable peace and sustainable
State in a multi-ethnic and diverse country requires a
pluralistic social and political structure. Hence the
international community has to make it clear that it will
work with the authorities in Kabul only if they work
with all parties to map out a clear path that guarantees
the fundamental rights of all segments of society, in
particular women and girls, and their inclusion in
the State. That should include a speedy return to
the constitutional order through elections in which
everyone should be able to take part. I know that we
do not have many good experiences and examples of
elections in Afghanistan, but there is no alternative
to elections. People, with all their problems, stand by
elections. We remember that people paid the highest
price; their fingers were cut for voting, but they still
exercised that right.
Finally, as the humanitarian crisis looms, women
and children constitute the majority of the vulnerable
population. To reach them, especially given the genderdiscrimination ideology of those holding power in
Kabul, it is imperative that the United Nations demand
the protection and inclusion of Afghan female aid
workers and peacebuilders and other civic professionals
and community organizations — not only the recipients
but also the decision-makers. They are critical to
the distribution and delivery of aid, and they are the
neediest. That is entirely in the control of the United
Nations. The United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and other agencies must learn
from the lessons of 1996 to 2001. When I was living
in Afghanistan, I was a recipient of that. They must
demonstrate a practical and clear gender-responsive
aid plan.
Let us remember that a safe, stable and just
Afghanistan means a secure world.
The President: I thank Ms. Koofi for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
President of Kenya.
At the outset, I want to thank the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, His Excellency
President Paul Kagame, His Excellency former
President Thabo Mbeki and Ms. Fawzia Koofi for their
insights. I am very grateful to all of them for honouring
my invitation to participate in this important debate.

S/PV. 8877

The key message that I wish to deliver today is that
the poor management of diversity is leading to grave
threats to international peace and security. Inequality
within and among States is too often the result of
exclusion on the basis of identity. That exclusion is often
institutionalized in governance and economic relations
at the national and global levels. It manifests itself in
stereotyping and bigotry. Among other things, it leads
to a lack of employment or livelihood opportunities for
billions of people, purely based on their identities, and
communities and countries being unable to benefit from
their natural resources. It leads to climate injustice and
an unfair trading system.
The result is a profound sense of grievance and
bitterness, which populists and demagogues can easily
exploit. That is so especially when such feelings and
narratives are carried by social media and its spreading
of misinformation, disinformation and narratives
that are often laced with incitement and extremism
tendencies. It leads to trust in institutions deteriorating
and State legitimacy weakening. It is fodder for
terrorism, insurgencies, the rise of xenophobia, hate
speech, divisive tribalism and racism.
The escalation of a social or political conflict finds
the State much less able to prevent or mitigate the crisis.
It is worth emphasizing that, rather than serving to
legitimize the State, in that environment of grievance
based on identity, elections sometimes only further the
divides. They become a zero-sum game in a winnertakes-all contest that appears to pit racial, ethnic and
religious identities against each other.
Images of desperate men and women on sinking
rafts, trying to migrate in pursuit of economic
opportunity, have today become commonplace. They
point to an international political and economic system
that is inadequate for the challenges of today and that
is definitely not adequate to meet our Sustainable
Development Goals.
The inability of their countries to offer them
viable opportunities is often the result of one-size-fitsall prescriptions and templates by powerful global
institutions that fail to take into account the diversity
and different needs of States, as well as the different
contexts. They therefore perpetuate inequality and
exclusion. Vaccine nationalism, travel bans and red
lists further inflame the divisions between rich and
poor States.

21-284577/23

S/PV.8877

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Those are manifestations of the inability to deal
with a diverse world. They are major factors in most
conflict situations of which the Security Council is more
often than not seized. We need to deal with that. That
requires that we accept that there is a need to change our
national and global economic and governance systems
to manage diversity more effectively. A necessary start
is to restructure global cooperation and governance so
that they truly accord to the principle that all peoples
and countries are of equal worth. We also need to
change how we embrace diversity at the national and
local levels.
The State must be seen, and indeed act, as a leading
protector of national unity and cohesion. That means that,
as a core duty, it must embrace respect for difference.
If the State is to demonstrate such a characteristic, the
political leaders who lead it will need to emerge from
a new politics of cohesion. In deeply divided countries,
as a start, individual leaders can demonstrate that,
although they may have deep political differences, they
can unite for the sake of the nation.
I am proud that Kenya demonstrated that approach
when, in early 2018, Kenya was facing dangerous politics
of division. Political differences were increasingly
being communicated by politicians as ethnic rivalry and
exclusion. It was therefore not acceptable to continue
on that path if we were indeed to build the prosperous
and secure Kenya for which our people yearn.
On 8 March of the same year, I had a handshake
with the leader of the opposition. We did it to make the
point to all Kenyans that our country’s cohesion and
unity were far greater than our political rivalry. That
handshake created a powerful surge of hope in Kenyans.
Tempers cooled, and we remembered that we were part
of a Kenyan family and not defined by our political
rivalry. It became clear that we were fellow citizens,
without regard to ethnicity or regional differences, and
that we shared a common interest in peace.
The handshake was more than a political gesture;
it was a political innovation that proposed to insert
the safety, unity and prosperity of Kenya at the core
of our politics. We sought to build those safety rails
into how the State is structured and works through a
national conversation. Kenya will continue to build and
protect its unity. I hope that we sustain it and that other
countries come to a similar conclusion. Our States
would then be good at preventing conflict and would
be exporters of stability and security to our neighbours.
8/23

12/10/2021

It is against that backdrop that I chose today’s
topic to inform our debate. I want to offer a few
recommendations that I consider essential in the
management of diversity, which supports State-building
and sustainable peace.
First, we should place safety rails on political
competition in all States, democratic or not. That can
be achieved by incentivizing a political culture that
does not endanger national cohesion through exploiting
identity to divide and create enmity among citizens.
Second, we need to undertake thorough reviews of
our international institutions to consider whether they
are fit for purpose in building a more inclusive world
and managing diversity better, particularly in times of
crisis, such as the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Third, we need to accelerate Security Council
reform. The membership of the Council lacks
transparency and inclusion.
Fourth, the twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, to be held in Glasgow next month,
will be an opportunity to ensure that climate-change
adaptation commitments are aimed at accelerating
development, investment and job creation, particularly
in the developing world. Climate adaptation must offer
a clear and viable path to green industrialization for
Africa and the Global South.
Fifth, States should be offered every assistance to
develop internal mechanisms for national dialogue and
reconciliation. They should establish early-warning
systems to avert conflicts and human suffering.
Sixth, the United Nations, regional organizations
and development partners should focus on State
capacity-building that delivers competence, as opposed
to the exclusive focus on good governance as a set of
normative standards.
Seventh, the United Nations and its peacebuilding
initiatives should include diversity management as a
component of peacebuilding and State stabilization.
Eighth, we should initiate a collaborative approach
among States, the United Nations system and
social media companies to combat hate speech and
incitement. That can include an agreed global code of
conduct by companies and the development of earlywarning tools to detect escalation trends and facilitate
pre-emptive measures.
21-28457

12/10/2021

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

I hope that those insights and recommendations
will be embraced by the Security Council and the
United Nations.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
I call on the Permanent Representative of the
United States and Member of President Biden’s Cabinet
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank you, Mr. President, for presiding
over this meeting today and for the important message
you just delivered to us. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, President Kagame and President
Mbeki for their briefings today. And I would like to
thank Ms. Koofi for her message and to highlight the
important work that she continues to do to promote
peace and security.
I have spent more than half of my life travelling
the world as part of my career, and I have experienced
and seen racism in every single place that I have
been, including in my own country. I bring this up to
acknowledge a simple fact — there is no society, no
region and no country that does not face division over
diversity. Our discussion today on how we can prevent
and stop conflict based on identity must acknowledge
that. This is a problem that we all share in different
ways and that we must all work together to resolve.
For our part, the United States believes in being
fully transparent about our shortcomings. We do not
claim to be perfect. Instead, we aim every single day
to form that more perfect union and to strive for justice
in our own country. In June, when the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
released a report on racism and police brutality against
Africans and people of African descent (A/HRC/47/53),
we not only acknowledged the examination of such
cases in the United States but we also issued a standing
invitation to the Special Rapporteur on Contemporary
Forms of Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia
and Related Intolerance and the Special Rapporteur on
Minority Issues to visit the United States. Addressing
brutality and advancing racial equity is a core priority of
the Biden-Harris Administration. We encourage every
community and country to look internally to advance
diversity and inclusion, to be fully transparent about
those formidable challenges and to work tirelessly to

S/PV. 8877

end racism, sexism, ableism, religious discrimination
and xenophobia.
We must also collaborate with the United Nations
and others to not only ameliorate conflict but to prevent
and address the fundamental sources of conflict. The
Secretary-General’s Our Common Agenda notably
and rightfully includes aspects of addressing racism,
discrimination and inequality. We need to put in
greater protections for all racial, ethnic and religious
minorities; people with disabilities; lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex people; as
well as indigenous people. That is particularly true for
the many and burgeoning places where conflict has
broken out mainly as a result of identity.
I scarcely need to say that, because we deal with
these issues almost on a weekly basis here at the
Security Council. In situations most vulnerable to this
type of threat, regional and subregional organizations
should take a more comprehensive approach, including
through prevention, peacekeeping, peacemaking,
peacebuilding and counter-terrorism. All of us must
work together to promote human rights, democracy and
the rule of law, especially here in the Security Council.
The Peacebuilding Commission has an important
convening role to play in this work and helps mobilize
attention and commitment to international peacebuilding
efforts. Strong local partnerships and international
cooperation are critical elements in fostering stability
and resilience, particularly in fragile States.
The women and peace and security agenda has a
vital role to play here too. Women make the world more
peaceful and should be empowered to meaningfully
participate in those efforts. Without women, we will
not achieve the progress that we seek.
The stated causes of those conflicts are myriad,
but the root causes are often the same — inequality,
discrimination, fear, hatred. Social media may amplify
those forces; they create an echo chamber and fuel
much of the disinformation that causes extreme hatred.
But, ultimately, the root causes are nothing new. They
are the same root causes that have always driven
racial, ethnic, regional, partisan and religious conflict.
Working together, we can take away the power of those
divisive forces, not by shying away from diversity and
inclusion but by embracing them.
That is why I champion people-to-people diplomacy.
When one meets someone in person and is are able to

21-284579/23

S/PV.8877

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

look at them face to face and hear about their goals
and their dreams, hatred is harder. Now I am not naïve;
not everyone lets hate in their hearts disappear easily.
But many people die because of that hatred. I believe
fundamentally, to my core, that embracing diversity
and celebrating one’s identity and the identities of those
different from oneself are some of the most effective
ways in which we can spread peace and security in
the world.
That work has great urgency, and we must use the
extraordinary power of our example to demonstrate our
unwavering commitment to inclusion. Together let us
work to promote diversity, to prevent conflict, to save
lives, to build a more peaceful world.
The President: I call on the Minister of State for
External Affairs and Minister of State for Parliamentary
Affairs of India.
Mr. Muraleedharan (India): Let me begin
by conveying the best wishes and greetings of my
Prime Minister to His Excellency the President of
the Republic of Kenya, Uhuru Kenyatta, on Kenya’s
historic presidency of the Security Council.
It is indeed a singular privilege to represent my
Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, at this important
high-level debate on a topic that is extremely important
and pertinent to the global south, particularly countries
in Africa.
I would like to thank His Excellency SecretaryGeneral
António
Guterres;
His
Excellency
Mr. Paul Kagame, President of Rwanda; His Excellency
Mr. Thabo Mbeki, former President of South Africa;
and Ms. Fawzia Koofi, First Woman Deputy Speaker of
the Parliament of Afghanistan, for enriching this open
debate with their insights.
The countries facing conflicts or emerging
from them face multiple challenges on their path to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Those are related
to factors causative of the conflict and primarily
involve ethnicity, race and religion, which are dominant
identity markers in society.
In addition, societies also encounter political,
social and economic factors that play a determining
role in how countries successfully emerge and move
forward in addressing those fundamental challenges of
State-building. History has shown that those challenges
are not limited to Africa or the developing world. Even
the developed world, at some points in history, faced
10/23

12/10/2021

such challenges, including through extremely violent
transitions, before eventually emerging successful.
India’s own context offers a unique manifestation
of unity in diversity, where, in spite of the convulsions
caused by the partition, we still came together as one
to form a democratic, pluralistic and inclusive society
with our Constitution as the basic bedrock of our polity.
Consequently, if one were to talk about embracing
diversity and inclusion, India has much to offer on
how diversity of identities, whether ethnic, regional,
religious, linguistic or other, can come together and
live as one nation — the common thread binding us
being the identity of being an Indian first and all other
things later. That is what the Father of our Nation,
Mahatma Gandhi, taught us, and that is what we follow
in letter and spirit. We believe in the ethos of tolerance
and understanding, practicing the age-old ethos of
Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam — that is, the whole world
is one family. That is relevant everywhere, including to
post-conflict societies, for the human race to reach its
fullest potential.
In a globalized, liberalized and interlinked world,
post-conflict State-building has faced increasing
societal expectations in terms of political space and
socioeconomic development, gender equality and
human rights. As a result, State-building has become
more complicated. Building peace and sustaining the
same, therefore, is proving more complex than ending
the conflict. That is even more evident in the context of
the developing world.
At the same time, we have several successful
examples where countries have managed to overcome
post-conflict challenges. Those include South Africa,
with its transition from apartheid to a free and open
society; Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Rwanda
and Burundi, each of which has been an example of
a successful transition of post-conflict State-building;
and South Sudan, where we are witnessing the transition.
Those societies are diverse and have managed to
sustain peace through an inclusive approach by setting
examples for similar States to emulate. We also have
several other examples, including in South Asia, where
diversity has always been the hallmark of societies. The
political leadership of respective countries respecting
universal values of peace, truth and compassion have
contributed immensely to State-building.
21-28457

12/10/2021

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

When we deal with countries coming out of conflict
and going into peacebuilding, putting in place a strong
legal framework as well as building credible institutions
based on solid principles is critical. That will also ensure
that diversity is protected and inclusivity fostered. We
need to encourage donor countries that are contributing
generously to peacebuilding in Africa and other regions
to ensure that those countries coming out of conflict
are able to put in place an enduring framework that
withstands the test of time.
The challenge will always be to make a trade-off
between the immediate and the long term. We believe
that the United Nations system as a whole should work
closely with Member States and regional organizations,
in line with their national requirements and needs,
and not advocate the imposition of ideas or solutions
from outside.
Terrorism is a clear manifestation of how forces
inimical to unity and diversity can seek to destroy the
social cohesion and democratic fabric of countries by,
inter alia, fomenting disaffection, hatred and violence.
The increasing spread of terrorism in Africa is a matter
of serious concern. What is even more unfortunate
is that those terrorist forces and groups are receiving
encouragement from Member States that seek to divide
communities by legitimizing terrorist activities.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy has clearly reinforced yet again that terrorism
cannot be justified on any grounds and that no country
should provide an excuse for such activities. It is equally
important that United Nations organizations take the
Strategy as a template and not give any encouragement
or excuse, even indirectly, to the efforts of Member
States to justify terrorism in any way.
With regard to religious identities, we are
witnessing how Member States are facing newer
forms of religious phobia. While we have condemned
anti-Semitism, Islamophobia and Christianophobia, we
fail to recognize that there are more virulent forms of
religious phobias emerging and taking root, including
anti-Hindu, anti-Buddhist and anti-Sikh phobias.
In our own neighbourhood and elsewhere, we have
seen the destruction of temples, the glorification of
breaking idols in temples, the violation of gurdwara
premises, the massacre of Sikh pilgrims in gurdwaras
and the destruction of the Bamyan Buddhas and other
religious iconic sites. Our inability to even acknowledge
those atrocities and phobias only gives those forces

S/PV. 8877

encouragement that phobias against some religions
are more acceptable than those against others. If we
choose to be selective about criticizing such phobias or
ignoring them, we do so at our own peril.
It is now time to look at peacebuilding in the
broader context in a more focused manner, especially
in the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic,
which is threatening to erode the gains we have made
over the years. The 2020 review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture that was concluded last
year has given us a new set of twin resolutions on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace (resolution 2558
(2020) and General Assembly resolution 75/201). We
appreciate that, as part of its 2020 to 2024 strategy, the
Peace Building Fund has put forth a comprehensive
scenario covering a horizon of five years.
We heard earlier the remarks by Ms. Koofi. The
change in authority in Kabul was neither done through
negotiations nor inclusive. We have consistently called
for a broad-based, inclusive process that involves the
representation of all segments of the Afghan population.
The expectations of the international community
with regard to Afghanistan, including on combating
terrorism, are set out clearly in resolution 2593 (2021).
It is important that commitments made in that regard be
respected and adhered to.
India has always played a constructive and
significant role in the context of peacebuilding through
its extensive development partnership with developing
countries, particularly in Africa and Asia and with leastdeveloped countries, landlocked developing countries
and small island developing States. India continues
bilaterally to assist countries in post-conflict situations
by providing substantial grants and soft loans.
Apart from focusing on infrastructure — especially
housing, education and health, connectivity, providing
livelihoods to those impacted by conflict, especially
in agriculture, and projects at the grass-roots level,
which directly impact the lives of people — India also
provides extensive education, training and capacitybuilding, including vocational training and information
technology, focusing particularly on youth. We will
continue to be a pillar of strength for all developing
countries in their transition to development, progress
and prosperity.
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank His Excellency Mr. Paul Kagame, Mr. António

21-2845711/23

S/PV.8877

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Guterres and Mr. Mbeki for their briefings. I also thank
Ms. Fawzia Koofi for her contribution.
We know, Mr. President, how important the theme
of this open debate is to you, given the recent history
of your country, which went through difficult times in
the aftermath of the 2007 elections. But fortunately,
thanks to the upsurge in patriotism and dialogue among
Kenyans themselves, your country was able to overcome
those challenges in its commitment to building a united
and prosperous nation, which serves as a model in a
region that is facing several challenges to its stability.
Whether we are discussing Afghanistan, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mali or Syria, managing diversity
remains today a challenge to the stability and viability
of the modern State. That statement is even more selfevident today in Africa, where State borders were
arbitrarily drawn by the former colonial Powers, which
brought together diverse groups under a then new
central national authority and system of governance.
Henceforth, the viability and political stability of those
new entities depended on the ability of the rulers to
accommodate ethnic, racial and tribal sensitivities in
a political system capable of providing citizens with a
sense of belonging and participation in the political and
economic governance of their nation.
The recent political history of our continent has
shown us that, where such a balance has been lacking, the
failure to address legitimate claims relating to identity,
politics and the economy has led to internal strife, which
has taken the form of rebellions, civil wars, coups d’état
and, even worse, genocide. Even today, in tandem with
the effects of the coronavirus disease pandemic and the
misuse of new information technologies, the issue of
diversity management remains a serious problem with
the rise of xenophobia, racism and the stigmatization
of minorities, in particular owing to the propagation of
misinformation and hate speech through social media.
In order to overcome the challenges related to
the management of their diversity and build domestic
peace, our States must resolutely commit to establishing
an inclusive political and economic governance system
that guarantees the participation of all national groups
in the management of the State within a democratic
framework. In drawing lessons from its past experience
in the political and security spheres, my country, the
Niger, has resolutely committed itself to establishing
and consolidating its democratic institutions to provide
all its sons and daughters an opportunity to participate
12/23

12/10/2021

in the political and economic life of the country. The
Niger is pleased to take this opportunity to commend
itself on the first peaceful political transition, which,
this year, saw the transfer of power between two
democratically elected Presidents.
Furthermore, in relying on its past experience in
managing internal conflicts, dating back 1995, the
Niger established the High Authority for Peacebuilding
in order to ensure the follow-up of and addressing the
root causes of conflict in a sustainable manner. Through
its activities, the High Authority, the goal of which is
to promote dialogue among national communities and
promote inclusiveness and community participation
in political and economic life, has contributed to
strengthening cohesion and national unity at the
community and local levels.
In conclusion, my delegation continues to believe
that, in order to overcome the challenges of managing
diversity, we must necessarily adopt policies adapted
to every specific national context. It is also imperative
that such ethnic, religious and tribal fault lines cease
being used as instruments of incitement by politicians
and other influencers to achieve their selfish ends.
Although such crises are often internal in
nature, they have repercussions on immediate
neighbours — and sometimes even beyond.
Accordingly, we should acknowledge the extremely
constructive role played by regional organizations such
as the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the Economic Community of West
African States and other similar regional organizations
in providing their good offices to help their members
achieve national reconciliation and lasting peace. The
intervention of the international community, which is
embodied by the United Nations, in internal conflicts
must be used only as a last resort.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I thank you, President Kenyatta, for convening this
important and timely debate. The United Kingdom
values our close cooperation with Kenya on the issues
brought to the Security Council. I would also like to
thank our briefers for sharing their experience and
distilling it into insightful comments for us today.
Today’s topic is a pressing one. Economic
pressures, a global pandemic and climate change have
put unprecedented strain on the social contract that
holds States together. The United Kingdom believes
in open societies. We value human rights, inclusion,
21-28457

12/10/2021

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

gender equality and free expression. Open societies
respect identities and differences as integral aspects
of community, and not as forces for division. Our
experience is that societies are stronger and more stable
when we embrace diversity. But history has also shown
us what happens when identity is weaponized — from
Bosnia to Rwanda.
I want to support this important debate by offering
three thoughts: first, why the Council should be
concerned when identity is used to stoke conflict;
secondly, why inclusivity matters for peacebuilding;
and thirdly, how to advance the use of United Nations
peacebuilding tools more fully.
First, we know the danger of identity-based
incitement. It marginalizes already vulnerable
populations, fuels extremism, manifests in human
rights violations and sparks war. The Council, with its
responsibility for peace and security, has an obligation
to call it out and to end the protection of States that
choose to ignore warning signs.
In Myanmar, the exclusion of the Rohingya
population has escalated into systematic violence and
forced displacement. In Ethiopia, identity politics and
hate speech are dividing communities, exacerbating a
conflict that has already pushed 400,000 people into
famine. Therefore, the Council should not stand by as
violence escalates. We should heed the warnings of
humanitarians on the ground.
Secondly, inclusion is central to peacebuilding and
makes States more resilient to shocks. As we heard so
clearly from our speakers today on the lessons of Rwanda
and the situation in Afghanistan, peace processes that
include the warring parties, civil society actors and
women’s groups strengthen national ownership.
Thirdly, as other speakers mentioned, the United
Nations has a range of tools to support countries that
are struggling with identity-based violence and are
committed to pursuing peace. In United Nations peace
operations, human rights monitoring is a critical earlywarning function. United Nations political leaders,
mediators and advisers facilitate inclusive peace
processes to build sustainable peace. The Peacebuilding
Commission supports countries grappling with their
peacebuilding challenges, while the Peacebuilding
Fund — to which the United Kingdom remains a major
donor — provides catalytic funding to encourage
those efforts.

S/PV. 8877

But as you said, President Kenyatta, the system
can do a better job of getting ahead of threats to peace.
Peace and development are mutually reinforcing,
and many of the tools to build sustainable peace are
found in the United Nations development system. We
urge the development system to embed peacebuilding
approaches now in order to avert humanitarian
crises later.
In conclusion, identity does not need to be a source of
violence, but a source of pride. By supporting diversity,
we can build stronger national and international bonds
and open, resilient and prosperous societies.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
welcome your presence among us here today, Sir, and
I thank you for bringing us together to debate such a
pertinent topic. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his participation.
Conflicts often thrive by exploiting differences
between peoples. Since 1957, the European project has
shown that, through political will, exchanges between
peoples, cooperation and solidarity, we can act to
ensure that those differences strengthen peace instead.
It is first and foremost through political discourse that
peace is built, hence why I welcome the participation
of both a former and a current Head of State, namely,
His Excellency Mr. Thabo Mbeki and His Excellency
Mr. Paul Kagame, respectively. Both have taken
the necessary actions in their countries to reconcile
and rebuild.
Preserving diversity helps to prevent conflicts. For
France, the fight against all forms of discrimination
must be part of a universal and indivisible approach
that is based on the equality of all individuals, without
distinction. France condemns all violations of human
rights, violence and persecution committed against
individuals, in particular in relation to their origins,
religion, beliefs, sexual orientation or gender identity,
whether true or assumed. That is why France supports,
for example, the fund to support victims of ethnic and
religious violence in the Middle East. That fund has
already supported approximately 100 projects in Iraq,
Lebanon, Jordan and Syria.
Secondly, conflict resolution requires inclusive
political processes. In the Sahel, terrorist groups use
differences to stir up hatred between communities.
France, in conjunction with the United Nations, the
European Union and its other partners, encourages
reconciliation processes and the restoration of State

21-2845713/23

S/PV.8877

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

authority, particularly in peripheral areas, in order
to guarantee lasting peace and equal rights for all
components of those societies. Education must be at the
heart of those efforts.
In the Horn of Africa, we call on the Ethiopian
Prime Minister to launch an inclusive national dialogue
without delay in accordance with his commitments.
The inclusion of all segments of society, in
particular women and young people, must be at the
heart of peace processes. In that respect, we welcome
the presence of Ms. Fawzia Koofi and recall that the
substantial participation of women is non-negotiable in
Afghanistan and elsewhere.
At the Generation Equality Forum, which was held
in Paris in late June and jointly organized with UNWomen and Mexico, we launched a monitoring and
accountability mechanism for the women and peace
and security agenda known as the Women, Peace
and Security and Humanitarian Action Compact. The
universal implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda is a priority in our diplomacy, and the
publication of our third national action plan illustrates
that commitment.
Finally, peacebuilding can succeed only if diversity
is also preserved. That is the responsibility of every
State, and France is doing its utmost to play its part in
that regard. That is the meaning of the approach taken
by France for a shared historical understanding of the
Tutsi genocide. That is the meaning of our commitment
to ensure that no one suspected of genocide crimes can
escape justice.
In Iraq, France welcomes national efforts to
rebuild the country after the abuses committed by
Da’esh, while paying special attention to minorities.
This has recently been reflected in the law on Yezidi
survivors, the historic visit of the Pope and the joint
work with UNESCO to “revive the spirit” of Mosul.
On 29 August in Mosul, President Macron announced
concrete commitments in the fields of heritage
and education to support the reconstruction of the
governorate for the benefit of all parts of Iraqi society.
The United Nations can further assist national efforts.
The Peacebuilding Fund should continue to support
accountability and the fight against impunity. It is already
doing so in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
example, through its Peace, Justice, Reconciliation and
Reconstruction programme in Central Kasai. The Fund
will continue to receive support from France, which
14/23

12/10/2021

has quadrupled its contributions in 2021. France will
continue to do its utmost to make diversity a factor
for peace.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Kenyan President Uhuru Kenyatta
for convening today’s debate on the links between
peacebuilding, sustainable peace and diversity, as well
as Secretary-General António Guterres, Rwandan
President Paul Kagame, former South African
President Thabo Mbeki and Ms. Fawzia Koofi for their
informative briefings.
Risks and threats to international peace and
security are multidimensional and inextricably linked
to economic and social development challenges. A 2018
study by the United Nations and the World Bank showed
that violent conflict had reached its highest levels in 30
years. It is projected that, by 2030, two thirds of people
living in extreme poverty will be living in countries
affected by fragility, conflict and violence. Exclusion,
inequality, systemic discrimination, misinformation
and hate speech fuel cycles of violence that in extreme
cases lead to crimes against humanity and the outbreak
of internal armed conflicts with risks that transcend
borders. Religious or ethnic tensions have been the
cause of regrettable and notorious genocides. Many
of the situations with which the Security Council is
concerned share similar causes.
Other factors, such as the coronavirus disease
pandemic,
climate
change,
food
insecurity,
technological transformations that increase exclusion,
supremacism, an irresponsible arms trade and extreme
poverty, exacerbate conditions conducive to violence
and conflict. National or ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities, as well as persons in vulnerable situations,
such as persons with disabilities, lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex persons, migrants, refugees
and internally displaced persons, indigenous peoples,
and women and children, are often the groups most
affected by exclusion and cycles of violence and
conflict. It is therefore necessary to create a culture of
coexistence that values diversity and in which everyone
feels included.
It is essential to address the spectrum of root causes
of conflict with a preventive approach, sensitive to the
situations of the most vulnerable people. In this regard,
I would like to highlight four points. First, the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and sustaining
peace are essential elements for long-term prevention.
21-28457

12/10/2021

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Lasting peace is ensured by building more resilient
societies, based on strong institutions, respect for
human rights, gender equality, inclusion and diversity.
Secondly, early-warning mechanisms play a key
role in identifying risks and triggers. We must continue
to strengthen such mechanisms, with particular
sensitivity in identifying aggravating causes for the
marginalized and most vulnerable groups. It is important
to see capacities for effective conflict-prevention action
through the lens of inclusion. Preventive diplomacy
needs better instruments. The report recently submitted
by the Secretary-General entitled Our Common Agenda
is one of them.
Thirdly, the full and effective participation of
women, youth and civil society in prevention work is
essential. Resolution 2475 (2019), for example, provides
the basis for including persons with disabilities in
conflict prevention and peacebuilding, while resolution
1325 (2000) was a milestone in the recognition of
women’s full participation in conflict resolution and
peace processes.
Fourthly, the Security Council must strengthen
dialogue with the other main bodies of the United
Nations, namely, the General Assembly and Economic
and Social Council, as well as with the Human
Rights Council and the Peacebuilding Commission,
specifically to prevent development challenges and
human rights violations from becoming a threat to
international peace and security. Waiting to see happen
is too late.
Mexico firmly believes in sustainable peace as the
central axis on which the architecture of prevention and
peacebuilding must repose. Rebuilding the social fabric
is a central element of post-conflict strategies, for peace
will only be sustainable and lasting if it is inclusive,
and to be inclusive it must recognize diversity.
Ms. DeShong (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines commends the
Republic of Kenya for convening today’s discussion,
and we thank our esteemed briefers — SecretaryGeneral Guterres, President Kagame, President Mbeki
and Ms. Koofi — for their salient contributions.
At this moment in history, when many intractable
conflicts seem to stem from clashes of identity along
ethnic, communal and political lines, today’s debate is
as timely as it is pertinent. Peace and security, at both
the community and national levels, are corollary to

S/PV. 8877

the social relations through which stable identities of
responsible citizenship are moulded. All stakeholders,
including women and youth, religious leaders, ethnic
and indigenous minorities, elected officials, and
representatives from the private sector, academia and
across civil society, must therefore be mobilized to
build public trust and cultivate social cohesion. That
multi-stakeholder approach, centred around diversity
and inclusiveness, provides the surest pathway to
building stable and resilient societies.
It is axiomatic that peaceful communities founded
on the ideals of unity and social solidarity and sustained
by a sound socioeconomic basis can be achieved only
through comprehensive developmental and reparatory
solutions. Those stratagems must address not only
the symptoms but also the root causes of conflict and
insecurity, including poverty and unemployment;
socioeconomic and political marginalization; pervasive
hunger and acute food insecurity; a changing climate,
widespread environmental degradation and the
security risks they produce; and the lasting legacies of
underdevelopment and intergenerational trauma felt in
the wake of egregious human rights abuses, including
the historical crimes of chattel slavery, native genocide
and violent colonization, which brought with them a
systemic racism that persists to this day.
Those stressors, most evident in vulnerable
settings, serve to heighten social and economic
inequalities and deepen political divides, both within
and between countries. Against the backdrop of the
current pandemic, in which those afflictions have been
greatly amplified, we must move swiftly — taking bold
steps and innovative measures — to promote a common
agenda that systematically addresses all those concerns
to prevent conflicts and to build and sustain peace.
Greater efforts must be made to advance a whole-ofsystem approach in which all organs and specialized
agencies of the United Nations work in tandem to
enhance sovereignty, reinforce social contracts and
hasten the delivery of the Sustainable Development
Goals. To that end, there can be no one-size-fits-all
approach. Practical, people-centred, gender-responsive
and climate-sensitive solutions must be delivered across
the peace and security-development-humanitarian
nexus and implemented in line with the particular
needs, cultural perspectives and national priorities of
all the countries concerned.

21-2845715/23

S/PV.8877

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Committed
stakeholders,
particularly
the
international financial institutions and partners from
the global North, should scale up their capacitybuilding and overseas development assistance
initiatives. Focused and coordinated multilateral action
on contemporary security risks, such as terrorism,
cybercrime, the coronavirus disease and climate change,
should be pragmatically and extensively pursued.
Certainly, those emergent issues have already become
battlegrounds of disinformation, misinformation and
hate speech, serving to erode State-building processes
along the way.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes the
complementary role of the Peacebuilding Commission
through its bridging, advisory and convening platforms
to foster comprehensive multistakeholder approaches
to peacebuilding. It is crucial that those efforts be
intensified to foment social cohesion and strengthen
national peacebuilding processes. Robust measures to
ensure adequate, predictable and sustained financing
for peacebuilding remain an urgent priority.
As we continue this struggle for global peace,
those challenges related to diversity must form
part of both the analysis and the prescription in all
contexts. Furthermore, conflict-prevention and postconflict peacebuilding must always be conducted in
line with the principles of international law and with
special consideration for the demographic diversity,
cultural sensitivities and the material circumstances of
development in each country.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would like
to thank Kenya for convening this open debate and
to express our appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his valuable remarks. We also thank President
Kagame, President Mbeki and Ms. Koofi for their
insightful presentations.
Rather than separating us from one another,
diversity should bring us collective strength. In
multi-religious and multi-ethnic countries, diversity
with inclusion could provide tangible benefits, while
embracing one another’s uniqueness and inspiring
innovation. In contrast, diversity without inclusion
could lead to tensions, social riots and even violence
and conflicts through incitement, hate speech, fake
news and misinformation. That fact endangers
State-building and the peacebuilding process.
Against that background, we wish to highlight the
following points.
16/23

12/10/2021

First, strong emphasis must be placed on conflict
prevention, and the primary responsibility for conflict
prevention rests with States. In that connection, the root
causes and the intertwined issues of poverty, inequality
and justice, intolerance, discrimination and incitement
of violence must be addressed as early as possible to
defuse tensions.
Furthermore, States need to focus on an effective
preventive strategy, which requires a comprehensive
approach encompassing both short-term and long-term
political, diplomatic, humanitarian, developmental and
institutional measures. In those processes, the role of
the United Nations and the international community is
to support national efforts for conflict prevention and
capacity-building.
My second point concerns the importance of
meaningful inclusion. States should take steps to build
national reconciliation and unity through inclusive
dialogue and mediation with the participation of
all stakeholders, including women, youth, elders
and vulnerable groups. That will help foster unity,
tolerance and cooperation at all levels so as to narrow
the gap among peoples of different ethnic, religious and
cultural backgrounds.
Thirdly, with regard to enforcement, the needs of
all segments of society should be taken into account
in the development of legal frameworks, policies and
mechanisms at all levels, especially at local levels. In
that process, Governments should focus their actions on
fostering sustainable development, eradicating poverty
and inequality, ensuring transparent and accountable
governance and the rule of law and promoting a culture
of peace and non-violence.
Last but not least, international cooperation is
essential. States should broaden and deepen all spheres
of cooperation with the United Nations, regional and
subregional organizations for peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflicts, including from
countries in transition or with relevant experience in
post-conflict peacebuilding. In particular, attention
to resource mobilization and capacity-building for the
countries concerned is vital for peacebuilding efforts.
We also wish to stress the need for more coordinated,
coherent and integrated peacebuilding among United
Nations missions, United Nations country teams,
regional organizations and development actors.
21-28457

12/10/2021

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

In the cooperation process, it is necessary to respect
the principles of non-interference in internal affairs,
territorial integrity and the political independence of
States, in conformity with the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and international law. It is also
essential to take into consideration various development
levels, historical backgrounds and the particularities of
each country.
As a multi-ethnic and multi-religious country, Viet
Nam has been doing its utmost to promote equality,
unity, tolerance, mutual respect and understanding
among our religions and 54 ethnic groups. We
acknowledge that each has its unique identity and role
in bringing to bear the rich diversity of Viet Nam in the
country’s sustainable development. Therefore, respect
for, and building on, diversity have been the source
of our strength, stability and development through all
historical periods of the country, be it at war or at peace.
Our achievements in nation-building and
development result from building consensus and
meeting the needs and interests of our people via
regular consultations and dialogue with people from
all strata of society, international partners and relevant
agencies of the United Nations.
In spite of our great achievements, there remain
challenges in ensuring prosperity for our people
in practice. In that regard, we look forward to the
continued cooperation and support of the international
community and United Nations agencies in such efforts.
In conclusion, we are committed to working
unanimously towards a world of peace, stability and
sustainable development.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General, President Kagame and
His Excellency Mr. Mbeki for their thoughtprovoking briefings.
I also thank Ms. Koofi for her words. She rightly
highlighted that, in Afghanistan, neither the parties nor
the international actors supporting the process were
previously able to achieve the equal and meaningful
participation of women or build the necessary
foundation for an inclusive political solution. We must
learn from that. We must reinforce the voices of Afghan
women fighting to influence their future. Without that,
there will be no stability or prosperity in Afghanistan
and no sustainable peace.

S/PV. 8877

However, we regret that the High Commissioner for
Human Rights was not able to brief us today. She and
her Office have such a valuable contribution to make
on this issue.
We thank you, Mr. President, for putting this issue
on our agenda and for your participation and wise words
and recommendations on this pertinent topic.
For several decades, Norway has been engaged in
peace efforts around the world. While all conflicts are
of course unique, we have found that there are common
lessons on the importance of inclusivity in peace
and reconciliation. We would like to contribute three
lessons learned to our discussions here today.
First, inclusive political settlements and institutions
are key to sustaining peace. For example, ensuring
inclusivity and participation can mitigate the likelihood
of actors exploiting the frustration of marginalized
groups. That means that we must design processes
and mechanisms with the inclusion of all, taking into
consideration different cultures, races, ethnicities,
languages, religions and, in particular, women’s
meaningful participation at all levels and in all phases
of peace processes.
The second lesson is the importance of talking to all
relevant actors to resolve conflict. We have experienced
that engagement with non-State armed actors can be
necessary to resolve conflicts. Engagement builds trust
and promotes a better understanding of underlying
interests. We saw that methodology bear fruit
through our engagement with the Palestine Liberation
Organization in the Middle East more than 30 years ago,
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia and
the Ejército de Liberación Nacional in Colombia and
the Maoists in Nepal.
The third lesson is that engagement cannot end
when a peace agreement is signed. The implementation
phase is when the stamina of the parties is tested and
where a long-term commitment by the international
community is needed. Maintaining an inclusive
character throughout implementation can be especially
challenging; yet we know that it pays off.
From our engagement in Colombia, we saw firsthand that the efforts of the parties to establish an
inclusive, victim-centred approach led to a more
inclusive agreement and implementation mechanisms,
enhancing the possibility for sustainable peace.

21-2845717/23

S/PV.8877

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

We should draw on positive experiences by
inclusivity being prioritized, from wherever they
come, and use them to enhance our peacebuilding
capabilities, especially in the United Nations context,
where we can, and must, better utilize the tools that we
have. For example, the Peacebuilding Commission is
uniquely placed to provide a deeper understanding of
how patterns of exclusion and demands for inclusion
relate to peacebuilding. We must implement closer
collaboration, where the Security Council actively
requests, deliberates and draws on the targeted advice
and the convening power of the Commission.
Norway also sees the potential for closer
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, such as the African
Union and the regional economic communities, in
preventive diplomacy and building sustainable peace.
In conclusion, we would like to highlight that,
in order for such an approach to be successful,
inclusion must not be about tallying who is or is not
at the negotiating table. It is instead about creating
opportunities for people with a stake in sustaining
peace to shape it. That is a central component in
strengthening a society’s resilience against violence
and armed conflict and why the Security Council needs
to be more engaged in those efforts
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Kenya for organizing this
meeting on this important topic of sustaining peace,
diversity and State-building. I would also like to thank
His Excellency President Uhuru Kenyatta for presiding
over our meeting and for his briefing, which included
important proposals. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, Their
Excellencies President Paul Kagame and former
President Thabo Mbeki for their briefings. My thanks
also go to Ms. Fauzia Koofi for her intervention, which
included important ideas.
Although the causes of conflicts are numerous, many
of them, especially those that erupt within a country,
are usually the most complex. They are related in one
way or another to the issue of pluralism and identityrelated ethnic, religious, sectarian, sexual and cultural
diversity, as well as to socioeconomic inequalities,
exclusion and marginalization. Such dimensions have
continued to become exacerbated, leading not only to
fuelling conflicts but also exacerbating their impacts.
18/23

12/10/2021

They clearly affect efforts to achieve, build and
sustain peace.
A number of countries succeeded in preventing the
issue of identity from becoming a factor of fragility,
division and conflict, after going through harsh
experiences. Many of the conflicts and instability
that exist today in many countries are witnessing
major complications, exacerbated by the effects of
other factors such as the currents of terrorism and
violent extremism that seek to exploit differences on
the basis of identity and differences between groups
within societies and manifestations of exclusion and
marginalization, as well as climatic changes and the
repercussions of natural and health pandemics, the
latest of which is the coronavirus disease pandemic.
From that point of view, it is important to take the
issue of managing diversity in its various dimensions
into account in the tracks of conflict resolution,
achieving and building peace. Experiences have proven
that stability and development in some countries have not
been achieved in the post-conflict and peace-building
stages due to the persistence of manifestations of
differences and disharmony on the basis of identity and
the lack of focus when building the State on the concept
of a unified, united State for all spectrums of society
and its components, on the basis of equality of rights,
political participation and socioeconomic development.
Achieving peace and ensuring its sustainability
require focusing on supporting the State’s ability to
contain and manage differences and diversity, promoting
the values of dialogue, consultation and equality,
rejecting discrimination and exclusion, focusing on
shared values, unity of destiny and belonging, and the
legal identity of all members of society.
As much as Tunisia values the awareness of the
United Nations on such issues, its establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission, its concern for human rights
and the comprehensiveness of conflict settlements, we
renew our support for its efforts to resolve conflicts,
achieve and build peace. We also support its efforts to
help countries and peoples concerned to transcend the
effects of conflicts.
Tunisia stresses as well the need for more
concerted efforts to strengthen early-warning plans
and mechanisms, conflict prevention and anticipation
through addressing fragility causes and factors linked
to social coherence, human rights, identity differences,
21-28457

12/10/2021

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

manifestations of exclusion and marginalization and
the absence or weakness of State authority.
It is also important that United Nations institutions
working on conflict prevention, at the forefront of
which is the Security Council, focus on achieving and
building peace, invest in diversity in race, gender,
religion and history in order to consolidate pillars of
peace and prevent its use to fuel disagreements and
grudges, which can compel some groups to seek other
points of reference and opt for the path of violence.
We also call for further partnerships among the
United Nations, international, regional and subregional
organization, international financial institutions
and civil society organizations so as peacebuilding
operations encompass sustainability, particularly
comprehensive development and capacity-building
while promoting the role of State institutions, social
cohesion and the active participation of all groups,
especially women and youth.
Tunisia will continue to contribute to international
peace and security and to make diversity an integrated
source of enrichment and peace.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank the Kenyan
presidency for organizing this open debate today. I
extend my warmest welcome to the Secretary-General
and His Excellency President Thabo Mbeki and
thank them for their insightful briefings. I also thank
Ms. Fawzia Koofi on her presentation on the evolving
situation in Afghanistan and the important role of
women in peacebuilding.
Looking into the role of diversity in peacebuilding
can be like opening Pandora’s box. The multitude
of differences — whether ethnic, religious or
political — exacerbate existing economic and social
problems. Maintaining stability will be even more
difficult if we do not dismantle radicalized identities
in time.
In an effort to identify ways to overcome challenges
in building peace, the experience of the European
community is worth examining. Different cultural,
ethnic, religious and political groups have reconciled
under the banner of “United in Diversity” — the official
motto of the European Union (EU).
As we look forward, new challenges to cooperation
are emerging. These fresh tensions are playing out with
increasing frequency in cyberspace. Extremist groups
use cyberspace to mobilize their followers, while

S/PV. 8877

authoritarian States utilize it to extend the State’s reach,
control and interests within and outside their borders.
Attacks on critical infrastructure, manipulation of
information, interference in elections all remain a
substantial concern.
I reiterate Estonia’s position that the efforts at the
United Nations play an important role in advancing
responsible State behaviour in cyberspace. As a
priority, the EU and its member States are committed
to promoting a global, free, open, stable and secure
cyberspace grounded in existing international
law, including human rights law and international
humanitarian law.
Respect for diversity does not mean tolerating
authoritarian attempts to limit the freedom of expression
and suppress other human rights and fundamental
freedoms. The promotion and protection of human
rights is one of the most efficient means of conflict
prevention. Importantly, the notion also entails the
important role of women in peacebuilding and respect
for gender equality.
We render our full support to the SecretaryGeneral’s call to action for human rights. This
transformative vision underpins the work of the entire
United Nations system. The success of the European
experiment is a result of unity, based on these very
same notions. Respect for human rights is essential to
addressing the broad causes of all complex crises and to
building sustainable, safe and peaceful societies.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome your participation in today’s
meeting, Mr. President. We would like to thank
the President of Rwanda, Paul Kagame, and the
former President of the Republic of South Africa,
Thabo Mbeki, as well as Ms. Fawzia Koofi, for their
briefings. It was especially important for us to hear
the opinion of leaders of countries that have gone
through difficult conflicts. Their experience and
knowledge are invaluable for those who are still in the
midst of crisis and are experiencing its consequences
and ramifications. We are also grateful to SecretaryGeneral António Guterres for his assessments.
We share the Kenyan presidency’s view that there is
a link between diversity, State-building and the search
for peace. Indeed, many conflicts are associated with
religious, ethnic and racial differences and triggered by
social inequality.

21-2845719/23

S/PV.8877

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Unfortunately, there are still many conflicts raging
on the African continent. We believe that there are
objective historical reasons for that. As a result of
Africa’s particularly difficult colonial past, the natural
process through which States are normally formed was
disrupted. Borders were then drawn arbitrarily, and
many peoples were either randomly divided or grouped
together into States. That policy, as well as the longterm imposition of languages and customs alien to
the local population, could only foster the emergence
of interreligious and inter-ethnic conflicts. Some
colonial empires deliberately left behind artificial lines
of division, hoping to maintain their influence in the
spirit of divide-and-conquer policies. That was also
accompanied by the continuing economic exploitation
of certain regions. In many countries, that did not help
create truly cohesive societies or strong States united
by a common history and culture, which are key to
preventing conflicts and resolving differences.
Unfortunately, today sociopolitical models are
being imposed on certain sovereign States. If they
show their independence by violating certain rules,
then unilateral sanctions, trade wars and even forcible
regime change are used. More than once, we have seen
situations where elections were designated as one of
the criteria for assessing whether a State is moving
towards domestic political stability — as if elections
in themselves were a panacea. At the same time, many
fundamental underlying issues of societal differences
have been ignored for years. We also see the opposite,
where an illegitimate power transfer in some States
elicited no reaction and was even supported.
The concept of transitional justice has also been
shown to be ineffective. Often, special courts only
exacerbate existing differences by enshrining the
victory of one side over another in a conflict and help
settle political scores. Sometimes they are even used by
foreign States as a means of intervening in the internal
affairs of countries weakened by conflicts.
We are convinced that the establishment of postconflict everyday life should be based on local traditions
and features. Sometimes, to ensure sustainable
reconciliation, the work of a truth commission is
enough. In other places, traditional mechanisms, such
as the Gacaca courts in Rwanda, are appropriate. We
are convinced that the issues of transitional justice in
the work of the Security Council are not a search for
a universal formula, but rather specific work with the
specificities of each country.
20/23

12/10/2021

We appreciate the contribution of peacekeeping
and political missions, which help ensure peace and
stability in conflict-affected States and have broad
mandates and billions in resources. They contribute
greatly to ending violence, protecting individuals
and moving political processes forward, as well as
mediation and good offices. However, that cannot
substitute for national political decisions and the
process of State-building based on a country’s own
interests and priorities. What is needed is a thoughtout national strategy based on civic patriotism. Every
person, regardless of his or her ethnicity or religion,
must be first and foremost a citizen of his or her country
and be proud of it. No one has the right to put ethnic
and religious distinctions above a State’s law. But, at
the same time, the laws of a country should take into
account ethnic and religious characteristics.
We are convinced that respecting history, creating
national education programmes, working with youth and
devising a national policy aimed at the establishment
of a responsible security sector and State institutions
is key to building a stable country and society,
recognizing their vital responsibilty for ensuring peace
and stability. The end result is inevitably a national
identity that takes into account the diversity of social
groups and cultural and civilizational values, as well as
the historic characteristics of a society. It is a lengthy,
complicated process but should take place organically,
without ready-made formulas being imposed from
the outside.
We do not mean to mentor anyone, because Russia
itself is a multinational and multi-religious State that
has seen difficult periods in its history, and we respect
the right of every nation to choose its own development
path. We stand ready to share our unique and vast
experience of peaceful coexistence among various
civilizations, religions and cultures. We support
aspirations of States to ensure the well-being and safety
of their people through their own efforts, with assistance
from their neighbours and regional integration bodies.
We note in particular the efforts made by the
African Union and countries on the continent to build
an inclusive and diverse African society unified being a
part of humankind’s common history and culture.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): The quest for peace,
our collective effort to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war, is the foundation stone of
the United Nations and the mandate of the Security
21-28457

12/10/2021

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Council. Such an enormous responsibility is entrusted
to each member of the Council. Every day, millions
of vulnerable people look to us around this table for
hope. They look to us to set aside our differences and
to prevent and end conflict. Our successes are theirs.
When we come together, we can help to alleviate
immense suffering; we can provide vital support to
peace processes. And yes, our actions, our words, can
save lives.
This debate gives us not only a welcome opportunity
to reflect on those successes, but also time to reflect
on our collective failures. It is appropriate that we are
joined today by deeply thoughtful briefers. I want to
thank the Secretary-General, President Kagame and
President Mbeki for their insightful messages. The
courageous briefing from Ms. Fawzia Koofi struck a
deep chord, and I thank her.
Today I will make three points.
First, as the Council seeks to build and sustain
peace, the leitmotif must be the fullest respect for
the human rights of all people. Human rights belong
to individual human beings in all their diversity.
They belong to all persons, regardless of their gender,
race, ethnicity, sexual orientation or gender identity;
regardless of religion, belief or disability; regardless of
whether they are rich or poor; and regardless of where
they live on this planet.
Our instinct as humans is to form groups and
communities; we carry this identity with us. But, as our
briefers have pointed out, too often group identity can
become the basis for marginalization, for discrimination
and even for abuse. Every woman knows this. The
LGBTQI+ community knows this. Ethnic groups,
religious groups, racial groups — they know this.
That should not be the case. The late Irish
peacemaker John Hume said:
“Difference is the essence of humanity. Difference
is an accident of birth, and it should therefore never
be the source of hatred or conflict”.
In situations on the Council’s agenda, people are
persecuted because they happen to be members of a
certain group. We should strive to resist the creation of
the “other” — resist creating hierarchies of humankind.
The very worst episodes of human history bear
testament to the danger of marginalization and to the
dangers of persecution on the basis of group identity.

S/PV. 8877

One thing is clear: difference alone does not cause
conflict, nor does homogeneity prevent it. As a Council
we must take care to recognize that human rights
violations, including on grounds of identity, can be a
prelude to and even a driver of conflict.
Secondly, the Council should think about peace
not as an event but a process. The Irish poet W.B.
Yeats wrote of how “peace comes dropping slow”. In
Northern Ireland, as elsewhere, the peace we cherish
took decades to achieve.
Often it is brave women, women like Fawzia Koofi
in Afghanistan, Hala Al-Karib in Sudan and Shukria
Dini in Somalia, who reach across community divides to
seek peace, as the Northern Ireland Women’s Coalition
did during our own peace process. The lesson I take
from the courage of their example is that the peace
we build must be inclusive and based on partnerships.
It is critical that we hear from grass-roots women
peacebuilders who actually get down and do this work.
Those civil-society voices were a golden thread
running through Ireland’s presidency of the Council
last month. They also bear witness to how in places like
Somalia and Myanmar, climate change and extreme
weather events are placing pressure on already fragile
communities.
The Peacebuilding Commission is an important
partner in the Council’s quest for sustainable peace.
It brings together not only United Nations actors but
also local peacebuilders in the field. In the aftermath
of conflict, building good governance cannot be a topdown exercise from a conference room here in New
York. It has to have its roots on the ground, in local
communities and in inclusive decision-making.
My third point is that inclusive peacekeeping
transitions are a litmus test for the durability of peace.
The moment the Blue Helmets of United Nations
peacekeepers leave, a reconfigured United Nations,
in cooperation with international actors such as the
international financial institutions and regional and
subregional organizations, needs to be ready to step
up and step in to support and to protect the peace left
behind. That is a critical inflection point, particularly
when it comes to ensuring that divisions recently healed,
including those based on identity, are not reopened.
The Council’s unanimous adoption of resolution
2594 (2021) is a recognition of that and a sign that we
agree that transitions should be nationally owned and

21-2845721/23

S/PV.8877

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

inclusive. Where transitions occur, the views of local
communities, of women, of youth and of marginalized
groups should be taken into account. The protection
of civilians is also a key barometer of the success of
any transition.
In the Council’s quest for peace, sometimes in the
depths of seemingly unending conflict, let us not forget
what we are trying to achieve. A sine qua non is that we
invest in human rights. We need to invest in inclusion.
And we should learn how to invest in critical moments
of transition. The overall dividend of such efforts will
be a more sustainable peace, which expels intolerance
and helps all people in their infinite diversity to belong
with dignity.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation thanks Kenya for organizing this
open debate. We extend a warm welcome to you,
President Kenyatta. I thank you for presiding over
today’s meeting. The briefings by the SecretaryGeneral, President Kagame and former President Mbeki
on the theme of the open debate were insightful and
inspiring, for which I am truly grateful. I also listened
closely to Ms. Koofi’s briefing.
Diversity is an intrinsic characteristic of the world.
It is a perpetual force that drives human development,
but it sometimes may also become a source of tension
and conflict. In the wake of the Second World War,
many Asian, African and Latin American countries
emerged from colonial rule and gained independence.
The legacy of colonialism, however, has not been fully
eliminated. National borders artificially drawn up by
external Powers and the bizarre political and economic
structures inherited from the colonial era have all but
hindered the organic formation of national identities
among the peoples of former colonies, have resulted
in a wide range of complex issues within the newly
independent countries and have become root causes
of conflict.
In the process of resolving hotspot issues and postconflict peacebuilding, how to make diversity a positive
driver is a topic that merits and in-depth discussion.
China is of the view that we must support the efforts
of developing countries to maintain national unity. In
order to govern any country, it is essential to respect
the diversity of society and, at the same time, remain
committed to maintaining national unity. Those two
goals are not incompatible or mutually exclusive.
22/23

12/10/2021

For many developing countries, the task of
maintaining national unity is more urgent, and the
related challenges are more pronounced. Many conflict
situations currently on the agenda of the Security
Council are the result of intensified intercommunal
disputes and weakened national identities. China calls
on all parties to internal conflicts to put the interests
of their country and people first, set aside communal
and partisan differences, build political consensus and
establish and consolidate a broad and inclusive political
architecture. We support United Nations peacekeeping
operations and special political missions in redoubling
their efforts in that regard on the path forward.
Kenya has forged ahead with reforms in recent
years and expanded the political participation of
women and other social groups. Kenya’s experience
and practices have set a laudable example for the
international community. We need to support the
efforts of developing countries to achieve inclusive
development. Development is key to finding solutions
to all problems. Decent living conditions for all is
the fundamental guarantee for the realization of
lasting peace.
In the process of post-conflict peacebuilding, the
countries concerned should uphold a people-centred
approach, formulate inclusive development policies,
encourage people’s initiative at all levels of society and
adopt a grow-the-pie mindset in national development.
That is the economic basis for achieving international
harmony and enhancing social cohesion. At a time
when the world economy continues to reel from the
shock of the coronavirus disease pandemic, developing
countries are in a more disadvantaged position in
international economic relations, and the goal of
inclusive development remains elusive.
We must improve global economic governance
and rectify the unjust and unreasonable arrangements
in the current system through reforms so that
developing countries can participate in and benefit
from international economic cooperation on an equal
footing. We should support developing countries to
address uneven development within their borders,
pay more attention to vulnerable groups, redistribute
the pie, enable everyone to benefit from the fruits of
development, prevent the polarization of wealth and
leave no one behind.
We must support the efforts of developing countries
to stand up to foreign interference. Every country has its
21-28457

12/10/2021

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

own unique history and culture and, as such, is entitled
to follow a development path that accords with its own
national circumstances. Attempts by foreign Powers to
promote regime change, impose their own governance
model on others and promote so-called democratic
transformation and the partiality of foreign influence
in internal disputes have plunged countries such as
Libya and Syria into civil strife and have resulted in
Afghanistan falling into a vicious cycle. History teaches
us that a world where peace and development prevail
is one that comprises different forms of civilization as
well as diverse paths to modernization.
Concerning the question of how a country should
be governed, it is the people of the country who should
have the final say. Countries should respect one
another’s choices regarding each one’s development
path and political system. Parties to hotspot issues
should be encouraged to seek solutions that reflect
realities on the ground. Regional organizations should
receive our support in playing an important role in
resolving their own regional issues. We should also
resolutely oppose any act that spreads hate speech or

S/PV. 8877

incites enmity among different communities, including
through the misuse of the Internet.
Humankind lives in a global village. The global
threats and challenges that confront us all require a
stronger commitment to solidarity and a collective
response under the banner of the United Nations.
China stands ready to work with other countries to
practice true multilateralism, promote the building of
a community with a shared future for humankind and
jointly build a better word.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
Before concluding, I would like once again to thank
all of the participants who joined us today. I would
also like to thank the Member States and regional
groups that have so far submitted written statements
on the subject of today’s discussion. Statements that
are received by the end of today will form part of the
compilation of statements from this meeting. We look
forward to receiving more.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

21-2845723/23
