United Nations

General Assembly

A/RES/61/36
Distr.: General
18 December 2006

Sixty-first session
Agenda item 78

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 4 December 2006
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/61/454)]

61/36. Allocation of loss in the case of transboundary harm
arising out of hazardous activities
The General Assembly,
Recalling that the International Law Commission at its fifty-third session 1
completed the draft articles on prevention of transboundary harm from hazardous
activities and recommended to the General Assembly the elaboration of a
convention on the basis of the draft articles,
Recalling also its resolution 56/82 of 12 December 2001,
Having considered chapter V of the report of the Commission on the work of
its fifty-eighth session, 2 which contains the draft principles on the allocation of loss
in the case of transboundary harm arising out of hazardous activities,
Noting that the Commission decided to recommend to the General Assembly
that it endorse the draft principles by a resolution and urge States to take national
and international action to implement them, 3
Emphasizing the continuing importance of the codification and progressive
development of international law, as referred to in Article 13, paragraph 1 (a), of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Noting that the questions of prevention of transboundary harm from hazardous
activities and allocation of loss in the case of such harm are of major importance in
the relations of States,
Taking into account views and comments expressed in the Sixth Committee on
chapter V of the report of the Commission on international liability in case of loss
from transboundary harm arising out of hazardous activities3 of the report of the
Commission at its fifty-eighth session,

_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 and corrigendum
(A/56/10 and Corr.1), paras. 91, 94 and 97.
2
Ibid., Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/61/10).
3
Ibid., para. 63.

06-49659

A/RES/61/36

1.
Expresses its appreciation to the International Law Commission for its
continuing contribution to the codification and progressive development of
international law;
Takes note of the principles on the allocation of loss in the case of
2.
transboundary harm arising out of hazardous activities, presented by the
Commission, the text of which is annexed to the present resolution, and commends
them to the attention of Governments;
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session
3.
an item entitled “Consideration of prevention of transboundary harm from
hazardous activities and allocation of loss in the case of such harm”.
64th plenary meeting
4 December 2006

Annex
Principles on the allocation of loss in the case of transboundary
harm arising out of hazardous activities
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming Principles 13 and 16 of the Rio Declaration on Environment and
Development,
Recalling the draft articles on the Prevention of Transboundary Harm from
Hazardous Activities,
Aware that incidents involving hazardous activities may occur despite
compliance by the relevant State with its obligations concerning prevention of
transboundary harm from hazardous activities,
Noting that as a result of such incidents other States and/or their nationals may
suffer harm and serious loss,
Emphasizing that appropriate and effective measures should be in place to
ensure that those natural and legal persons, including States, that incur harm and
loss as a result of such incidents are able to obtain prompt and adequate
compensation,
Concerned that prompt and effective response measures should be taken to
minimize the harm and loss which may result from such incidents,
Noting that States are responsible for infringements of their obligations of
prevention under international law,
Recalling the significance of existing international agreements covering
specific categories of hazardous activities and stressing the importance of the
conclusion of further such agreements,
Desiring to contribute to the development of international law in this field,
…

2

A/RES/61/36

Principle 1
Scope of application
The present draft principles apply to transboundary damage caused by
hazardous activities not prohibited by international law.
Principle 2
Use of terms
For the purposes of the present draft principles:
(a) “damage” means significant damage caused to persons, property or the
environment; and includes:
(i)

loss of life or personal injury;

(ii)

loss of, or damage to, property, including property which forms part of
the cultural heritage;

(iii) loss or damage by impairment of the environment;
(iv) the costs of reasonable measures of reinstatement of the property, or
environment, including natural resources;
(v)

the costs of reasonable response measures;

(b) “environment” includes natural resources, both abiotic and biotic, such
as air, water, soil, fauna and flora and the interaction between the same factors, and
the characteristic aspects of the landscape;
(c) “hazardous activity” means an activity which involves a risk of causing
significant harm;
(d) “State of origin” means the State in the territory or otherwise under the
jurisdiction or control of which the hazardous activity is carried out;
(e) “transboundary damage” means damage caused to persons, property or
the environment in the territory or in other places under the jurisdiction or control of
a State other than the State of origin;
(f)

“victim” means any natural or legal person or State that suffers damage;

(g) “operator” means any person in command or control of the activity at the
time the incident causing transboundary damage occurs.
Principle 3
Purposes
The purposes of the present draft principles are:
(a) to ensure prompt and adequate compensation to victims of transboundary
damage; and
(b) to preserve and protect the environment in the event of transboundary
damage, especially with respect to mitigation of damage to the environment and its
restoration or reinstatement.
Principle 4
Prompt and adequate compensation
1.
Each State should take all necessary measures to ensure that prompt and
adequate compensation is available for victims of transboundary damage caused by
3

A/RES/61/36

hazardous activities located within its territory or otherwise under its jurisdiction or
control.
2.
These measures should include the imposition of liability on the operator or,
where appropriate, other person or entity. Such liability should not require proof of
fault. Any conditions, limitations or exceptions to such liability shall be consistent
with draft principle 3.
3.
These measures should also include the requirement on the operator or, where
appropriate, other person or entity, to establish and maintain financial security such
as insurance, bonds or other financial guarantees to cover claims of compensation.
4.
In appropriate cases, these measures should include the requirement for the
establishment of industry-wide funds at the national level.
5.
In the event that the measures under the preceding paragraphs are insufficient
to provide adequate compensation, the State of origin should also ensure that
additional financial resources are made available.
Principle 5
Response measures
Upon the occurrence of an incident involving a hazardous activity which
results or is likely to result in transboundary damage:
(a) the State of origin shall promptly notify all States affected or likely to be
affected of the incident and the possible effects of the transboundary damage;
(b) the State of origin, with the appropriate involvement of the operator, shall
ensure that appropriate response measures are taken and should, for this purpose,
rely upon the best available scientific data and technology;
(c) the State of origin, as appropriate, should also consult with and seek the
cooperation of all States affected or likely to be affected to mitigate the effects of
transboundary damage and if possible eliminate them;
(d) the States affected or likely to be affected by the transboundary damage
shall take all feasible measures to mitigate and if possible to eliminate the effects of
such damage;
(e) the States concerned should, where appropriate, seek the assistance of
competent international organizations and other States on mutually acceptable terms
and conditions.
Principle 6
International and domestic remedies
1.
States shall provide their domestic judicial and administrative bodies with the
necessary jurisdiction and competence and ensure that these bodies have prompt,
adequate and effective remedies available in the event of transboundary damage
caused by hazardous activities located within their territory or otherwise under their
jurisdiction or control.
2.
Victims of transboundary damage should have access to remedies in the State
of origin that are no less prompt, adequate and effective than those available to
victims that suffer damage, from the same incident, within the territory of that State.
3.
Paragraphs 1 and 2 are without prejudice to the right of the victims to seek
remedies other than those available in the State of origin.
4

A/RES/61/36

4.
States may provide for recourse to international claims settlement procedures
that are expeditious and involve minimal expenses.
5.
States should guarantee appropriate access to information relevant for the
pursuance of remedies, including claims for compensation.
Principle 7
Development of specific international regimes
1.
Where, in respect of particular categories of hazardous activities, specific
global, regional or bilateral agreements would provide effective arrangements
concerning compensation, response measures and international and domestic
remedies, all efforts should be made to conclude such specific agreements.
2.
Such agreements should, as appropriate, include arrangements for industry
and/or State funds to provide supplementary compensation in the event that the
financial resources of the operator, including financial security measures, are
insufficient to cover the damage suffered as a result of an incident. Any such funds
may be designed to supplement or replace national industry-based funds.
Principle 8
Implementation
1.
Each State should adopt the necessary legislative, regulatory
administrative measures to implement the present draft principles.

and

2.
The present draft principles and the measures adopted to implement them shall
be applied without any discrimination such as that based on nationality, domicile or
residence.
3.
States should cooperate with each other to implement the present draft
principles.

5
