A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/104
26 January 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 152
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/53/633)]
53/104. Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country,1
Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United Nations, the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities
of the United Nations,2 the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America regarding
the Headquarters of the United Nations,3 and the responsibilities of the host country,
Recognizing that effective measures should continue to be taken by the competent authorities of the host
country, in particular to prevent any acts violating the security of missions and the safety of their personnel,
Noting the spirit of cooperation and mutual understanding that has guided the deliberations of the
Committee on issues affecting the United Nations community and the host country,

1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 26 (A/53/26).

2

Resolution 22 A (I).

3

See resolution 169 (II).

99-76243

/...

A/RES/53/104
Page 2

Taking into account the increase in profound interest and concern of many Member States in the work of
the Committee,
Noting that the Committee reviewed its membership and composition with the full participation of
observers, in accordance with the request contained in General Assembly resolution 52/159 of 15 December
1997,
1. Endorses the recommendations and conclusions of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country
contained in paragraph 50 of its report;1
2. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee that its membership be increased by four members,
including one each from African, Asian, Latin American and Caribbean and Eastern European States, to be
chosen by the President of the General Assembly in accordance with resolution 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December
1971, in consultation with the regional groups;
3. Considers that the maintenance of appropriate conditions for the normal work of the delegations and
the missions accredited to the United Nations is in the interest of the United Nations and all Member States, and
requests the host country to continue to take all measures necessary to prevent any interference with the
functioning of missions;
4. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made by the host country, and hopes that the issues raised
at the meetings of the Committee will continue to be resolved in a spirit of cooperation and in accordance with
international law;
5. Notes that during the reporting period the travel controls previously imposed by the host country on
staff of certain missions and staff members of the Secretariat of certain nationalities remained in effect, and
requests the host country to consider removing such travel controls, and in this regard notes the positions of
affected States, of the Secretary-General and of the host country;
6. Requests the host country to continue to take steps to resolve the problem relating to the parking of
diplomatic vehicles in a fair, balanced and non-discriminatory way, with a view to responding to the growing
needs of the diplomatic community, and to continue to consult with the Committee on this important issue;
7. Welcomes the efforts of the Committee aimed at identifying affordable health-care programmes for the
diplomatic community;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively engaged in all aspects of the relations of the United
Nations with the host country;
9. Requests the Committee to continue its work in conformity with General Assembly resolution 2819
(XXVI);
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled “Report of the
Committee on Relations with the Host Country”.

83rd plenary meeting
8 December 1998
