S/2003/769

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 July 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 29 July 2003 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
In my briefing to the Security Council on 16 July 2003, I informed the Council
that the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) had indicated its
readiness to deploy 1,500 troops to Liberia by mid-August 2003, to serve as a
“vanguard force” for the multinational force that I proposed in my letter of 28 June
to the Security Council (S/2003/678). At their meeting in Dakar on 22 July 2003, the
ECOWAS Defence and Security Commission and the ECOWAS Mediation and
Security Council decided that the “vanguard force” would comprise two battalions
from Nigeria (one of which would be transferred from the United Nations Mission
in Sierra Leone) and a third battalion made up of troops contributed by Ghana (250
troops), Mali (250 troops) and Senegal (250 troops). The battalion coming from the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) would be deployed first,
followed by the second Nigerian battalion from Lagos and, finally, the composite
battalion from Ghana, Mali and Senegal.
I am deeply concerned at the dramatic deterioration of the situation on the
ground, following renewed fighting in Monrovia on 18 July. It is therefore
absolutely essential to accelerate the deployment of the ECOWAS vanguard force to
Monrovia to pave the way for the early deployment of the multinational force. I am
encouraged by the determination of ECOWAS and the Security Council to take the
necessary steps to that end. The Government of Nigeria has indicated its willingness
to begin deploying its two battalions to Liberia immediately, provided the necessary
logistical support is made available by the international community. In this
connection, on 25 July the United States of America announced that it will position
appropriate military capabilities off the coast of Liberia to support the deployment
of the ECOWAS forces.
The United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone stands ready to transport the
Nigerian battalion that will be transferred from the Mission, since it was due for
repatriation under the Mission’s drawdown plan. Should it become necessary, and if
authorized by the Security Council, UNAMSIL also has the capacity to sustain that
battalion, as well as the second Nigerian battalion, for a limited period in Liberia
without adversely affecting the Mission’s operational capacity. To that end, I believe
that it may be within the Security Council’s jurisdiction to give UNAMSIL the
necessary mandate to use its resources to provide full support for the deployment
and sustainment of the ECOWAS vanguard force. I therefore appeal to the Council
to give this matter urgent consideration.

03-44530 (E)

290703

*
0
3
4
4
5
3
0
*

S/2003/769

As the Security Council is aware, the deployment of the ECOWAS vanguard
force would be the first phase of an interlocking three-phase deployment. The
deployment of the full multinational force would constitute Phase 2, followed by a
United Nations peacekeeping operation, which would be Phase 3.
The Economic Community of West African States is currently finalizing the
concept of operations of the vanguard force. The priority task of the ECOWAS
vanguard force would be to stabilize the situation in Monrovia as President Taylor
departs. It would, however, be important to reinforce the vanguard force in a timely
manner. Phase 2 troops, particularly those from the Member State that would lead
the multinational force, should arrive immediately after President Taylor’s
departure, in order to facilitate the installation of a successor Government and the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. The multinational force would be relieved by a
United Nations peacekeeping operation within the shortest possible time. I have
therefore instructed the Secretariat to begin the necessary planning for the
deployment of the envisaged United Nations peacekeeping mission.
The military component of such a United Nations operation would include
ECOWAS troops from the multinational force, as well as other international troop
contributors. It will be important for the Security Council to take an early decision
on the establishment of the envisaged United Nations mission, in order to facilitate
the timely generation of the military personnel required for this phase.
It would also be essential for the Security Council to authorize a robust
mandate for the envisaged United Nations peacekeeping force, in order to ensure
that it has a credible deterrence capability. The overall objective of the United
Nations peacekeeping operation would be to support the implementation of the
envisaged comprehensive peace agreement, culminating in the holding of free and
fair elections, which should be a key — but not the only — benchmark for the
gradual drawdown of the mission. The United Nations peacekeepers would provide
a security umbrella and create the necessary conditions for the holding of the
elections. Other specific tasks to be performed by the military component would
include assisting the interim government in disarming and demobilizing the armed
groups, providing security at vital locations and government buildings, including at
major seaports and airports, facilitating the delivery of humanitarian assistance, and
protecting civilians facing violence in areas of its immediate deployment.
Initially, the size of the United Nations peacekeeping mission is likely to be
driven by the need to support key activities, in particular the political process, the
humanitarian effort, and the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme. However, the specific number of troops and other personnel required
would be determined by a multidisciplinary assessment mission to Liberia, which I
intend to dispatch once vital areas of the country become accessible, following the
deployment of the multinational force.
As indicated in my letter to the Security Council dated 8 July (S/2003/695),
my Special Representative, Jacques Paul Klein, will lead and coordinate the
activities of the United Nations in Liberia. It is my expectation that Mr. Klein’s
office will not only play an active role in the political process in Liberia, but will
also constitute the advance party of a multidimensional United Nations
peacekeeping mission. In view of the appointment of Mr. Klein, and the envisaged
establishment of a United Nations operation in Liberia, the mandate of the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in Liberia will naturally have to be

2

S/2003/769

terminated. The Office, including its staff and assets, would be absorbed by the
office of my Special Representative.
As the security situation in Liberia stabilizes, and following the installation of
an interim government, the United Nations presence and role in Liberia would be
expanded, as necessary, with a view to giving the office of my Special
Representative and other United Nations agencies the capacity to support the interim
government. Pending the findings of the United Nations assessment mission, the
following principal areas of support by the United Nations can be readily identified:
working with the World Bank and the other stakeholders to develop and support a
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme; supporting the
resettlement of returning Liberian refugees and internally displaced persons and
providing care for Sierra Leonean and Ivorian refugees in Liberia; supporting the
restructuring and rehabilitation of the judiciary and the police force; assisting the
interim government to extend its authority throughout the country; promoting
respect for human rights and good governance; mobilizing bilateral assistance for
the reform and restructuring of the army; and providing assistance for the conduct of
free and fair national elections.
Given the envisaged interlocking nature of the deployments in the three phases
described above, arrangements are being put in place for close coordination between
ECOWAS, the United Nations and the lead country in the multinational force.
ECOWAS has invited the Secretariat to provide military, logistics and budget
officers to participate in a series of ongoing planning meetings convened by the
subregional organization. The United States is also participating in those meetings.
It is my expectation that similar arrangements will be put in place for planning the
deployment of the full multinational force, including arrangements for the
subsequent embedding of United Nations military planners in the headquarters of
that force.
Subject to guidance by the Security Council, it is my intention to proceed
immediately with the necessary preparations for the envisaged United Nations
operation in Liberia.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

3
