General Assembly - Thirty-eighth Session

38/105.

Participation of women in promoting international peace and co-operation

The General lssemhlL
Rcaffmning its resolution 37 "63 of 3 December 1982, by
which it proclaimed the Declaration on the Participation
of Women in Promoting lnternational Peacc and Cooperation,
Bclieving that further cfforts are requircd to eliminatc
discrimination against womcn in ali its forms and in every
field of human cndeavour.
Wishing to encourage the active participation of women
in promoting international peace and security and cooperation,
Conscious of thc need to implement the provisions of
the Declaration,
Desiring that publicity he given to the Declaration,
1. Ca/Is upon the Sccretary-Gcneral to disseminatc
widely the Declaration on the Participation of Women in
Promoting lnternational Peace and Co-operation in the six
official languages of the United Nations:
2. Invites ali Governments to take the necessary measures to ensure wide publicity for the Declaration:
3. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the Declaration to the attention of the appropriate specialized agencies. including the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization. the International Labour
Organisation. the World Health Organization and other
appropriate bodies within the United Nations system. for
the consideration of mcasures to implement the Dcclaration:
4. Requcsts the Commission on thc Status of Women
to consider what measures may be neccssary in order to
implcment the Declaratíon and to report. through the Economic and Social Council. to the General Assembly at its
thirty-ninth session:
5. Decides to consider at its thirty-ninth session the
report of the Commission on the Status of Women under
the item entitlcd "United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality. Development and Peacc". together with the
preparations for the World Conference to Review and
Appraise the Achievemcnts ofthe United Nations Decade
for Women. to be hcld in 1985.
100th plenary meeting
/6 December /983

38/106.

Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade for Wornen

The General Asscmbly.
Reca//ing its resolution 31/133 of 16 December 1976.
containing the criteria and arrangements for the management of the Vol untary Fund for the lJ nited Nations Decade for Women.
Recal/ing a/so its resolution 36/ 129 of 14 December
1981, in which it decided that the Fund should continue
its activities heyond the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and Peace,
Recal/ing fúrther its resolution 3 7/62 of 3 December
1982 and. in particular. its view that thc appointment of
senior women's programme officers at the regional commissions represents a valuablc contribution to the implcmentation of the goals of the Decade.
Rea_tfirming that question,· ..:oncerning women should be
approached and dealt with as an integral part of overall
131 A/381 530.

policics and programmes in the tield of social and econnmic development.
Noting with apwecia//on the effectivc management and
continuing expansion of the activities of thc Fund and thc
co-operation extended by rclcvant bodies of the Unitcd
Nations. including the Unitcd Nations Children's Fund.
the United Nations Devclopmcnt Programmc and the
regional commissions. and by non-governmcntal organizations.
We/coming thc contributions madc by Memhcr States
and non-governmental organizations towards the impkmentation of the goals of thc Decadc.
Taking note 1r11h appreciation of the rcport of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Fund. u 1
1. Takcs no/e wilh satisfaction of thc recommendations
of thc Consultativc Comm.ittee on the Voluntary Fund for
the United Nations Dccadc for Women at ib thirteenth
and fourteenth scssions. rcfcrrcd to in thc report of thc
Secretary-Cieneral: 114
2. 1~·xpresses 1/s concem that the qucstion of senior
women's programme officers posts at the regional commissions is still unrcsolvcd and that lack of progrcss in this
regard is seriously impeding work on thc women ·s
programmes in severa( regions:
3. Urges thc Secrctary-Gcncral, in consultation with
the executive sccretaries of the regional commissions, to
give priority to solving the question of senior women·s
programme officers and to take urgently appropriatc measures to cnsure that ali temporary and permancnt senior
womcn's programme officers posts at the regional commissions should be continued within thc regular hudgel
rcsources availablc to them:
4. Notes with satisfaclion the continuing incrcase in the
number of projects submitted to and financcd by thc
rcsources of the Fund and thcir contribution to promoting
the involvcment of women in devclopment:
5. ( 'onsiders that the Fund has a unique contribution
to makc in the technical assistance ti.cid to the implcmcntation of thc goals of the Unitcd Nations Decade for
Women: Equalit}. Development and Peace:
6. Stresses that the Fund also has a unique contribution to make to the achievcment of the goals of the Third
l lnited Nations Dcvelopment Decade. and evcn bcyond it:
7. Expresses lls appreciation for the voluntary support
given to the Fund by Member States, national committces
for the Fund. national United Nations associations and
other non-governmcntal organizations:
8. Notes with conccrn that contributions to thc Fund
have not been suflicient to cnable it to take on ali the
worthwhilc projccts submittcd to it:
9. Notes that contributions bv Governments have a
vital role to play in maintaining a'nd increasing the financia( viability and effectiveness of thc work of the Fund:
10. Urges Govemmcnts. accordingly, to continue and
increase. where possible, their contributions to thc Fund
and calls upon thosc Governments that have not yct done
so to consider contributing to the Fund:
11. Decides that. when considering the reports of the
Secretary-General to be submitted to thc General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session pursuant to Assembly resolution 36/129. ali possiblc options for continuing the Fund's
activities heyond the end of the Dccade will be revicwed in
depth:
12. Requests that the results of the forward-looking
assessment that is being undertaken on the activities
assisted by the F\md be reflected in thc reports of the Scc114 / /,u/ .. SLTI. \
