S/2008/847

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 December 2008
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
1.
The present note by the President of the Security Council concerning the
summary statement of matters of which the Security Council is seized (seizure
statement) consolidates and revises the provisions of paragraph 49 of the note by the
President dated 19 July 2006 (S/2006/507) and paragraphs 5 to 7 of the note by the
President dated 19 December 2007 (S/2007/749).
2.
Rule 11 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council provides
that the Secretary-General shall communicate each week to the representatives on
the Security Council a summary statement of matters of which the Security Council
is seized and of the stage reached in their consideration.
3.
The practice of including an agenda item on the seizure statement once it has
been adopted at a formal meeting of the Security Council will remain the same. In
this connection, the members of the Security Council recall paragraph 2 of the note
by the President of the Security Council dated 19 July 2006 (S/2006/507), which
states the desirability, whenever possible, of using descriptive formulations of
agenda items at the time of their initial adoption and that, when such a descriptive
formulation exists, consideration may be given to subsuming earlier agenda items
on the same subject under the descriptive formulation.
4.
At the end of each year, the Security Council will review the seizure statement
in order to determine if the Council has concluded its consideration of any of the
listed items, in particular those items that were considered for the first time that
year, and whether consequently, such items should be deleted from the seizure
statement. Further, except as herein provided, any item which has not been
considered by the Security Council during the preceding three calendar years will
also be deleted.
5.
The preliminary annual summary statement issued in January of each year by
the Secretary-General on matters of which the Council is seized will identify the
items to be deleted from the list. The first seizure statement issued in March of each
year will reflect the deletion of these items, unless a Member State of the United
Nations notifies the President of the Security Council by the end of February of that
year that it requests an item to remain on the seizure statement, in which case such
item will remain on the seizure statement for one year, unless the Security Council
decides otherwise.
6.
The deletion of an item does not imply that such an item cannot be taken up by
the Security Council as and when it deems necessary in the future.

09-00045 (E) 060109

*0900045*

S/2008/847

7.
The seizure statement will be presented in the format of two sections, as
follows: one section comprising items which have been considered by the Security
Council at a meeting during the preceding three-year period, and another section
comprising items which have not been considered at a meeting during the preceding
three-year period but which the Security Council has decided to retain at the request
of a Member State.
8.
The Security Council reconfirms that the first seizure statement of each month
will contain a full, updated list of items of which the Security Council is seized. For
intervening weeks, a weekly addendum to the summary statement will be issued
listing only those items on which further action has been taken by the Council
during the previous week or indicating that there has been no change during that
period.
9.
The Security Council reconfirms that references given for each item listed in
the seizure statement will be the dates when the item was first taken up by the
Council at a formal meeting and the most recent formal meeting of the Council held
on that item.

2

09-00045
