250

General Assembly-Forty-first Session

X

or omtssions occurring within the Headquarters dis1rict.
the following regulation:

SALARY
AND
RETIREMENT
ALLOWANCE
OF
fHI:.
SECRETARY-GENERAL AND SALARY AND PENSIONABLE
REMUNERATION OF THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL FOR DEVELOPMENT AND
INTERNATIONAL
ECONOMIC
COOPERATION AND THE ADMINISTRATOR OF THE UNITED
NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME

Having considered the report of the Advi~ory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 68
1. Concurs with the recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Ques1ions
concerning the gross salary and retirement allowance of
the Secretary-General, contained in paragraphs 4 and 5 of
its report;
2. Also concurs with the recommendation of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions concerning the gross salary and pensionable remuneration of the Director-General for Development and
International Economic Co-operation and the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme.
contained in paragraphs 6 and 8 of it~ report:
3. Approves the amendment to annex I to the Staff
Regulations of the U nited Nations with effect from I April
1987, as set forth in the annex to the present resolution

101st p/enury meeting
1J December Jq86

In any tort action or in respect of any tort claim by
any person against the United Nations or against any per"ºº· including a L·orporation, acting on behalf of the
United Nat1ons, to the extent that the United Nations may
he required to indemnify such person, whether such per"ºn is a member of its staff, an expert ora contractor, arismg out of any act ,ir omission, whether accidental or otherwise, in the Headquarters district, no person shall be
,·nt1tled to:
1 <1)
Compensa110n ir damages for econmmc loss, ª"
,.klined herein, in excess of:
( i) The limit... prescrihed for death, injury or illness
in the Rules Governing Compensation to Mem ·
bers of Commissions, Committees or Similar
Bodies m the Event of Death, lnjury or Illness
Attributahle to Service with the United Nations
applied mutatis mutandis;
(it) Reasonable amounts for damaged, destroyed or
lost propert y;

1 b) Compensat1on llf damages in excess of $100,000
for any non-econ.imic loss:
1 el

Any punit1ve or moral damages.
As used in t his regulation:

A1'NFX
Amendment to annex 1 to the Staff Re~ulations
of the ll nited "'lations
In paragraph l. the ,alary ligur<" frn the Admm"t,atm of thc United
Nations Dcvclopn1ent Programrnc ami 1hc D1rechlr-< Jcncral for nc\e!
opmcnt and Intt:rnatinnal l~Ltmnrmc ( \)-~1pl'r:.t1on -.hall rt::id
$LIS l 19,429

41/210.

Limitation of damages in respect of acts occurring within the Headquarters district

The General Assembly
Adopts, within the provision" of t he Agreemen t bel wee11
the United Nations and the United States of America r<.'·
garding the Headquarters of the United Nations, in accordance with the provisions of General Assembly resolution
481 (V) of 12 December 1950, and for thc purpose ofplacing reasonable limits on the amount of compensat1on ()J
damages payahlc by the l lnited Nati,111, iu rcspect pf acts
Ojjfrwl Rcl'ord\ uí th,, (lcllt'rui •1\',i'1'1/d_1,. h,rtv-fu·'-1 ";,,"1u•1
No. 7
(A/41 /'
:.nd
Add 1 11 ),
dt1,umc1,1
NoA/41/7/Add.11
hX

S11ppleme111

1a) "Economic loss" means the reasonable cost of repairing or replacing property, and, in respect of death, injury or illness, anv reasonable past, present and estimated
future:
(1) Health ,are expenses;
(1i) Rehabilitation expense,;
(iii) Loss of earnings;
(iv) Loss of tinancial support;
1v) Cost of homt'.maker services;
(vi) Transportation expenses:
(vii) Burial expen;,es;
( viii) Legal expenses.

( h) "Headquarters district'' meaos the district by that
name as defined 111 section 1 ofthe Agreement hetween the
llnited Nations ami the United States of America regard111g the Headquarkrs of the United Nations, of 26 June
1 ,¡47

101st plenury meeting
11 Decemher ]98ó
