FORTIETH

YEAR

nd
MEETING:

14 JUNE

1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...*...

. . . . . . . . . . a...

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2592)

Adoption

of the agenda . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .

The situation

1
1

in Namibia:

(a)

Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17213);

(b)

Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17222);

(c)

Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia(S/17242)..................,..........:.,.................

WPV.2592

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Secwity Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2592nd MEETING
Held in New York on Friday,
President: Mr. Errol MAHABIR

(Trinidad and Tobago).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Provisional agenda (WAgenda12592)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Namibia:

(4

Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17213);
Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Mozambique to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17222);
Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of Namibia (S/17242)

The meeting was called to order at 7 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
(4 Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Rep?sentative of India to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/17213);
(4 Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Coun$l
(S/17222);
(4 Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 435
(1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/17242)

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite the representative of
Liberia to take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kofa (Liberia)
took a place at the Council table.

14 June 1985, at 6.50 p.m.
2. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite the Acting President of
the United Nations Council for Namibia and the other
members of the delegation to take a place at the Council
table.
At the invitation of the President,Mr. Ouyahia, Acting
Presidentof the UnitedNationsCouncilfor Namibia,and the
other membersof the delegationtook a place at the Council
table.

3. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite Mr. Nujoma to take a
place at the Council table.
At the invitation of thePresident,Mr. Nujomatook a place
at the Counciltable.

4. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with decisions taken
at previous meetings on this item [2583rdto 2587th,2589th
and2590thmeetings],
I invite the representatives ofAfghaniStan, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Canada, the Congo, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Ethiopia, the German Democratic Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany, Ghana, Guyana,
Haiti, Hungary, Indonesia, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya,
Kuwait, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho,
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Panama, Poland, Seychelles, South Africa, Sri Lanka, the
Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Uganda, the
United Arab Emirates, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zambia and Zimbabwe to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of thePresident,Mr. Zarf(A&hanistart),
Mr. Bessaieh
(Algeria), Mr. Van-Dunem(Angola),Mr. Mufiiz
(Argentina),Mr. Choudhury(Bangladesh),
Mr. Moseley(Barbados),Mr. Tshaing (Bhutan),Mrs. Carrasco(Bolivia), Mr.
Legwaila(Botswana),Mr. Maciel(Brazil), Mr* Tsvetkov(Bulgaria), Mr. Engo (Cameroon),Mr. Lewis (Canada), Mr.
Gayama (Congo),Mr. Malmierca (Cuba), Mr. Moushoutas
(Cyprus),Mr. C&ar (Czechoslovakia),
Mr. AMshtnl(Democratic Yeme@,Mr. Dinka (Ethiopia).Mr. Ott (GermanDemocratic Republic),Mr. Lautenschlager(FederalRepublic of
Germanl?),Mr. Asamoah(Ghana), Mr. Kurran (Guyana),
Mr. Charles(Haiti), Mr. R&z (Hungary), Mr. Kusuniantma&
(indonesiu),Mr. Shearer (Jamaica), Mr. Kuroda
(Japan),Mr. Kiilu (Kenya), Mr. Abulhassan(Kuwait), Mr,
Vongsay(Lao People’sDemocraticRepublic),Mr. Makeka

(Lesotho), Mr. Azzarouk (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr,
Zuin (Malaysia), Mr. Mtioz Redo (Mexico), Mr. Nyamdoo
(Mongolia), Mr. Alaoui (Morocco), Mr. Murargy (Mozambique), Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann (Nicaragua), Mr. Gambari
(Nigeria), Mr. Shah Nawaz (Pakistan), Mr. Cabrera Jovane
(Panama), Mr. Nowak (Poland), Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles),,
Mr. von Schirnding (South Africa), Mr. Wijewardane (Sri
Lanka), Mr. Birido (Sudan), Mr. Al-Atassi (Syrian Arab
Republic), Mr. Tiirkmen (Turkey), Mr. Odaka (Uganda),
Mr. Al-MO@, (United Arab Emirates), Mr. Mkapa (United
Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Le Kim Chutig (Viet Nam), Mr.
Golob (Yugoslavia) Mr. Goma (Zambia) and Mr. Mudenge
(Zimbabwe) took the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.

10. We are particularly pleased to see you, the representative of Trinidad and Tobag+-a Caribbean country which
is, like mine, a limb torn by force from the tree of Africapresiding over the Council’s consideration of the situation
in Namibia. We are certain that your well known qualities
as a statesman and diplomat and your commitment to the
cause of oppressed peoples will be of great value to the
Council in its deliberations, the outcome of which will
determine the fate of an entire people which has been
enslaved and humiliated for too long.
11. I wish also to pay a tribute to the representative of
Thailand for the outstanding way in which he carried out
his responsibilities as President for the month of May.
12. It is now at least seven years since the Council, on the
initiative of the Group of Five, adopted the settlement plan
for Namibia contained in resolution 435 (1978), believing
that it had found the basis for a negotiated settlement which
would enable the Namibian people at long last to exercise its
inalienable right to self-determination and national independence. That resolution, accepted by all the parties concerned, gave rise at the time to great hope in the
international community. Despite scattered doubts, there
were many who believed that that problem, which had
lasted far too long, was going to be settled at last, thus also
eliminating a major hotbed of tension in the southern part
of Africa. Unfortunately, they had not taken into consideration the bad faith, intransigence and duplicity of the Pretoria regime, which, defying the authority of the United
Nations and the will of the international community, is
more than ever determined to persist in its colonial occupation of Namibia in order both to protect its strategic and
economic interests and to ensure the survival of the odious
system of apartheid. To achieve its ends, Pretoria sometimes
uses force, sometimes cunning. At the same time, there has
been an unprecedented strengthening of Pretoria’s military
machine, an intensification of its repression, and a consolidation of its political domination through the installation of
puppet surrogates, with whom it would replace the South
West AfricaPeople’s Organization (SWAPO), the sole legitimate representative of the Namibian people. Moreover, its
acts of aggression against neighbouring States-such as the
Cabinda incident, aimed against the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Angola, and, most recently, yesterday’s massacre of innocent victims in Botswana-continue
unabated.

5. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Malta, in which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gauci (Malta) took
the place reservedfor him at the side of the Council chamber.
6. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received from the representatives of Burkina
Faso, Egypt and Madagascar a letter dated 14 June 1985
[S/17271] which reads as follows:
“We, the undersigned members of the Security Council, have the honour to request that the Council extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Neo Mnumzana, Deputy Chief Representative of the African National Congress ofSouth Africa, in
connection with the Council’s current consideration of
the item entitled ‘The situation in Namibia’.”
If I hear no objection I shall take it that the Council agrees
to grant that request.
It was so decided

13. All those facts amply demonstrate that Pretoria has
not the slightest intention of co-operating in the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). In that regard, the
Secretary-General’s report to the Security Council of 29
December 1983 [S/16237-j is particularly illuminating,
when it states that all the principal questions dealt with in
resolution 435 (1978) had been settled and that South Africa’s intransigence was the only remaining obstacle to the
independence of Namibia.

7. The PRESIDENT: I should like to draw the attention
of members of the Council to document S/17262, which
contains the text of a letter dated 11 June from the Acting
,President of the United Nations Council for Namibia’
addressed to the Secretary-General.
8. The first speaker is the representative of Haiti. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

14. Meanwhile, Pretoria is determined to put into effect its
own agenda, in keeping with its manifest desire to continue
its colonial-type domination. In effect, its plan to install an
interim administration in Namibia can be explained only by
its determination to make of Namibia another bantustan
or, at best, a vassal State, a protectorate. This recidivist

9. Mr. CHARLES (Haiti) (interpretation from French):
First of all, Sir, I wish to thank you and, through you, the
other members of the Council for having allowed us to
take part in this debate on one of the most worrying questions before us.
2

who suffered losses from the attack last night from South
Africa, The United States condemns South Africa’s attack
on Gaborone.

behaviour in itself represents a serious challenge to the
international community and in particular to the Council,
which has, rightly, categorically rejected and condemned
that decision which cannot fail to have serious consequences for the prospects for the implementation of resolution
435 (1978).

21. As we said in the Council earlier this week, respect for
the national sovereignty of all States and the inviolability of
international borders are key principles in international
relations, and no State can arrogate to itself a right to
violate those principles. We cannot and will not condone
violations of those principles. Such cross-border violence
only complicates efforts to bring peace to the southern
African region.

15. However, we are entitled to ask what is the practical
value of that condemnation if it is not followed by sanctions. Experience has proved that tolerance and accommodation only encourage Pretoria in its arrogance and
intransigence. It should be emphasized in this regard that
clearly the racist regime has so far been the sole beneficiary
of the policy of constructive engagement. For us, trust in the
good faith of the racists is nothing but naivete, pure and
simple, if not complicity, Our high regard for the truth and
for justice does not allow us to accept such duplicity if we
are to remain true to ourselves.

22. In saying that, my Government in no way condones or
accepts recent bombings and acts of violence within South
Africa, nor can we accept a right to launch such actions
from beyond its borders. But this latest South African
action comes against a background that raises the most
serious questions about that Government’s recent conduct
and policy.

16. In the eyes of world public opinion, these meetings of
the Council are the moment of truth for our Organization’s
credibility. If, 19 years after the termination of South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia and 7 years after the adoption
of a plan for a negotiated settlement of the question, the
Namibian people is still suffering under the yoke of the
racist occupier, it is largely because so far certain permanent
members of the Security Council have not fully shouldered
their responsibilities.

23. Public claims of a policy of mounting military operations in neighbouring sovereign countries have been made
by senior officials of that Government, in South Africa and
here at the United Nations. Actions have been taken that
placed at physical risk United States lives and property. My
Government categorically rejects such a policy, which is
antithetical to the goal of working for a negotiated solution
and an end to southern Africa’s cycle of violence.

17. In that context, we must quote the spokesman of the
South African regime, who told the Council on 10 June:

24. Yesterday’s attack on Botswana is particularly depiorable in the light of the recent progress made by the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of both Botswana and South Africa to
control cross-border violence and settle mutual problems
by discussion. Mechanisms had been put in place to handle
security concerns of both sides, and South Africa’s action
calls into question its sincerity and seriousness in dealing
constructively with those matters,

“The time has come for Western countries in the
United Nations to take a stand for the promotion of the
democratic values which they profess to espouse.”
[2583rd meeting,para. 223.1

18. We absolutely agree with him about that. We are
pleased to note that within public opinion in the Western
countries the struggle is continuing to bring their Governments, belatedly, to subscribe to the following values: the
right of peoples to self-determination, the elimination of
racism, colonialism, neo-colonialism and apartheid, the
legal equality of States, respect for national will, cooperation between peoples and States, on the basis of
mutual respect, and so on.

25. In the light of this and other recent events, we have
decided to call our Ambassador to South Africa, Herman
Nichols, home on consultations to review the situation.
26. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Democratic Yemen. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

19. It is our most fervent hope that that appeal will now be
heeded by those States, which must honestly and seriously
assume their obligation to seek in complete good faith, with
the other members of the Council, all possible ways and
means to achieve the decolonization of Namibia, by the
immediate implementation of resolution 435 (1978), which
remains the only basis for a universally acceptable politically negotiated settlement, excluding all pre-conditions or
conditions that have nothing to do with the substance of the
problem. Then will begin for the Namibians the rehabilitation they have so long awaited, by their regaining their
sovereignty, their dignity, their political and economic freedom and their humanity. Then justice will prevail.

27. Mr. AL-ASHTAL (Democratic Yemen) (interpretution from Arabic): It is a great pleasure for me warmly to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
for this month. I am fully convinced that your well-known
experience and skill wiIl bring successto the deliberations of
the Council.
28. On this occasion I must also expressmy appreciation
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the representative of
Thailand for the wise way in which they conducted the
deliberations of the Council in the month of May.
29. The meetings of the Council following a request by the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the participation
of a large number of Ministers and delegations in this

20. . Mr. CLARK (United States of America): We should
like to express our condolences to the people of Botswana,
3

,’

imposed on the racist regime by circumventing United
Nations resolutions, particularly Council reSOhtiOl1
435
(1978). This connivance between imperialist circles and the
minority racist regime in South Africa has increased the
racist regime’s flouting of international resolutions and
demands. Indeed it has encouraged it to wage further
aggression against the African front-line States; it has
encouraged it to destablize them and to threaten their security and stability. The Declaration [see S/I7184 and Cow.1,
annex] issued by the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of
the Co-ordinating Bureau of theNonAligned Countries on
the question of Namibia, held at New Delhi in April 1985,
states that the policy of constructive engagement undertaken by the current Administration of the United States is
in principle intended to encourage and support the racist
regime. It further declares that that policy encourages the
increasing intransigence of the racist regime as well as the
policy of continued aggression and blackmail that it
imposes on neighbouring independent States.

general debate on Namibia represent an expression of political solidarity with the people of Namibia struggling under
the leadership of its sole, legitimate representative,
SWAPO, and we are indeed honoured to have with us
today its distinguished leader, Mr. Sam Nujoma.
30. Perhaps those who have been following this debate
since its beginning will see the truth of a number of firmly
established facts, which we can summarize as follows.
31. First, this wide-scale participation in a debate on the
question of Namibia reflects the increasing concern of the
international community regarding developments in southern Africa in general and in Namibia in particular in the
light of the latest manoeuvre of the racist South African
regime, which is trying to implement a declaration establishing a so-called interim government in Namibia. Furthermore, this emphasizes the continuing condemnation ofthat
declaration and the call for its abrogation. The installation
of a group of puppets aimed at supporting the policy of
uparrheid and entrenching illegal control of Namibia by the
racist regime of South Africa merely represents a part of the
attempts of the racist Pretoria regime to hamper and sabotage United Nations efforts and the efforts of the international community to achieve real independence for
Namibia in accordance with the United Nations plan set out
in Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 539 (1983).

34. Fourthly, the question of Namibia is one of national
liberation, and in the first place it is a question of decolonization. For that reason, those who have spoken before me
have condemned all attempts to link Namibian independence with the withdrawal of Cuban forces from Angola.
This Council has rejected that linkage in its resolution 539
(1983). Furthermore the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting
of the Coordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries
stressed its condemnation and rejection of the linking of
implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978)
with extraneous issues that have no relation whatsoever to
Namibian independence and stated that it runs counter to
the United Nations plan and constitutes intervention into
the internal affairs of Angola and an infringement of its
sovereign rights as an independent State.

32. Secondly, in addition to South Africa’s continuing
illegal occupation of Namibia, the situation has become all
the more dangerous because of the racist regime’s plans to
transform Namibia into a militarized territory and use it as
a springboard for acts of aggression and sabotage against
neighbouring
independent African States, especially
Angola, which is suffering occupation of parts of its territory by the racist forces. This indeed is a great threat to
peace and security in the region and in the world as a whole.
In this context my delegation wishes to denounce the attack
upon Botswana this morning, which is part and parcel of
the aggressive policy perpetrated against independent
States neighbouring South Africa.

35. In the light of these facts, Democratic Yemen stresses
its full support for the contents of the declaration of the
Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating
Bureau. Furthermore, it renews its complete support for the
struggle of the people in southern Africa and of their
national liberation movements, particularly SWAPO, the
sole legitimate representative of the Namibian people, in
their just struggle against occupation, oppression, discrimination and apartheid.

33. Thirdly, the dangerous and explosive situation now
being suffered by the southern Africa region is virtually the
result of the stand of the United States and some other
Western States that support the South African racist regime
by all political, military and economic means. The aim is to
maintain their monopolizing interests in Namibia and
South Africa under different forms and guises. This
renewed debate on the question of Namibia in the Council
stresses the awareness of the Namibian people and the
international community regarding the manoeuvres of
deception and procrastination being made under the guise
of the so-called policy of constructive engagement and the
creation of excuses to hamper implementation of resolution
435 (1978). In this context the failure to adhere strictly to the
Security Council resolution on the prohibition of military
co-operation with the racist regime of Pretoria, the continued hampering of any measure taken by the Council to
impose mandatory sanctions against the racist regime, and
the official visits undertaken recently by the Prime Minister
of that regime to a number of Western States-all are part
of a continuing attempt to break the international isolation

36. We call for immediate implementation of resolution
435 (1.978). We believe that the Council must set out concrete steps to ensure Namibian independence so that it may
give credibility to its resolutions. We furthermore call for
condemnation of all racist attempts aimed at hampering
implementation of Council resolutions as well as condemnation and rejection of all “internal settlements” imposed
on Namibia by the racist regime against the will of its
struggling peoples. Furthermore, we call for rejection and
condemnation of all attempts to link Namibian independence with the withdrawal of Cuban forces from Angola.
37. We stress our support for the front-line States as they
face the continued acts of aggression and sabotage, as well
as the economic siege imposed by the Pretoria racist regime.
We call on the Council to impose comprehensive manda4

tory sanctions against the South African rtgime under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.

43. The record is unmistakable. It is replete with glaring
instances of bad faith. Each and every one of the sevenyears
during which we have been trying to implement resolution
435 (1978) has been used by South Africa as an opportunity
to promote an internal settlement in Namibia with the clear
purpose of subverting any United Nations solution to the
Namibian problem. This is so despite Pretoria’s protestations of good faith. Let us recall, to mention only a few
glaring examples, the internal elections of 1978, glorified by
the South African representative in his speech on Monday,
a provocative aberration which caused even the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of the Western five to go on a hapless
pilgrimage to Pretoria; the so-called second-tier elections of
1980; the repeated somersaults on the non-issue of United
Nations impartiality; the persistent invasions and occupation of southern. Angola and the merciless massacre of
Namibian refugees in that country every time a breakthrough in the negotiations was thought to be imminent.
Finally, there was the linkage, the ultimate in Pretoria’s bad
faith, now complicated by yet another internal colonial
artifice: the so-called interim government, whose real purpose even South Africa must be really hard put to explain
with a straight face.

38. The people of Namibian is the victim of the racist and
colonial policy of the South African racist rCgime and its
imperialist allies. These allies, which provide it with every
political, economic and military assistance, are the very
Powers which provide assistance to the racist Zionist
rtgime, which is practising its aggressive and barbaric policy against the Arab people in Palestine, The indentical
nature of the two racist rCgimes in South Africa and Israel is
indeed what has led today to their close co-operation in all
fields and particularly in the military and nuclear fields.
This assistance has the aim of prolonging the subjugation
and colonization of the African and Arab peoples. We are
convinced that the struggle of the peoples of South Africa,
Namibia, Palestine and the other Arab peoples will be
crowned with victory. We are convinced that the dangers of
the racist policy will be eliminated, as it is a policy which is a
source of grave danger to peace and is contrary to the
principles of the Charter.
39. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Botswana, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

44. Then there was the recent discovery by Angola that
the purported withdrawal of South African troops from
southern Angola was a cynical diversionary tactic designed
to dupe the People’s Republic into believing that there were
at long last no more South African troops in that country. It
discovered that South African commandos were in fact
deep into the other side of Angola, still as determined as
ever before to destroy that front-line State’s vital economic
infrastructure. Is there any need for more proof of what we
are up against?

40. Mr. LEGWAILA (Botswana): Sir, the coincidence of
your assumption of the presidency of the Council with the
crucial Council debate on the question of Namibia is very
welcome indeed. We have no doubt that under your skilled
guidance the Council will be imbued with a new sense of
purpose as it continues to strive to live up to the expectations of the Namibian people. We wholeheartedly repose
our confidence in you. In no small measure, your predecessor also deserves our sincere admiration for his yeoman
service to the Council in the month of May.

45. Yet South Africa is portrayed today as a lover of
peace, a harbinger of political stability and racial harmony
in the southern African region, legitimately deserving ofthe
gratuitous benefits of constructive engagement. The contrary is true; for if South Africa were indeed a lover of peace
and a harbinger of stability and harmony in our region it
would have been co-operating in the implementation of
resolution 435 (1978), hailed by the world as a historic
blueprint for the peaceful decolonization of Namibia, a
Territory held for so long in brutal bondage. It would not
have been manufacturing one excuse after another every
time we prepared to take the final step towards the peaceful
liberation of Namibia through the implementation of the
United Nations plan. Our region would not have been
transformed into a war zone, a veritable cockpit of bloody
conflict, where a growing assortment of dissident movements are mercilessly sowing death and misery at the behest
of the white minority regime in Pretoria.

41. We are once again compelled to come to the Council
to plead Namibia’s case, if it needs any more pleading at all.
We are fully aware that everything that needs to be said
about that betrayed trust of mankind has been said. Every
trick in the book has been employed to try to remove the
impediments that have been placed in the way of the Territory’s progress towards liberation. Seminars, conferences,
both ordinary and extraordinary, special sessions of the
United Nations General Assembly and the Council for
Namibia and numerous meetings of the Security Council
have been held in the past seven years to facilitate and
expedite the peaceful decolonization of theTerritory by way
of the implementation ofcouncil resolution 435 (1978)--all
without success.We know the reason why this is so, why we
cannot implement a plan which the Council unanimously
adopted seven years ago.

46. Only early this morning my own country became the
latest victim of the murderous activities of the Pretoria
regime. Under the cover of darkness, in the fashion of the
Maseru attack almost three years ago, South African commandos entered the capital of my country in theearly hours
of this very day, where they snuffed out in cold blood the
lives of approximately twelve innocent South African refugees and Botswana citizens, leaving many others wounded
and maimed.

42. The problem we face today as WCseek to implement
that plan is the same problem we have faced throughout the
unpredictable life of resolution 435 (1978). It is the same
problem we faced at the pre-implementation meeting ar
Geneva in 1981, in New York in the summer of 1982 and
ever since. It is the problem of negotiating the future of
Namibia with a South Africa that has turned bad faith into
a profession.
5

47. This senselessand dastardly act was, as usual, unprovoked and unwarranted, for no one in his right mind, even
in Pretoria or anywhere else, can be so ridiculous as’ to
suggest that the people of Botswana would permit their
exposed capital, of all places, to be used as a military base
for guerrilla attacks against South Africa-and despite the
fact that South Africa knows only too well Botiwan$s
position on the question of guerrilla bases.The whole world
knows this position, as well. Indeed, what theSouth African
commandos found when they arrived in our capital were
not military bases, but civilian houses, which they proceeded to destroy with all their contents, including a fiveyear-old child, who even in South Africa’s warped senseof
morality cannot be regarded as a guerrilla of the African
National Congress of South Africa (ANC).

52. Indeed, the whole atmosphere around the Namibian
question has become so polluted that, listening to the South
African representative’s speech the other day one felt as if
one was listening to bandit Jonas Savimbi’s propaganda.
The speech debated the issue of Angola’s internal affairs
instead of addressing the question of Namibia. The Council
was treated to a lengthy and presumptuous peroration
about the alleged denial of the right of self-determination to
the Angolan people,,as though the meeting had been convened to discuss the situation in Angola. The South African
representative’s assertion that “the peoples of Angola and
[Namibia] both wish above all else to exercise their right to
self-determination” hit our ears as a very curious assertion
by the representative of a country in which the enjoyment of
the right of self-determination is racially determined-a
country more than two thirds of whose citizens are brutally
treated as aliens without rights in their own country.

48. And this is the South Africa which in the logicof thdse
who apologize for that rkgime has become a peacemaker
who deserves all the benefits of doubt. What peace can be
made by the cold-blooded murder of innocent refugees
who, in any case, are already victims of racial tyranny and
political persecution? What peace can be made by pursuing
them, these victims of racial tyranny, and murdering them
even in their places of refuge, in foreign lands? Indeed, what
peace can derive from the contemptuous disregard for the
time-honoured laws and norms of behaviour which govern
relations between and among nations?
49.

53. The representative also had the audacity to charge
that in both Angola and Namibia “political objectives are
pursued by violence rather than by peaceful means and
national reconciliation” -an equally very curious charge by
the representative of a country whose police shoot to kill
peaceful demonstrators for demanding their right to selfdetermination.
54. This series of meetings is not convened to discuss
Angola. We are here to discuss the implementation of
resolution 435 (1978). We are here to discuss the liberation
of Namibia, not the right of the people of Angola to selfdetermination, or the presence of Cuban forces in Angola,
or the threat of communism in the southern African region.
These are irrelevant issues introduced in this debate as a
ploy designed to confuse the issue at stake,

I now go back to the subject of Namibia.

50. In his report of 6 June 1985, the Secretary-General
states that “there has been no change in the position of
South Africa” [S/17242, pm. 451 on the question of the
linking of the independence of Namibia to the presence of
Cuban forces in Angola. South Africa has also refused thus
far to reveal its choice of the electoral system to be used in
the conduct of United Nations-supervised elections in Namibia. It has further bedevilled prospects for Namibia’s
peaceful transition to independence by the provocative
steps it hasrecently taken to prepare Namibia for unilateral
independence. The implications of this latest act of bad faith
on the part of South Africa are obvious.

55. We all want peace in southern Africa, and we all know
why we cannot have it in the prevailing circumstances. So
long as the people of Namibia are denied their right to
self-determination and used as pawns in a chess game of
extra-continental power politics there will’ be war and
bloodshed in our region. The peace we want is peace in
freedom and liberty, not the sort of peace that must be
extorted from us with the barrel of a dissident’s gun, not
peace at all costs, the sort that must be superimposed on the
existing unacceptable S~U~ZLS
quo. Be it in Namibia or in
South Africa, the source of conflict is the same: it is racial
tyranny, the brutal denial of self-determination to millions
of our fellow men who have as a last, desperate resort been
forced to take up arms to reasserttheir violated and insulted
humanity, Get rid of the racial tyranny, and peace in freedom and liberty will prevail in our region.

51. There can be no doubt that the setting up of a so-called
interim government in Namibia at a time when all efforts
should be devoted to breaking the deadlock that has for so
long now impeded the implementation of resolution 435
(1978) is extremely unhelpful and provocative, to say the
least. It shows quite clearly that South Africa has not abandoned its antipathy to a United Nations solution to the
Namibian question: it still hopes to frustrate resolution 435
(1978) to death. If South Africa can help it, Namibia should
be unilaterally delivered to the internal puppets to enable
Pretoria, like Pilate, to wash its hands of the issue and thus
confront the United Nations and the world at large with the
so-called facts on the ground, or new realities, which should
be recognized by resolution 435 (1978). This is South Africa’s plot, for one cannot find any other reasonable explanation for the setting up of an interim government in Namibia
whose existence in the prevailing circumstances can serve
only to sabotage the United Nations plan and pollute the
whole atmosphere around the Namibian question.

56. No three- or four-legged parliament at Cape Town, a
constitutional set-up which simply seeks to forestall the
inevitable, no interim rCgime in Namibia manned by the
appointed agents of the colonial Power, no spawning of
dissident movements in our region will spare South Africa
the tragedy of wasted opportunities.
57. As long ago as 22 May 1979, in a letter addressed to
the then Secretary-General, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of South Africa stated:
6

“Neither South Africa, nor the people of South West
Africa/Namibia,
have ever retreated from their agreement to the original proposal. Indeed, South Africa
insists that the original proposal, as approved in its final
and definite form by Security Council resolution 435
(1978), be implemented without delay,” [See S/13345.]

South Africa and yet are now pleading
of Pretoria’s obstinacy, is to imagine the
Thdse five Western Powers have allowed
theif grasp a golden opportunity, a
chsince to make a uniquely historic
search for peace in our region. They havi allowed themselvesto be led by the nose into a situatibn where the leading
and constructive role they played in the birth of resolution
an object of intense suspicion

That is what the South African Foreign Minister for Foreign Affairs said in 1979. That was the spirit of 1979, and
that is the spirit that we need today if we are to avoid further
needless bloodshed in Namibia and the region as a whole.
We do not need excuses to evade a responsibility which
Pretoria sounded so enthusiastic about carrying out in 1979.
Had it been carried out, Namibia would have enjoyed six
years of freedom and independence to date. Many lives
would have been saved and southern Africa would have
been a different place today, That is another opportunity
wasted on the altar of bad faith.

meeting of 29 April 1984:
“the immediate objective for Namibia is and must be the
rapid implementation of United Nations Security Council resolution 435 (1978), in order that Namibia may
attain full and internationally recognized independence
on the basis of selfdktermination by all the people ofthat
country.“’

58. And through all this, SWAP0 has remained steadfast
in its commitment to the implementation of resolution 435
(1978). SWAP0 has not added to or subtracted from the
plan. SWAP0 has watched with horror as South Africa
demanded one endless concession after another, from
impartiality
packages to constitutional principles to
linkages embellished with occasional utterances in Pretoria
about the problem of Namibia being a regional problem
that should be solved by the countries of the region-a
suggestion that an internationally sponsored solution is an
unwanted intrusion which ought to be avoided.

The consequences of any further delay in achieving that
noble objective are too bbvious and too ghastly.
64. The authors of the present stalemate are well known.
The reasons for the stalemate are also well known. It is
incumbent upon the Council, therefore, to act accordingly
and take the necessarymeasures to ensure that its own plan
is implemented. That is all that remains to be done to avoid
more wasted bpportunities.

59. In January 1981 at Geneva SWAP0 declared its readiness to sign a cease-fire to end, once and for all, the needless
shedding of innocent blood in Namibia. South Africa
reacted to this declaration by insisting on having the political images of its puppets polished first before it would
consent to the implementation of the plan-only for the
world to be confronted a few months after that disastrous
meeting with the introduction of linkage.

65. The PRESIDENT: The last speaker is Mr. Neo
Mnumzana, to whom the Council extended an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
66. Mr. MNUMZANA: On behalf oftheNationa1 Executive Committee of the ANC and in the name of all the
oppressed and struggling people of South Africa, I extend
the warmest fraternal greetings to all of you.

60. The front-line States, as indirect parties to the Namibian issue, have also stretched their patience asfar as they
humanly can throughout these seven years of endless and,
at times, fruitless negotiations for the implementation of
,resolution 435 (1978). They have co-operated fully with all
efforts aimed at facilitating the implementation of the plan.
Every concession expected of them has been made and
faithfully adhered to.

67. I extend a special greeting to the heroic people of
Namibia and to their sole authentic representative,
SWAPO. I wish also to recognize the presence of a great
leader of the Namibian people, Mr. Sam Nujoma. His
presence here points to the great importance and urgency
that the people of Namibia attach to thedeliberations of the
current session of the Council. His presence,along with that
of many ministers of Government from various parts of the
world, underlines the increasing gravity of the situation in
southern Africa stemming from the lack of sufficient progress in the quest for Namibian decolonization at the level
of international efforts.

61, I must confess that we are not so sure of the role ofthe
Western Five in all this, in recent years. Having led US on a
hapless journey of blind faith in the summer of 1982, at the
end of which we were allowed to issue a statement which, in
retrospect, should make us all look or sound terribly foolish, a statement to the effect that we had completed all the
negotiations, the Western Five now seem to have withdrawn into a limbo-with the exception of their leader, who
has decided to pursue the obstructive issue of linkage to its
illogical conclusion.

68. I take this occasion to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your election to the presidency for the month of
June. Your competent guidance certainly places the Council in good stead as it continues to execute its immense and
frequently daunting global responsibilities in our common
quest for peace, freedom and progress. I also wish to thank
you for allowing me to speak.

62. There is a terrible tragedy about it all. To imagine that
resolution 435 (1978) is the brain-child of five Western
cbuntdes, almost all of which have enormous influence on
7

74. In the last four months apartheid’s Fascist security
forces have murdered over 400 unarmed people. Those
killings continue. More than 30 prominent members of the
United Democratic Front (LJDF), such as Mrs. Albertina
Sisulu, as well as trade unionists, community and religious
leaders have recently been charged with treason because of
their alleged connection to the ANC. The regime continues
to murder its opponents while they are in prison. Witness
the recent and tragic fate of trade unionist Andries Raditsela. It also continues to pursue them beyond South Africa’s
borders. Witness again the tragic fate of Vernon Nkadimeng, who was exiled in Botswana.

69. The urgency of the necessity to decolonize Namibia is
self-evident. It is as obvious an imperative as the need to
eradicate apartheid itself. The seeming paradox is that,
though this noble objective commands a universal consensus, there is a continuing lack of progress towards its timely
realization. But the paradox is only apparent. The lack of
progress is not the result of a lack of means.‘It stems rather
from the studied reluctance of a small but inordinately
powerful minority of States to take the type ofaction which
is essential for forward movement. These same States, all
without exception, derive benefits from their comprehensive ties to apartheidand regard that crime against humanity
as iimply good business. They remain unmoved by the
ce$ury-old struggle of the Namibian people. They remain
callous in the face of the agony that the Namibian people
have to suffer and the sacrifices they have had to make in
their efforts to shake off the burdensome and oppressive
yoke of colonialism.

75. We learned with dismay this morning through a
Reuter dispatch that the apartheid regime claimed that its
troops killed at least 15 people in raids against 10 bases in
Botswana “of the outlawed African National Congress
which is pledged to overthrow white minority rule in South
Africa”.

70. Through diversionary tactics, ill-disguised apologies
and other stratagems, such as constructive engagement,
designed to dignify support to apartheid, they still seek to
ensure that the oppression and dispossession of the people
of Namibia and South Africa is prolonged indefinitely. But
time is running out and a tragedy of horrendous proportions with potentially global consequences is already in the
offing,

76. At Lusaka the ANC denied using Botswana as an
infiltrating route or military base, contradicting the reason
which Pretoria gave for last night’s attack.
77. Recently, faced with the stiff resistance of the people,
the apartheid regime professed to halt its forced removals.
Now it has resumed them and we know it will soon use
violence to do so.

71. It used to be said that apartheid was running out of
time. Today, despite the efforts of its collaborators, apartheid has run out of time, Caught between the anvil and the
hammer of the ever-escalating struggles of the people of
Namibia and South Africa, led respectively by SWAP0 and
the ANC, apartheid is sinking irreversibly into an economic
and political crisis. A distinctive characteristic of the consequent mire of futility in which the Pretoria racist regime is
irrevocably trapped is the stepped-up militarization of
apartheid, in an effort to transform whatever strength it has
still left into a murderous machine of absolute and pervasive
violence against the forces of freedom.

78. Through economic blackmail and sabotage, political
subversion and outright military aggression, the Pretoria
racist regime continues in its efforts to destabilize the neighbouring States, seeking to beat them into submission to its
diktat.
79. The Secretary-General of the ANC, in the press
release following this dastardly act by the apartheidrtgime
against the Republic of Botswana and South African exiles,
had this to say:
“This act has also demonstrated yet again that the
source of war in our region is the Pretoria regime. To end
aggression must mean to end the apartheid system. Botswana has never wished nor planned to invade South
Africa as Pretoria did today.”

72. This series of meetings occurs against the background
of the increasing scope, frequency and effectiveness of the
all-round mass actions by South African workers and peasants, youth and students, men, women and children,
against apartheid and for a free, united, non-racial and
democratic South Africa. That struggle is their school of
unity. As that struggle advances so is their unity strengthened, spelling a movement towards the total isolation of
apartheid. Part and parcel of this grand people’s offensive is
the heightened ability of their revolutionary army, Umkonto
we Sizwe, to deal more frequent, more sustained and more
telling blows against apartheid’s army, police, and its economic and other vital installations. These developments
have forced the Pretoria racist regime to make the rare
admission that a full-scale revolution is under way in our
country.

80. It used to be said that apartheid kills; now it has
become simply genocidal.
81, Five years ago the Western Five contact group created
itself with the stated objective of trying to accelerate progress towards the decolonization of Namibia. However,
efforts by the United States to turn that body into a vehicle
for constructive engagement led to its paralysis. The result
was five wasted years which only benefited apartheid. It
need hardly be said that it is high time to let the United
Nations Council for Namibia resume its responsibilities. It
is time to reset Council resolution 435 (1978) into motion
with a view to its implementation without delay. The most
effective means available to the international community to
force apartheid to comply with resolution 435 (1978) is the
imposition of comprehensive and mandatory sanctions
against that crime against humanity.

73. As the people move towards making our country
ungovernable and apartheid unworkable, apartheid, never
sane, is now moving to the extreme of repressive and violent
insanity.
8

82. In this respect, I wish again to quote the SecretaryGeneral of the ANC in the press release already referred to:
“The rest of humanity can now see that the ap&theid
rCgime is not interested in peace and is committed to
maintaining itself in power by conducting violence
against our people and against independent Africa. The
world must condemn this murder and take urgent
measures to cut off this cancerous regime by imposing
sanctions against it and adopting other measures for its
total isolation,”
83. However, the partners of apnrtheid, who consider our
oppression and exploitation as nothing but good business,
have in the past obstructed and frustrated efforts totally to
isolate the racist regime of Pretoria. They are certain to try
that again, through delaying tactics. They will aurgue that
sanctions will lead to the loss of black people’s jobs. This is
like saying the slave plantation should not be eradicated
because the poor slaves will lose their slave jobs. The point is
not jobs. It is about freedom, Our people are well aware
that the price of freedom is steep. They continue to sacrifice their lives for that freedom. Desirable as jobs may be,
surely it must be clear that people who sacrifice their very
lives are prepared to sacrifice jobs in return for freedom.
They know that freedom will also be freedom to seek and
obtain justly rewarding jobs which will also be consistent
with their interests, training and aptitudes. The people. of
Namibia and South Africa, perfectly aware of the implications, are the very ones who decades ago called for the total
isolation of apartheid. Today they repeat that call with
added urgency. Surely the world, ifit values freedom, must
respond with action.
84. We are also told to exercise patience while apartheid is
gently persuaded to reform itself. However, Bishop Tutu
has recently in this very chamber correctly pointed out the
fact that apartheid, like other forms of evil, cannot be
reformed but must be uprooted. Besides, the history of
apartheid is a history of the deliberate defiance of world
opinion and the violation of all international laws, norms
and conventions. To hope to persuade apartheid gently is
the height of folly.
85. The Council has a very good idea of what apartheid
understands by reform. Recently the Council had occasion

to declare null and void apartheid’s new constitutional dispensation. The Council correctly saw the tricameral parliamentary system as nothing but an attempt to further
entrench apartheid. Meanwhile the Pretoria racist regime
was marketing that ill-fated initiative as its most daring
reform to date.
86. Now, apartheid is talking about giving South Africans
the right to marry across the colour line. That right is
meaningless. Only within the context of the right of the
people to determine their own destiny does the right to free
marriage assume true significance. Otherwise it is just
another hoax, The same can be said of the other so-called
reforms of the Pretoria racist regime, including the so-called
multi-party conference and the related so-called transitional
administration, which has already been adequately commented upon.
87. We must dispense with ‘the lip-service that vice pays to
virture. We must ensure that the torrent of words the Council will hear during these meetings’does not flow into the
desert of inaction. The United Nations must be allowed to
resume its responsibility for the decolonization of Namibia.
Implementation of resolution 435 (1978) must be set in
motion without further delay. Namibia must and will be
free.
88. We take this occasion to reiterate the principled and
militant solidarity of the struggling people of South Africa
with the heroic struggle of the Namibian people, led by
SWAPO. We do the same for the struggle of the people of
Nicaragua, led by the Sandinist Front for National Liberation, and for all struggles to end the oppression and exploitation of man by man.
89. We thank all our allies, supporters and friends around
the world. The peoples of Namibia and South Africa need
your active solidarity today more than ever before.
The meeting rose at 8. I5 p.m.

NOTE
’ See A/AC.

1 I YL.6

IIa
