S/2020/435

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 May 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 22 May 2020 from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the Secretary-General and the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, as well as the statements delivered by the representatives of Belgium, the
Dominican Republic, Estonia, France, Germany, Indonesia, the Russian Federation,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam, in
connection with the video-teleconference on the situation in the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela convened on Wednesday, 20 May 2020. Statements were also delivered
by the representatives of Colombia and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of
the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council
members dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the
extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefing and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.

(Signed) Sven Jürgenson
President of the Security Council

*

Reissued for technical reasons 22 June 2020

20-07101 (E) 030620 110620

*2007101*

*

S/2020/435

Annex I
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, Rosemary A. DiCarlo
Venezuela is mired in a deepening protracted crisis that only Venezuelans can
resolve. Attempts at reaching a negotiated solution have been unsuccessful despite
the significant international facilitation efforts that have been made. The path of
negotiation seems to be stalled.
In a letter to the President of the Security Council, the Government of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela stated that on 3 and 4 May,
“armed groups of mercenaries and terrorists, organized, trained, financed and
protected by the Governments of the Republic of Colombia and the United
States of America, illegally entered the Venezuelan territory”.
According to the letter, the “declared purpose” was “[to] perpetrat[e] criminal acts”
against the Venezuelan people and “[to] carry out selective assassinations against
high officials of [the] Government”, including President Nicolás Maduro.
The letter pointed to the involvement in the operation of an “extremist sector
of the Venezuelan opposition”, referring explicitly to “Deputy Juan Guaidó”, who
is recognized by a group of States Members of the United Nations as the interim
president of the country. According to the letter, the operation was “frustrated by the
Venezuelan authorities” and, as of 13 May, the Prosecutor General of Venezuela had
confirmed the arrest of 47 people in relation to the operation.
The Governments of Colombia and the United States have rejected allegations
by the Venezuelan Government regarding their involvement. The leader of the
Venezuelan opposition has also denied involvement in the operation and called for
establishing a national emergency Government. On 4 May, through his spokesperson,
the Secretary-General affirmed that we stand against any escalation of the situation
in Venezuela and that the way to resolve the situation is through political dialogue
and full respect for human rights.
There is heightened concern regarding the stand-off and the absence of any
serious negotiations between the main political parties in the country, especially
amid the potentially far-reaching effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. Until restrictions imposed by the pandemic forced the suspension of its
activities, the Applications Committee of the National Assembly, established to
work on the selection of members of the National Electoral Council, was the only
formal space bringing together lawmakers from the Government and the opposition.
The Committee was also significant in that it was poised to lay the groundwork for
necessary agreements between the Government and the opposition over the electoral
calendar and process. Legislative elections are due before the end of the year.
We have taken note of the position of members of the opposition who have
called for presidential elections to take place together with legislative elections. We
call on the main political actors to engage in a constructive negotiation to create
conditions conducive to the holding of credible, inclusive and participatory elections.
In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, the General Assembly has called
for a global response based on unity, solidarity and multilateral cooperation. The
United Nations COVID-19 Global Humanitarian Response Plan includes Venezuela.
The 2020 Humanitarian Response Plan is expected to request some $750 million
to cover humanitarian needs of the most vulnerable Venezuelans and support the
response to the pandemic. More funding is urgently needed.

2/30

20-07101

S/2020/435

The Government of Venezuela has been calling for a humanitarian agreement
for health and peace among all political sectors. While such calls are welcome, the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (UNHCR) has received reports
of detentions of political leaders and journalists reporting on COVID-19 and threats
and intimidation against health workers for, for example, expressing concern about
the lack of equipment to fight the pandemic or for giving information on the number
of cases. The High Commissioner for Human Rights has expressed concern about
the excessive use of force in some countries, including Venezuela, in the context of
protests for access to such basic rights as food, water and medicine.
Politicization of humanitarian aid in Venezuela has continued during the
pandemic, which remains a major concern. Humanitarian aid provided by the
United Nations and our partners across the country is governed by the principles
of independence, humanity, neutrality and impartiality. Mark Lowcock, the United
Nations Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, has asked all parties to respect this principled humanitarian approach
and not manipulate the needs-based assistance.
Another concern is the nationwide fuel shortages, a key operational constraint
for humanitarian organizations trying to sustain their response. The Venezuelan
Government attributes the fuel shortages to unilateral sanctions. While available
social and economic indicators show that the economic crisis predates the imposition
of economic sanctions, the measures are exacerbating an already critical situation.
In his address to the Group of 20 on 26 March, the Secretary-General appealed
for the waiving of sanctions that could undermine countries’ capacity to respond to
the pandemic. Meanwhile, in her update on Venezuela to the Human Rights Council
on 10 March, the High Commissioner noted that
“despite exceptions to allow imports of medicines, food and humanitarian
supplies, public services and the general population continue to suffer from
the impact of over-compliance from the financial sector”.
In the context of the pandemic, she has recently affirmed that “humanitarian
exemptions to sanctions measures should be given broad and practical effect”.
The United Nations system will continue strengthening its human rights and
humanitarian action in Venezuela as well as its response in support of Venezuelan
refugees and migrants outside the country. According to official figures, as of early
May, close to 5.1 million refugees and migrants have left Venezuela. More than
80 per cent of this population can be found across countries in Latin America and
the Caribbean.
Since the start of the pandemic, there are reports of Venezuelans returning
to their country due to the loss of livelihoods. Eduardo Stein, the Joint Special
Representative of the UNHCR and the International Organization for Migration
(IOM) for Venezuelan refugees and migrants, has said that the pandemic exposes
them to even greater hardship as many are now struggling to survive away from
home. He urged the international community to generously provide support through
the regional response plan for Venezuelans, which to date has only 4 per cent of the
funds it requires.
In a statement on 15 May, the European Union and the Spanish Government
announced plans to convene an international donors conference in solidarity with
Venezuelan refugees and migrants in Latin American countries. The conference,
which is set to take place on 26 May, will be supported by UNHCR and IOM.
The Secretary-General has repeatedly called for a negotiated solution among
Venezuelans. He has supported international facilitation efforts and has offered his
20-071013/30

S/2020/435

good offices, should they be needed and should the parties request them. We remain
convinced that a real negotiation among Venezuela’s main political actors is the only
way forward.
In the face of the COVID-19 pandemic, an agreement that strengthens
democratic governance, with full respect for human rights and the rule of law, is more
urgent than ever. We call on the main political actors to resume serious negotiations.
We urge all Member States to stand behind this call.

4/30

20-07101

S/2020/435

Annex II
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations, Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve
I thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
for her briefing.
The incident described in the letter from the Permanent Representative of
Venezuela and in the Russian request for today’s meeting raises a lot of questions.
Where is the line between fact and interpretation? Where is the line between reality
and assumptions? Who is benefiting most from this situation? How can we access
neutral, non-partisan information?
To be clear, Belgium condemns the use of mercenaries in all circumstance,
and relevant instruments under international law should be applied to the crime of
their use. We condemn the use or threat of use of force and stress the importance
of respecting each country’s sovereignty. We also emphasize the importance of
respecting human rights, including in anti-insurgency operations.
This incident raises many questions, but there a few things we know
with certainty.
First, we know the population of Venezuela is suffering. We remain very
worried about the human rights situation, the absence of the rule of law and the
lack of democracy in the country. This situation has led to an exodus of historic
proportions. We emphasize the need for transparent, free and fair presidential and
parliamentary elections and denounce the ongoing intimidation of members of the
National Assembly who must be allowed to exercise their parliamentary mandate.
Secondly, we know that only a political solution can resolve the ongoing crisis
in Venezuela. The recent events divert attention from the human-made humanitarian
crisis that is further being exacerbated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We
hope the pandemic can also serve as an opportunity to focus minds and encourage
people to work together in confronting this shared challenge.
Thirdly, the politicization of humanitarian aid is unacceptable. We reiterate
the importance of respecting humanitarian principles and the need for full and
unrestricted access. The threat posed by COVID-19 does not exempt Governments
from their obligations under international law, in particular human rights law and
refugee law.
Finally, we know that the population of Venezuela can rely on the support of
the European Union (EU) and its member States. On the humanitarian side, the EU
remains the largest donor in Venezuela. Politically, the EU-led International Contact
Group on Venezuela will continue to support all initiatives in good faith that lead to
a peaceful and democratic resolution of the crisis.
The political deadlock in Venezuela remains profoundly problematic and has
negative impacts on regional stability. We call on all stakeholders to engage in a
credible, representative and serious negotiation process such as the one facilitated
by Norway. The only way forward resides in political talks.

20-071015/30

S/2020/435

Annex III
Statement by the Special Envoy to the Security Council of the
Dominican Republic, José Singer Weisinger
Allow me to express our sincere appreciation to Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for her insightful briefing.
The Americas, our region, is one of peace. We have a rich and successful
history of democratic transitions that have ultimately translated into sustainable
development, despite the many challenges.
At the outset, let us be clear about the position of the Dominican Republic, not
only in the particular case of Venezuela, but with respect to any other matter involving
accusations of this magnitude. We reiterate our full respect and commitment to the
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations for the collective benefit
of safeguarding international peace and security. The Dominican Republic rejects
any use of force or threat thereof against the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of any country.
Our demonstrated interest in the resolution of the Venezuelan crisis was
evident when we facilitated a dialogue between the Government and the opposition
in Venezuela in order to clear the path for a democratic process in the country. All
these efforts were made in solidarity and based on our clear conviction that it is only
through dialogue and peaceful means that a solution to the crisis in Venezuela can
be achieved.
Likewise, we vehemently reject and condemn any act of terrorism as
unjustifiable under any circumstances, recognizing the need to combat this scourge.
We also reject the illicit trafficking by international criminal organizations of drugs,
money, small arms and light weapons, and persons.
The regional implications of this crisis are great, but they are greatest for the
Venezuelans themselves. Either as refugees or as persons enduring a harsh yearslong economic crisis, they are the ones paying the highest price. In this context,
we continue to have serious concerns about the dire humanitarian situation in the
country, particularly with the advent of the coronavirus disease pandemic, and
sincerely hope that priorities are established to provide and facilitate assistance to
those in need and that the necessary measures to contain the spread of the virus
are undertaken.
Allowing for a democratic transition to take place without further delay
through the holding of free, fair and credible elections needs to be at the centre
of all international efforts, in full respect of the United Nations Charter and the
legitimate aspirations of the Venezuelan population, including those living outside
their country. In the light of the accusations presented and the discussions held
thus far, we also call for an independent investigation of the facts before jumping
prematurely to conclusions.
We long for a path to open for Venezuelans where the fulfilment of their
inherited individual and collective rights and aspirations are guaranteed and where
a prosperous Venezuela regains its rightful place in the orchestra of democracies of
the Americas.

6/30

20-07101

S/2020/435

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her comprehensive briefing
on the situation in Venezuela.
The situation in Venezuela is very concerning. The further deterioration of
the political crisis and its destabilizing effects across the region must be addressed.
The lack of dialogue between the regime and the opposition is steadily increasing
the suffering of Venezuelans. Estonia firmly believes that a peaceful and inclusive
democratic transition is the only sustainable solution to the current political deadlock
and the severe social crisis.
We are concerned about reports of human rights violations against protesters,
civil society activists and human rights defenders. The authorities must secure
freedom of speech and freedom of assembly, protect peaceful protesters from
violence, investigate all violations and ensure accountability.
The people of Venezuela are in urgent need of humanitarian aid as the current
pandemic has worsened the situation even more. We urge all relevant actors to take
all necessary measures to secure safe, full and unhindered access of humanitarian aid
to all people in need and to ensure the safety of humanitarian workers. The European
Union is the largest donor to the Venezuelan humanitarian crisis, providing more
than half of all funding.
Finally, more concerted efforts are needed to meet the extremely urgent needs
of the Venezuelan people. We support United Nations efforts as well as those of all
other key players.

20-071017/30

S/2020/435

Annex V
Statement by the Political Coordinator at the Permanent Mission of
France to the United Nations, Antoine Michon
As members of the Security Council, we have the responsibility to contribute
constructively to political and peaceful solutions to political crises. It is in that spirit
that we approach today’s discussion on the situation in Venezuela.
I wish first to reaffirm that the solution to the Venezuelan crisis can be found
only in full compliance with international law and the Venezuelan Constitution. The
use of force must be strongly condemned, without exception. Naturally, respect for
international law also applies to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations,
and Venezuela has an obligation to guarantee the normal functioning of all foreign
embassies in Caracas.
In response to the Venezuelan political crisis, France, together with its
partners in the European Union and Latin America, has engaged in diplomatic
efforts with the creation of the International Contact Group on Venezuela to promote
a resolution of the crisis through dialogue by taking into account the results of the
Oslo and Barbados processes, among other elements. Inclusive, good-faith dialogue
is indeed the only way forward with a view to the organization of free, transparent
and credible elections. Venezuelans must be able to freely choose their future, and
the prerogatives of the National Assembly must be respected in accordance with the
Venezuelan Constitution.
Venezuelans are the first victims of the current crisis, which has lasted too
long. Millions have had to flee their country, and we pay tribute to the generosity
that many neighbouring countries have demonstrated in welcoming and protecting
them. The European Union has shown its readiness to support those countries and
will hold a donor conference on 26 May, together with United Nations agencies,
following on from the solidarity conference that was held in Brussels in October
2019. Our response to this crisis, under the leadership of the United Nations, must
be inclusive and collective and must take into account the dangerous spread of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, whose humanitarian and socioeconomic
impacts on the region could be terrible.
Venezuelans are also suffering from the economic consequences of the
political crisis. We call on all actors to ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian
access and to reject any politicization of humanitarian aid. That is all the more
necessary in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. I recall that France has been
increasing its financial contribution over the last years; in total, the European Union
provides more than half of the humanitarian aid to Venezuelans.
Finally, Venezuelans are suffering from serious and repeated human rights
violations. France calls on Venezuela to implement all of the recommendations of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, particularly with regard
to the release of political prisoners. We recall that European Union sanctions are
individual measures adopted in response to those human rights violations and that
they are designed not to affect the population and the response to the pandemic.
As the Council can see, France, together with its European partners, is
committed to all aspects of the Venezuelan issue — political, humanitarian and
human rights. We call on all parties to resume dialogue, which is the only way out
of the crisis.

8/30

20-07101

S/2020/435

Annex VI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany to
the United Nations, Juergen Schulz
In our view, the Council members need to focus on the most pressing issue
at hand: the unprecedented humanitarian emergency the Venezuelan people are
suffering through and the overwhelming need for a political solution. We are aware
of the Maduro regime’s attempts to instrumentalize some reported incidents to
divert the world’s attention from the real issues. We see that as an effort at diversion
by a regime that is responsible for the protracted political crisis and dire economic
situation that Venezuelans from all walks of life are suffering.
We, as the Security Council, should not fall into that trap. If we really care
about the fate of millions of Venezuelans and about regional stability, we need urgent
action now. The only way forward is through a peaceful, Venezuelan-owned political
process. We strongly renew our call for the restoration of democratic institutions
and the rule of law in Venezuela through free, transparent and credible presidential
elections. The European Union (EU), through the International Contact Group on
Venezuela, stands ready to support that process. Echoing the Secretary-General’s
call to unite in our shared battle against coronavirus disease (COVID-19), now is
the time to overcome the political deadlock and find an agreement, possibly within
the framework of the Oslo process, which Germany has always strongly supported.
We also support the proposal of a transitional Government for Venezuela,
representing both sides, to pave the way towards presidential and parliamentary
elections and to unite in order to jointly respond to the challenge posed by COVID-19.
We urge the Maduro regime to finally engage in meaningful negotiations.
In the context of collapsing infrastructure, mass migration and a Government
in denial about the humanitarian emergency, COVID-19 could have disastrous
implications for Venezuela. Humanitarian actors need unimpeded and sustained
access to the most vulnerable people and must be able to deliver humanitarian
assistance in full accordance with the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence. We urge the Maduro regime to grant access nationwide.
Humanitarian assistance must never be exploited for political purposes or be
misused as a propaganda tool. The politicization of the delivery of humanitarian
assistance runs counter to the humanitarian mandate and undermines the safety and
security of humanitarian workers. We call instead for a united attempt to combat
COVID-19 that includes all political actors. The National Assembly of Venezuela
has made a number of constructive proposals to strengthen the country’s health-care
system. The authorities in Venezuela and the international community must use all
available resources at this point in time. That requires all of us to provide sufficient
humanitarian assistance, first and foremost through the United Nations.
Let me reiterate in that context that EU sanctions do not stand in the way
or impede the global fight against COVID-19 or more broadly the provision of
humanitarian assistance. On the contrary, EU sanctions, such as asset freezes and
travel bans, are targeted and are aimed at those responsible for the policies or actions
that violate international law or human rights and aggravate conflict. To be perfectly
clear, EU sanctions imposed against Venezuela do not apply to humanitarian
assistance and humanitarian activities, including medical assistance.
We are alarmed that with the arrival of the pandemic in the country,
intimidation and threats against health professionals, members of non-governmental
organizations, journalists and human rights defenders have increased yet again. That
is unfortunate and must stop. We therefore urge the regime once again to release
20-071019/30

S/2020/435

all political prisoners, especially bearing in mind the consequences of the current
pandemic under conditions of detention.
Before closing, let me recall that more than 5 million Venezuelans have fled to
neighbouring countries, often in search of medicine and basic health services. Sadly,
the COVID-19 pandemic further exacerbates their plight. This is the biggest refugee
crisis in Latin America’s history. On 26 May, Germany will participate in a donor
conference for Venezuelan refugees to be hosted by the EU, together with Spain.

10/30

20-07101

S/2020/435

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Indonesia to the United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
As I am the last speaker before the President, I have the luxury to have heard
all of the members’ statements.
Let me begin by once again reiterating that Indonesia’s position on the
situation in Venezuela has always been clear, consistent and principled. We have had
the opportunity to express our position several times. For us, dialogue, reconciliation
and negotiation remain the preferred option for the durable resolution of all issues.
Having said that, let me make three very brief points.
First, the principles of non-interference, sovereignty and territorial integrity, in
line with the Charter of the United Nations, should be the starting point in discussing
any issues in the framework of the United Nations. That is also the case for the
situation in Venezuela. It is imperative to respect those fundamental principles. With
that in mind, we appeal to all the parties involved, both in and outside Venezuela,
to put serious effort into reducing tensions and not exacerbating the situation. We
would like to echo Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo’s point that only Venezuelans
themselves can resolve the protracted crisis.
Secondly, it is important for us, the Security Council, to be united and to
take the right action. Within less than one month, the Council has met three times
to discuss the situation in Venezuela. Those efforts have so far failed to make any
difference for the people and the country. Last time we met, we could not even agree
on press elements. Indonesia regrets that we have been unable to achieve unity in the
Council on a mechanism for us, as a respected body, to move forward to address the
situation of Venezuela, including its already dire humanitarian challenges. Despite
our diverging views in the Council, Indonesia still believes that it is possible for us
to arrive at a consensus in line with our responsibility and mandate.
That brings me to my last point, namely, that any solution for the situation in
Venezuela should be focused on an inclusive political dialogue involving all parties.
To that end, there is an urgent need to address the large trust deficit in the country.
We therefore call on all parties to accept the good offices offered by the SecretaryGeneral and again urge restraint against any action that could result in further
deterioration of the already fragile situation on the ground.
In this time of coronavirus disease, responding to the humanitarian needs
of the most vulnerable Venezuelans, including refugees and migrants, during the
pandemic is imperative. However, if we really care about the people of Venezuela —
as I believe we do — the first step is to demonstrate a united front in the Council
and find common ground. We have continuously expressed the need to have a united
front, but it is a pity that we have not done so, as we heard in the many divisive
statements this afternoon. This is the time for us to put aside our differences and
ensure that we will be part of the solution and not part of the problem. We still have
the obligation to find ways and means to assist Venezuela and its people in finding
a peaceful solution to their current challenges. Let us show the people of Venezuela
that we stand with them and will not leave them in despair.

20-0710111/30

S/2020/435

Annex VIII
Statement by the First Deputy Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations, Dmitry Polyanskiy
We thank Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
Rosemary DiCarlo for the briefing.
I want to indicate from the outset that the situation we are facing today is
unfolding around Venezuela, not inside the country. The recent incidents of breach
of Venezuela’s sovereignty by foreign agents pose a direct threat to the country’s
peace, as well as to regional security and stability. Moreover, the situation is a clear
violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
To better illustrate the point of our meeting, I will summarize the facts. In the
first days of May, an armed group of at least 60 people entered the sovereign land of
Venezuela from the territory of neighbouring Colombia on two vessels. Forty-seven
of them were arrested, among them two citizens of the United States of America,
who confessed that their mission was to train forces in neighbouring Colombia for
military operations in Venezuela and to take control of an airport in order to secure
the transportation of President Nicolás Maduro to the United States.
We also know about a contract signed on 16 October 2019 by a deputy to Juan
Guaidó and Jordan Goudreau, the chief executive officer of United States company
Silvercorp, for some $200 million. The aim was “to remove the current Venezuelan
regime”. According to the information available, the operation was to be financed
through Venezuelan sovereign funds expropriated by the United States from Caracas
and kept in United States banks. After the imposter President claimed that he had
nothing to do with the contract, another financial document dated 28 April 2020
that demanded Juan Guaidó make a down payment of $1.5 million to Silvercorp was
published just a few days prior to so-called Operation Gideon.
We would like to question what role neighbouring Colombia had in that story.
It is hard to imagine that the clandestine operation that originated on its soil was
conducted without it having any knowledge of it. The United States authorities claim
that they have nothing to do with it. We would be glad to believe them, but they
fail to explain the fact that, according to the contract, two American citizens were
planning to take the legitimate Venezuelan President hostage and bring him to the
United States. For what purpose, may I ask? And how does it correlate with the
constant all-options-are-on-the-table messages from the United States Government
to Caracas, including the recent announcement of a $15 million bounty on President
Maduro? Who else can be behind this mercenary adventure? Nepal, as Mr. Pompeo
once said regarding another issue?
The facts, as provided to the Council by the Permanent Representative of
Venezuela in his letter of 13 May, are self-evident. Fortunately, the invasion was
exposed and countered by the Venezuelan armed forces. As a result, a significant
number of firearms were confiscated, including high-calibre weapons, all of which
were meant to be used to trigger internal chaos and take over critical infrastructure
and State institutions. It was an act of aggression and must be condemned.
The Venezuelan Government has warned numerous times that preparations
were being made for armed attacks and paramilitary groups were being trained in
neighbouring countries. Let me recall that the Security Council
“condemns any State which persists in permitting or tolerating the
recruitment of mercenaries, and the provision of facilities to them, with the
objective of overthrowing the Governments of States Members of the United
Nations” (resolution 239 (1967), para. 2).
12/30

20-07101

S/2020/435

That was a direct quote from resolution 239 (1967), which appears to have
been grossly violated in this situation, as have the Charter of the United Nations
and the Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention and Interference in the
Internal Affairs of States, adopted by the General Assembly in 1981.
Unfortunately, the United States has a history of treating the whole of South
America as its backyard, in accordance with the Monroe Doctrine, mothballed for
some time until the United States Administration decided to give it a second chance.
The Bay of Pigs invasion in Cuba in 1961, overthrowing Salvador Allende in Chile
in 1973 and the 1986 Iran-Contra file in Nicaragua are just a few examples.
Today Venezuela is on the United States menu, and our American colleagues
do not even make an effort to deny it. It is exactly because of this that the recent
adventure of Silvercorp is especially alarming. And we cannot forget the troubling
context — the so-called counter-narcotics operation in the Caribbean, which
was in fact a military operation following the announcement of the bounty for
President Maduro.
We want to ask today what the real aim of the American Navy parade in
the Caribbean is. Are there more mercenaries on the ground in Venezuela?
Who is responsible for attacks on Venezuelan critical infrastructure, including
electricity networks?
We also hope Washington fully realizes the risks of incidents when deploying
the USS Lassen, USS Preble and USS Farragut in an area where Iranian oil tankers
are involved in legal activity near Venezuela.
I also want to use this opportunity and put a question to our European
colleagues, who hastily recognized the imposter President two years ago. How do
they see his role now that his role in this attempted coup d’état — let us call things
by their names — has become so evident? How can the legitimate Venezuelan
authorities engage in negotiations with him after this?
The absolute majority of the international community rejects military or
subversive actions as an instrument in international relations. We appeal to all
participants in today’s discussion to unequivocally condemn the invasion attempt
on Venezuelan sovereign territory. It is time for all of us to speak in support of the
right of Venezuelans to solve their political disagreements themselves, including
their right to choose their own leaders, in line with the Constitution of the country.
The Russian Federation will continue to do its utmost to help Venezuelans in
that endeavour. We urge everyone to join us and to refrain from dictates, ultimatums,
sanctions or coercive measures with regard to this or any other country.
With this in mind, we have prepared a draft Security Council press statement
to address the above-mentioned issues. It reads as follows:
“The members of the Security Council discussed the latest developments
in and around the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
“The members of the Security Council rejected the use or threat of
use of force, as stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations, reaffirmed
relevant resolutions on the condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and on the use of mercenaries.
“The members of the Security Council called for the current situation in
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to be resolved through a dialogue by
Venezuelans, without interference, through peaceful and political means, in
line with Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter, within the framework of

20-0710113/30

S/2020/435

its national Constitution and in full respect of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Venezuela.”
We believe that such a short, politically neutral and concise text will raise no
substantial objections from the Council members. We will distribute it immediately
after my statement.

14/30

20-07101

S/2020/435

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
I begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for
her remarks, and I recognize the presence of my colleagues, the Permanent
Representatives of Venezuela and Colombia.
This situation is not only close to home for us in Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines by means of geographic proximity, it is also an enduring feature in the
hearts and minds of many across the Caribbean region as we stand in solidarity with
our Venezuelan brothers and sisters. Today we reaffirm the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and call on all Member States to recommit to
their obligations under international law.
The recent attempted armed incursion into the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela was only the latest in a long series of unwarranted aggressions meted out
against this sovereign nation over the past two decades. We maintain that the internal
political dispute within the country does not constitute a threat to international
peace and security. More pointedly, the situation in Venezuela does not threaten the
national security, territorial integrity or political independence of any external State
party, and all acts of aggression, including unilateral economic coercion, carried out
under these guises are unjustifiable and illegal.
These flagrant violations of international law undermine the internal political
processes within the country. And now, following the $15-million bounty offered
for the capture of the country’s duly elected leader, new sources of instability,
including mercenary activity and terrorism, have precipitated an increasingly
volatile environment. These acts of solicitation serve to inflame rather than
quell the challenges facing the country and its people. We maintain that the only
sustainable solution to the political crisis is an inclusive national dialogue that
meets the legitimate needs and aspirations of the Venezuelan people, free from any
geopolitical machinations designed to interfere with the outcomes of this internal
political process.
We are deeply concerned about the worsening humanitarian situation in the
country. The convergence of external economic and political forces to further the
“regime change” agenda places unnecessary strain on the socioeconomic fabric in
Venezuela and produces immense hardship and suffering for the people. Again, we
reiterate our calls for an immediate and unconditional withdrawal of all unilateral
punitive measures and urge all members of the international community to desist from
all aggressions against the sovereign rights of the country and political freedoms of
its people. During these unpredictable times, when efforts to combat the coronavirus
disease pandemic should be consolidated, these geopolitical manoeuvres are both
unhelpful and detrimental.
At a time when our multilateral system is faced with a crisis of credibility,
we cannot afford to deviate from the rules and norms of international cooperation.
In defence of the bedrock principles of international law, we must not sow seeds
of discord or fan the flames of provocation. The Venezuelan people deserve so
much more.
Before closing, my delegation wishes to support the press statement as
proposed by the Russian Federation. We consider it to be factual and balanced.

20-0710115/30

S/2020/435

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Jerry Matjila
We thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting, and UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her informative briefing. We also welcome
the Permanent Representatives of Venezuela and Colombia to our meeting.
I will focus my intervention today on three issues, namely, the political
situation, the humanitarian situation, and the exacerbating impact of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic and regional peace and stability.
First, regarding the political situation in Venezuela, we reiterate our view that
only a Venezuelan-led political dialogue will resolve the political challenges facing
the country. In accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, Venezuela’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity should be respected, and therefore attempts at
the unconstitutional change of a democratically elected Government in Venezuela
should be condemned.
The international community should rather support a Venezuelan-owned
internal peace process and resolution without imposition or preconditions. Time and
time again we have witnessed the disastrous impacts of attempts to forcibly and
unconstitutionally change a Government, including protracted conflict and instability
that reaches beyond borders and regions. We do not wish this for Venezuela.
In that context, we emphasize the imperative to respect the Constitution of
Venezuela and its provisions on separation of powers. Furthermore, we reiterate our
view and underline that, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Venezuela should be respected by all and
no attempt should be made by anyone to violate it. In the same vein, we wish to
emphasize the position and principle of non-interference in the internal matters of
any country.
Secondly, South Africa expresses its concern at the devastating impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic across the globe, and particularly on those countries affected
by conflict and instability. The pandemic requires all of us to draw from the deepest
wells of global solidarity and cooperation.
During these trying times, the focus should be on addressing the humanitarian
needs and concerns of countries such as Venezuela, which are enduring economic
and political challenges as a result of a myriad of causes, not least of which are
the prevailing economic restrictions imposed externally, and also the exacerbating
effect of COVID-19. South Africa therefore urges all parties to respect the need for
impartiality, neutrality and independence in the provision of humanitarian assistance
to Venezuela. Humanitarian assistance should not be used as a political bargaining
chip, which holds the people of Venezuela and those most vulnerable to ransom.
We appreciate the work of the United Nations system in assisting Venezuela
to address the humanitarian situation, as well as the indispensable work of the World
Health Organization in helping the country to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic.
In that regard, South Africa fully supports the Secretary-General’s calls for
enhanced international solidarity and the removal of economic sanctions that will
severely limit the ability of countries to recover from the pandemic. We also support
the call for a global ceasefire in all parts of the world. We must be clear that our
common enemy today is the COVID-19 pandemic. Our narrow national agendas
should be set aside as we jointly address the pandemic. As Congresswoman Barbara

16/30

20-07101

S/2020/435

Lee said this morning at the Africa Dialogue Series organized by the Office of the
Special Adviser on Africa, Ms. Bience Gawanas, “no one is safe until all are safe”.
South Africa is concerned by the increase in tensions in the region and urges
all countries to heed the call of the Secretary-General for solidarity at this time of
global crisis and not to perpetuate divisions and friction. Such solidarity and unity
of purpose are essential in assisting the world to emerge from the pandemic with
minimized adverse impact on international peace and security.
Finally, as we commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations, South Africa once more calls for the peaceful resolution of the Venezuelan
political crisis. We appeal for concerted global efforts to assist in initiatives by any
country that help Venezuelans to overcome their differences and converge in a series
of consultative dialogues internally until a peaceful political settlement is reached
for the sake of its people, its neighbourhood and all of us.

20-0710117/30

S/2020/435

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Tunisia to the United Nations
Venezuela is in the midst of a tense political standoff and socioeconomic
collapse, which risks being highly exacerbated by the devastating impact of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic on the population.
We regret to note that the polarization in Venezuela has continued to deepen
and to abort attempts of reaching a negotiated solution between the main political
actors. We are concerned also to note that the current stand-off and the absence of
any space for serious negotiations between the parties is potentially undermining the
stability of the region, where tension is looming as well.
This is the third time in less than a month that the situation in Venezuela is
on our agenda, but we regret to note that the Council, despite the good intentions of
its members, is not speaking with the same voice on this issue. The divisions in the
Council will not help us walk Venezuela to stability.
Tunisia remains convinced that a negotiated political solution through the
efforts of Venezuelans and their political leaders is the only way forward. This is
even more important in the context of the COVID-19-pandemic. We stand ready to
support any initiative of the Security Council in this regard, as well as any good
offices of the Secretary-General, should they be requested.
We call on all the main actors to put aside mistrust and animosities and to
work on durable solutions that would strengthen democratic governance and meet
the aspirations of all Venezuelans to peace and welfare.

18/30

20-07101

S/2020/435

Annex XII
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, James Roscoe
I join others in thanking Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
Today we have been convened to speak about what is essentially an independent
operation by a rogue group of mercenaries in speedboats, not a threat to international
peace and security. The United Kingdom rejects the ridiculous notion peddled by the
Russian Federation that this incident was a United States and Colombia-supported
attempt to assassinate Maduro and impose a substitute Government, as the Maduro
regime has alleged in its letter to the Security Council.
This discussion does, however, give the Council a useful precedent for
scrutinizing such adventurism by others into sovereign territory in the future, and I,
for one, welcome the Russian delegation’s condemnation of the violation of national
sovereignty by mercenaries. We hope this means that they will themselves be
changing the approach they take in Libya and elsewhere, as the Council heard earlier
this week (see S/2020/421). Indeed, we were glad to hear many Council members
defend territorial integrity and sovereignty, and we hope to hear similar sentiments,
especially those put so vehemently by the Russian delegation, when we discuss the
illegal annexation of Crimea tomorrow.
For our part, we have seen no evidence that the United States or Colombia
were involved in that operation. To the contrary, both Governments have taken steps
to address the involvement of individuals from their countries. We welcome the
United States Government’s announcement that it has begun investigations into the
activities of Silvercorp, its owner Jordan Goudreau and the failed operation, and
we welcome the Colombian authorities’ launch of investigations into the incident.
The opposition to any form of military intervention in Venezuela is a principle with
which the United Kingdom firmly agrees.
But, as we have said many times on this subject, the only positive way
forward for Venezuela is through a negotiated, democratic and peaceful solution
stemming from free and fair presidential elections in accordance with international
norms. Such negotiations must be approached with genuine will on both sides to
constructively engage.
So far, we have seen the spirit of engagement on the side of interim President
Juan Guaidó, who has engaged in several dialogue initiatives, but not from the side
of the Maduro regime. That was seen recently when they rejected the United States’
democratic transition framework without considering its potential. Instead, in an
attempt to divert attention from the humanitarian catastrophe the Maduro regime
has brought upon its own people by drawing the world’s attention to a small group
of mercenaries who, it seems, were far from being put in a position to inflict serious
harm on Maduro or his regime. So it is this behaviour, rather than failed adventurism,
that worries us and on which should be focused.
The Maduro regime has also used the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
crisis to divert the international community’s attention, focusing, for example, on
the thousands of Venezuelans who have returned to their country in recent weeks.
As Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo told us, economic pressure on migrant
communities grows. Rather than focusing on the 5 million who have left Venezuela,
with more than 1.8 million of them alone given a welcome in Colombia, Maduro does
everything in his power to draw attention away from the humanitarian crisis and
the human rights violations he is perpetrating against his own people. The regime
20-0710119/30

S/2020/435

continues to repress the opposition, stifle media freedom and harass journalists
and human rights defenders, and it is now failing to guarantee basic rights to those
detained as part of this operation. We therefore call on the Maduro regime to treat
these detainees and others in accordance with international human rights standards,
including with respect to their access to family, and their rights to a fair trial and to
choose their own defence. And we further call on the regime to allow unhindered
humanitarian access, as called for by Mr. Lowcock, for all Venezuelans in need and
to depoliticize humanitarian aid.
This is a crucial time for the Venezuelan people, and the challenges they have
already faced are being exacerbated by COVID-19. Finally, we call on the Maduro to
constructively engage in dialogue as soon as possible so that the Venezuelan people
can move forward in freedom and democracy. This is what they need and this is what
they deserve.

20/30

20-07101

S/2020/435

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing today. It is most
unfortunate that some Council members have insisted on wasting her time today.
The letter from the illegitimate Maduro regime that prompted today’s meeting
is, as such letters always are, a long-winded compilation of fantastical accusations
and demonstrable falsehoods. Unfortunately, for the second time in less than a
month, our Russian colleagues have indulged their client regime’s habit of blaming
others for its appalling choices.
But I am here today to tell the Council that the United States has no plans
to cooperate with such attempts to avoid responsibility. Since 2018, this corrupt,
criminal and illegitimate regime has overseen some 7,000 — I am going to say that
again — 7,000 extrajudicial killings. It has used food as a political weapon. It engages
in torture and human trafficking, and its strategy for combatting the coronavirus
disease involves detaining medical professionals and independent journalists who
attempt to inform the public of the risks posed by the virus. There is no question that
these are the regime’s choices, freely made.
Of course, it would be inconvenient indeed for the regime to acknowledge its
decisions to murder, starve and traffic the Venezuelan people. So, instead, it attempts
to distract and misdirect, as it is doing now with claims of a supposed coup attempt,
with the aim of providing cover for even more extrajudicial killings and murders.
President Trump and Secretary Pompeo have already made clear that the
United States was not involved in Operation Gideon. I will repeat that again — the
United States has not entered Venezuela and categorically rejects any claims to the
contrary. The United States was not involved in the alleged armed incursion of 3 and
4 May.
In fact, the only nations that appear to be violating Venezuela’s sovereignty
are Russia and Cuba, which, without approval from the National Assembly, routinely
send military officers and mercenaries into the country. I must admit, it is perplexing
to see these self-appointed champions of the Venezuelan people doing everything in
their power to prevent ordinary Venezuelans from even expressing their political
desires, let alone acting on them.
We encourage the Council to look closely into the role of the Maduro regime
in creating this supposed crisis, and especially into interference by the vast Cuban
intelligence apparatus in Venezuela. Furthermore, we reiterate President Juan
Guaidó’s call for unbiased investigations into the round-ups, extrajudicial killings
and torture that have resulted from Maduro’s repression.
As the United States investigates the alleged operation, more details are
coming to light. We cannot yet share all that we have learned, but we can say this. It
is obvious that the alleged operation was discovered long before. It was even publicly
noted almost a week before, as there was a public address by the regime laying out
its plans and highlighting that any efforts had been fully penetrated by the regime.
As these investigations move forward, our focus must remain on the
Venezuelan people, on the return of genuine democracy to the country, on the
delivery of humanitarian aid to those in need, and on the specific and undeniable
abuses committed by the illegitimate Maduro regime.
In the end, today’s meeting is about whether we are willing, collectively and
individually, to acknowledge plain truths. For our part, the Trump Administration
20-0710121/30

S/2020/435

will not avert its eyes from the evil the regime has visited on the Venezuelan people.
Thankfully, the same can be said for many Council members here today, but not for
all of them. And I can only hope that a time will come when all members see fit to
disavow such wilful blindness.

22/30

20-07101

S/2020/435

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam, Dang Dinh Quy
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her
briefing. I welcome the Permanent Representatives of Venezuela and Colombia to
our meeting today.
I received the letter from the Permanent Representative of Venezuela, and
today I have followed closely the briefing of Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and
the statements of previous speakers. I feel deeply concerned over recent reports
of armed incursions into Venezuela. Viet Nam strongly opposes the use of force
or threat of use of force against the sovereignty and independence of any State or
interference of any form in its internal affairs, which violate the Charter of the
United Nations and run counter to international law. In this regard, we would like to
stress the following points.
First, we call on parties related to the situation in Venezuela to exercise selfrestraint and refrain from the threat or use of force or actions that may escalate
tension and destabilize the situation in Venezuela. It is the Council’s responsibility
to uphold the fundamental principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, and abide by internationally agreed norms in the conduct of
international relations among States.
Secondly, we support the constitutional Government and relevant parties in
Venezuela in engaging in dialogue, with a view to achieving a long-term solution
by peaceful means. The way forward for Venezuela should be led and decided by
Venezuelans, in line with its Constitution and its people’s aspirations, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
Thirdly, as the ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic has further exacerbated
the situation in Venezuela, the most important task now is to combat the pandemic and
provide humanitarian assistance for Venezuelans to overcome current difficulties.
In this connection, we would like to welcome further United Nations-led efforts to
help the people of Venezuela, in accordance with the principles of humanitarian
assistance and the needs of Venezuelans. We also strongly support the appeal by the
Secretary-General to waive sanctions that may undermine the capacity of States to
respond to the pandemic.

20-0710123/30

S/2020/435

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations, Guillermo Fernandez de Soto Valderrama
I am grateful for the opportunity to participate in this meeting on Venezuela, a
sister country facing a colossal crisis. My country has a historic tradition of respect
for democracy and international law. It has been a strong advocate for multilateralism
and dialogue to resolve differences.
Colombia, together with more than 50 countries and multilateral organizations,
has disavowed the illegitimate Maduro regime for over a year, and instead recognizes
interim President Juan Guaidó. As a part of the Lima Group and along with other
countries, it supports his efforts to restore democracy in Venezuela.
Colombia’s relationship with Venezuela is a strategic issue. The tight bonds
forged by proximity have guided our international policy. Both nations share a long
history and an extensive border that has been described as the most alive border in
America. Over the past two decades, Colombia has implemented a policy aimed
at integrating and supporting the social and economic development of the border
regions and their communities.
However, such efforts stand in stark contrast to Venezuela’s ongoing support
for terrorism and its collusion with transnational organized crime, thereby adversely
affecting Colombia’s national security and the stability of the region.
Both Chávez and Maduro turned purported attacks — all failed ones —
and attacks against Venezuela’s sovereignty — all of them under control — and
systematic conspiracy theories against their regime into the core tenets of their
propaganda. The regime’s hostile policy against Colombian institutions runs counter
to the rules of international law and the resolutions of the United Nations and the
Organization of American States.
Venezuela has been driven to a multidimensional crisis. It has gone from
being one of the most prosperous nations in Latin America to a situation of profound
deterioration. Today it is widely considered a failed State. Between 2014 and 2019,
Venezuela lost two thirds of its wealth, and last year hyperinflation stood close to
10,000 per cent. In addition, its oil production went from 3 million barrels a day
in 1999 to 622,000 barrels a day in April 2020, and half of its population lives in
multidimensional poverty.
Who could believe that a country with one of the largest oil, gas and
minerals reserves in the world would end up experiencing scarcity, a lack food and
medicines, a shortage of electricity and water supplies and insufficient gasoline for
domestic consumption?
The human rights situation in Venezuela is unprecedented. Since 2003, the
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights has reported on the clear weakness
in the fundamental pillars for the existence of the rule of law. Furthermore, since
2018, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has
noted patterns of violations of all human rights. The High Commissioner has also
documented the increasing repression of political dissidents and the subjection
of detained persons, including children, to various forms of cruel, inhumane and
degrading treatment, as well as punishments such as beatings, electric shocks,
suffocation and threats of sexual assault.
More than 5 million Venezuelan citizens have had to abandon their homeland
due to poverty and repression. As a result of this unprecedented exodus, more than
1.8 million Venezuelans have established their residence in Colombia.
24/30

20-07101

S/2020/435

Confronted with the challenge of the second-largest displacement crisis in
the world, Colombia has acted with unfailing fraternity and solidarity, investing
significant financial and institutional resources on an ongoing basis despite the
emergency caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Responding to a humanitarian call by the Venezuelan National Assembly and
interim President Juan Guaidó, on 23 February 2019 an effort was made to provide
Venezuelan citizens with urgently needed food and medicine. Together with Brazil,
Curaçao, Chile, Paraguay, the United States and Puerto Rico, my country gathered
humanitarian supplies at the border city of Cúcuta with the intention of delivering
them to volunteers who would carry them to Venezuelan territory.
The Maduro regime responded with violence, and the paramilitary armed
groups known as “colectivos” thwarted the delivery of the provisions. Tensions at
the border led to the expulsion of all Colombian diplomatic and consular personnel
from Venezuelan territory, and diplomatic ties were broken.
The Lima Group has repeatedly called for a democratic transition in
Venezuela that will allow for the rule of law to be restored and the economy to
be rebuilt. In making that call, however, the Lima Group members have always
stressed that such a process must take place peacefully and in accordance with the
Venezuelan Constitution.
The European Union has also promoted initiatives aimed at facilitating the
recovery of democratic institutions in Venezuela, such as the International Contact
Group. Norway and Sweden have also undertaken efforts to find solutions to the
crisis through dialogue. Unfortunately, the regime has proven its unwillingness to
abandon its position of oppression against the people of Venezuela.
Corruption and other criminal activities provide enormous proceeds to
Maduro and his collaborators, who are unwilling to abandon those activities and
give up their lucrative business, even if that means continuing to deprive Venezuelan
citizens of goods and services essential to their survival. According to Transparency
International’s Corruption Perception Index, Venezuela is the most corrupt country
in Latin America and the fifth most corrupt in the world.
Recently, the United States Attorney General charged Maduro and 14 other
current and former officials of the regime, including Iván Márquez and Jesús Santric,
former leaders of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia – Ejército
del Pueblo, with formal criminal charges for narco-terrorism and corruption,
among others.
The Government of Colombia has acted in strict observance of international
law with the aim of seeing Venezuela’s democracy restored, and has not carried out
any covert or hidden actions. On the contrary, it has deployed all diplomatic efforts
within its reach and has spoken in various forums on the abuses committed by the
regime against the Venezuelan people.
In May 2017, President Iván Duque, a senator at the time, filed a complaint
before the International Criminal Court (ICC) against Nicolás Maduro for the
commission of crimes against humanity.
In May 2018, the Secretary General of the Organization of American States
also submitted a report to the ICC Prosecutor’s Office, in which he shows that there
is no access to a fair justice system in Venezuela.
In September 2018, the Heads of State of Argentina, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Paraguay and Peru filed a petition with the ICC, formally requesting the opening of

20-0710125/30

S/2020/435

an investigation into the commission of crimes against humanity under the Nicolás
Maduro regime. France later supported that petition.
Likewise, the member States of the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal
Assistance agreed to activate the Organ of Consultation of the Treaty. In September
2019, they adopted a resolution that indicated that
“all of these criminal activities, associated with the humanitarian crisis
generated by the deterioration of the political, economic and social situation in
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, represents a threat to the maintenance
of the peace and security of the continent”.
Maduro’s illegitimate regime irresponsibly accuses Colombia of tolerating the
commission of crimes that may affect Venezuela. But nothing could be further from
the truth. Some examples of actions taken by Colombian authorities to promote law
enforcement and criminal prosecution can be found in the document that I delivered
today to the President of the Security Council. Several of the criminals that the
Venezuelan regime mentions in its recent complaints have been imprisoned in the
past year.
The allegations are also false with regard to the seizure of weapons on 23
March. At the time of the arms seizure, Colombian judicial authorities issued a
warrant for the arrest of the person in possession of said weapons, issued a criminal
notice and began an investigation.
Mr. Clíver Alcalá, who claimed responsibility for acquiring said weapons, is
the subject of open investigation by the Colombian Attorney General’s Office. He
voluntarily surrendered to the United States authorities in order to collaborate with
the criminal proceedings against him in this country.
The events of
judicial investigation.

the

so-called

Operation

Gideon

are

also

under

Regarding the false accusations purporting to implicate the Colombian
authorities in the use of force contrary to international law, we reiterate the 7
May communiqué from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which strongly rejects
those claims.
Colombia has never been an aggressor country. On the contrary, it has devoted
its efforts to strengthening its institutions, consolidating its institutional capacities
to ensure stability and security, and raising the quality of life of its citizens. We
have waged an ongoing war against crime and have made significant economic and
social progress since the beginning of the century. Allow me to express clearly our
emphatic rejection of any allegations purporting to link my Government to actions
that run counter to international law.
The restoration of democracy in Venezuela is a shared purpose and a moral
imperative. The Security Council can be certain that Colombia does not pose a threat
to international peace and security.

26/30

20-07101

S/2020/435

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to the United Nations, Samuel Moncada
I thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting to discuss the latest developments
in Venezuela, especially the terrorist and mercenary attacks that took place on 3 May,
as well as the looming threat of an armed attack, in an imminent breach of the peace
in my country and of the entire region, should the aggression continue.
When signing the Charter of the United Nations, all States Members committed
“to take effective collective measures for the prevention and removal of threats
to the peace, and for the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches
of the peace, and to bring about by peaceful means, and in conformity with
the principles of justice and international law, adjustment or settlement of
international disputes or situations which might lead to a breach of the peace”.
Today that provision is being violated, with impunity and in full contempt of
the Charter.
In a letter to the Security Council dated 13 May, we demonstrated to the
world the acts of armed aggression against my country, which, as per public and
irrefutable evidence shared at that time, proved that the Governments of the United
States of America and the Republic of Colombia facilitated its planning, training and
financing and are, to this day, protecting groups of mercenaries and terrorists who
executed an armed attack with the objective of perpetrating indiscriminate killings
of innocent civilians, targeting the killing of selected high-level officials of my
Government and even the assassination of President Nicolás Maduro.
This is a manifest violation of the Charter of the United Nations, international
law and multiple resolutions of the Security Council, which are legally binding on
all Member States. The Governments of Colombia and the United States of America
violated their relevant obligations under international law, particularly as enshrined
in at least the following four resolutions.
The Security Council, in paragraph 2 of resolution 239 (1967), condemns any
State that permits or tolerates “the recruitment of mercenaries, and the provision
of facilities to them, with the objective of overthrowing the Governments of States
Members of the United Nations”.
The Security Council, in paragraph 4 of resolution 1269 (1999), called upon
States to “prevent and suppress in their territories through all lawful means the
preparation and financing of any acts of terrorism”.
The Security Council, in resolution 1373 (2001), decided that all States shall
both refrain from providing any form of support to entities or persons involved in
terrorist acts, including by suppressing their recruitment and the supply of weapons
to terrorists, and deny safe heaven to those who finance, plan, support or commit
terrorist acts.
The Security Council, in paragraph 2 of resolution 1456 (2003), called upon
States to “assist each other, to the maximum extent possible, in the prevention,
investigation, prosecution and punishment of acts of terrorism, wherever they occur”,
while stressing, in paragraph 3, that States “must bring to justice those who finance,
plan, support or commit terrorist acts or provide safe heavens, in accordance with
international law, in particular on the basis of the principle to extradite or prosecute”.
As of today, the Governments of the United States of America and Colombia
continue to refuse any sort of contact with relevant Venezuelan authorities in order
20-0710127/30

S/2020/435

to establish the facts and avoid impunity by ensuring that those responsible are
brought to justice. As a result, those Governments are violating their obligations
under existing bilateral treaties on mutual legal assistance in criminal matters. Even
more, as of today, the United States Government continues to provide safe heaven to
the leaders of the armed incursion against Venezuela.
Today I must report that the operations to capture the individuals involved
in this armed aggression are still ongoing, as we are aware of the existence of other
groups of mercenaries and terrorists who were trying to carry out their criminal plans
in other regions of our country. As a matter of fact, an attack against our national
water system took place on 14 May, which, apart from constituting itself a clear
violation of resolution 2341 (2017), on the protection of critical infrastructure from
terrorist attacks, confirms the veracity of the public statements by the criminals,
who still remain at large, regarding the preparation of further acts of aggression
and the training of yet more groups of mercenaries and terrorists. At the same time,
further evidence continues to come to light clearly pointing to both Washington and
Bogota as the main plotters behind the aggression.
Furthermore, there are at least three additional developments that I must also
denounce today, as they are part of the continued systematic campaign of aggression
against my country.
First, on 13 May, the United States Government included Venezuela in an
unlawful unilateral list, falsely condemning my country as being among those
that do not cooperate fully with counter-terrorism efforts. There could be nothing
more cynical than such an accusation, coming just days after the perpetration of
an armed attack with mercenaries and terrorists, with the full support of United
States Government officials and the direct participation of United States citizens and
companies. In addition, the following day, on 14 May, a senior Trump Administration
official told Reuters News Agency that consideration was being given to designating
several Venezuelan security agencies as “terrorist organizations”. This is a manifest
threat to the peace and security of my country, as the United States Government
is aiming at fabricating a narrative in which, according to its supremacist notion
claiming its national laws to be universal, it may take “decisive defensive action” and
proceed with the assassination of top officials from Venezuela’s security agencies,
and, by using its propaganda machine, then twist the crime and present it as a counterterrorism operation. It is a sad fact of our times that the United States Government
expects to openly get away with murder by normalizing the unlawful killing of top
national officials around the world through the sheer use of brute force.
Secondly, as we have denounced in previous letters to the Security Council, the
United States Government has openly admitted to exerting pressure on companies
to refrain from supplying gasoline to Venezuela, resulting in the current shortages
throughout the country. In that context, allow me to ask the following question: what
would happen if, in the midst of the coronavirus disease pandemic, New York City
were deliberately left without gasoline? That would undoubtedly constitute a crime
against humanity, which is precisely what the Government of President Donald
Trump is currently perpetrating against 30 million Venezuelans.
Today coercion is coupled with a fresh peril: the threat of the use of military
force against five Iranian tankers carrying fuel that are en route to Venezuela,
in violation, among other things, of the freedoms of trade and navigation. If that
threat materializes, it would constitute actual armed aggression against a civilian
Iranian vessel and against the Venezuelan people as a whole. In that context, I wish
to stress that a naval blockade is an act of war under international law, particularly
if not authorized by the Security Council on the basis of Article 41 of the Charter
or applied pursuant to the right of self-defence. Therefore, the current threats being
28/30

20-07101

S/2020/435

made by the United States Administration are nothing more than a military act of
aggression against civilian vessels carrying vital goods for our people and coming
from a country that has engaged in legal trade with my own.
In the midst of a pandemic, forbidding those vessels from reaching our ports
would thus constitute an act of extermination amounting to a crime against humanity.
Perversely, the United States Government insists on portraying itself as our saviour,
claiming to be the major donor of humanitarian assistance to Venezuela, and now
even dares to accuse our Government of obstructing the provision of United States
assistance, when the truth is that everyone willing to support our country has been
able to do so through the relevant United Nations agencies.
Thirdly, on 13 May international media revealed the existence of a “Venezuela
reconstruction unit” within the United Kingdom Foreign and Commonwealth
Office, through which discussions were held between United Kingdom officials,
Venezuelan opposition figures and those who plotted the recent armed incursion on
the promotion of and the need to provide guarantees of preferred status to British
businesses in my country once the act of aggression had successfully been carried
out. This new evidence that has now come to light, together with the pillaging of
more than $1.7 billion in Venezuelan gold by the Bank of England, demonstrates once
again how the British Government is an opportunistic accomplice in the colonial
looting of Venezuelan wealth. In addition, British warships remain off our territorial
waters, with a hostile and confrontational attitude, together with Dutch, French and
United States warships, conveniently disguised as anti-drug-trafficking operations
but in fact aimed at illegally establishing a naval blockade against our nation. The
combination of military provocations with information operations is a replay of the
old trick of plausible deniability used in covert assaults.
In that context, it is noteworthy that just hours ago international media
revealed that a powerful Colombian drug-trafficking organization known as “Los
Pachenca”, which controls that country’s La Guajira region and which supported
the mercenaries and terrorists that participated in the armed attack of 3 May against
my country, is in possession of precise operational information on the surveillance
routes and the locations of Colombian and United States warships in the Caribbean.
That official, top-secret information is being used by the cartel to avoid operations
allegedly being carried out for counter-narcotic purposes. This proves that the
real purpose of warships in my region is not to fight drug trafficking but to attack
Venezuela. This is yet more evidence of the coordination that exists between the
intelligence agencies of those countries and narco-paramilitary groups. It is a classic
example of the “all options are on the table” strategy in the clandestine war against
Venezuela, under the pretext of an alleged war on drugs.
Behind it all is the very same mind that applied that very same combination
in Nicaragua during the 1980s, that is, the use of drug lords, covert operations and
mercenaries in a dirty war. Cruelly, one of the individuals who was responsible
for this more than 35 years ago is now repeating his crimes today in Venezuela —
literally the very same individual. I am referring to Elliott Abrams, one of the darkest
characters in our region’s history.
On 14 December 1974, the General Assembly unanimously adopted
resolution 3314 (XXIX), which in its article 1 defines aggression as
“the use of armed force by a State against the sovereignty, territorial integrity
or political independence of another State, or in any other manner inconsistent
with the Charter of the United Nations”
and includes as such acts both “the blockade of the ports or coasts of a State by
the armed forces of another State” and “the sending by or on behalf of a State of
20-0710129/30

S/2020/435

armed bands, groups, irregulars or mercenaries, which carry out acts of armed force
against another State”, as set out in its article 3, paragraphs (c) and (g), respectively.
That text fits perfectly the description of the most recent events in Venezuela.
Consequently, while urging the Security Council to fulfil the duties and
responsibilities entrusted to it by the Charter of the United Nations in relation to the
maintenance of international peace and security, we request that it once and for all
not only determine the threat that the warmongering policies of the Governments of
Colombia and the United States of America represent to the peace of both Venezuela
and the region, but also to both recognize the acts of aggression that have been
committed against my country and demand that the perpetrators immediately bring
to an end their criminal practices, including the use or threat of use of force and
the commission of further armed attacks, inter alia, through the use of mercenaries
and terrorists.
The United States Government and its allies are creating a lawless space in
international relations where they can ignore their obligations under international
law and impose tyrannical, whimsical and colonial practices on the rest of the
world. Thus, in their minds, the supremacy of their national interest justifies the
most abhorrent crimes, as is the case with protecting the “good terrorists and
mercenaries” who attacked Venezuela if they serve the expansion of United States
power. The Security Council must enforce the notion of legality in international
relations under the principle, as set out in article 5, paragraph 1, of General Assembly
resolution 3314 (XXIX), that
“no consideration of whatever nature, whether political, economic, military or
otherwise, may serve as a justification for aggression”.
That is the only way to further peace and security among nations.
Today, in the midst of a deadly pandemic that is affecting all of humankind
and which requires the full attention of our national Government to protect the lives
of our people, we are facing an imminent armed attack that, because of its genocidal
effects, amounts to a crime against humanity. Given the seriousness of the situation
and its potential escalation, inaction from the Security Council at the current juncture
will only embolden those Governments to continue with their warmongering and
criminal plans, as has been the case thus far, considering the fact that the Colombian
and United States Governments have doubled down on their aggression against
Venezuela, in breach of international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
thereby demonstrating their unrepentant and recidivist nature.
Allow me to conclude by stressing that our country does not represent a threat
to anyone and expects everyone to learn this lesson: Venezuela is not for sale; it will
never be anyone’s colony; and our people, with serenity and determination, will
fulfil their duty to be free.

30/30

20-07101
