United Nations

S/PV.6411

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6411

th meeting
Tuesday, 26 October 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kategaya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uganda)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Spindelegger
Ms. Čolaković
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Ms. Kikuta
Mr. Salam
Ms. Carrera
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rodham Clinton

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security (S/2010/498)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-60258 (E)

*1060258*

S/PV.6411

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2010/498)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, the Bahamas, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Denmark, Egypt, El
Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, the Gambia, Germany,
Ghana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malawi, Monaco,
Morocco, Namibia, Nepal, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
the Philippines, Portugal, Rwanda, Sierra Leone,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Ukraine, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay and Viet Nam, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which will be issued as document S/2010/549 and
which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate

2

in the Security Council open debate that will be
held on Tuesday, 26 October 2010, on women and
peace and security.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting, in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I invite the following
briefers under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure: Ms. Michelle Bachelet, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women; Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations; and Mr. Hamidon Ali,
President of the Economic and Social Council.
It is so decided.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, acting head of the delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of Gabon, in
which he requests that the Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union, His Excellency
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item in accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Walter Füllemann, Permanent Observer and head
of the delegation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross.
It is so decided.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of Turkey, in
which he requests that the NATO Civilian Liaison

10-60258

S/PV.6411

Officer to the United Nations, Ms. Eirini LemosManiati, be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item in accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Thelma Awori of the Civil Society Advisory Group
to the United Nations on Women, Peace and Security.
It is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I wish to warmly
welcome the Deputy Secretary-General at this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/498, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on women and peace and
security. I also wish to draw members’ attention to
document S/2010/466, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on women’s participation in
peacekeeping.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security. It was the first Security
Council resolution to address women’s issues on the
international peace and security agenda. Member
States, the United Nations system, civil society and
parties to conflict were called upon, among other
things, to acknowledge the role and address the plight
of women in situations of armed conflict. Resolution
1325 (2000) also sought to protect women and girls
from violence, particularly sexual violence, in conflict
and post-conflict situations.
Uganda recognizes the progress that has been
made by the United Nations and the broader
international community towards enhancing the
participation of women in conflict resolution, peace
processes and post-conflict reconstruction. However,
there are still situations in which conflict continues to
have a devastating impact on women and girls.
As we commemorate the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), Uganda will move beyond the
reaffirmation of our common commitment to the
implementation of the resolution and make strong,

10-60258

time-bound and measurable commitments to action. It
is essential to empower women to enable them to
participate effectively in issues of peace, security and
development. The Government of Uganda has adopted
a deliberate policy for the empowerment of women
through affirmative action initiatives. These include
providing for one woman representative per district in
Parliament and for a third of local council executive
positions to be occupied by women, and awarding 1.5
additional points to female candidates for admission to
public universities, as well as ensuring universal
primary and secondary education for all children.
Through these initiatives, women’s participation in
governance has been greatly enhanced.
Uganda launched its national action plan for
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), as well as
the Goma Declaration in December 2008. The action
plan highlights specific commitments and duties of the
Government and stakeholders and identifies priority
interventions for the short and medium terms. It also
apportions institutional responsibilities and establishes
a mechanism for coordination, monitoring and
reporting.
In the next five years, Uganda will be developing
a comprehensive national policy on gender-based
violence to guide prevention and responsiveness in all
situations, including in the humanitarian development
context. We shall establish sustainable and integrated
systems for collecting data on gender-based violence
and improve access to justice for victims and survivors.
We are also institutionalizing gender-based violence
training in key institutions for training security forces,
including those involved in peacekeeping missions.
Uganda is already carrying out wide-ranging reforms
to address the remaining gender inequalities and
violence against women in both the public and the
private sectors. We are also working on integrating the
principles of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008)
into the implementation, monitoring and evaluation
processes for our national development plan.
At the regional level, through the African Union,
the East African Community and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, Uganda is
committed to strengthening collaboration to enhance
women’s participation and empowerment in conflict
prevention, mediation and resolution. We are
convinced that women have an important role in
ensuring durable peace, security and development.

3

S/PV.6411

The Council has before it the text of a statement
by the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today’s meeting. I thank Council members for their
valuable contributions to this statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members of
the Council, I shall take it that the members of the
Security Council agree to the statement, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/PRST/2010/22.
It is so decided.
I shall now invite the Council to hear a statement
by the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, who is travelling in Asia and will address
this meeting via a videotaped message.
The Secretary-General: I welcome the
opportunity to address this commemorative open
debate. I thank the President and members of the
Council for allowing me to participate by video. As
they know, I am in South-East Asia, en route to Viet
Nam to attend the third United Nations-Association of
Southeast Asian Nations summit. I have asked the
Deputy Secretary-General to represent me today.
The landmark adoption 10 years ago of resolution
1325 (2000) acknowledged the role of women in peace
and security, not simply as victims but as agents of
change. It opened the way for incorporating gender
perspectives into all our work to restore, keep and
build peace.
The Council has also shown its commitment by
following up with three subsequent resolutions and by
demanding country-specific reporting on how
resolution 1325 (2000) is being implemented. Just two
weeks ago, the Council received my report on women’s
participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466), which
details a clear seven-point agenda for action. Member
States, the United Nations system and civil society
have all contributed to implementing resolution 1325
(2000). Twenty countries have adopted national action
plans, and women are an increasing influence in
national parliaments, including in countries emerging
from armed conflict. The proportion of female
legislators in Burundi and Rwanda is truly inspiring.
Yet the past decade has also been marred by
repeated instances of abuse. Many of my reports to the
Security Council on the progress of peacekeeping
missions have noted widespread rape, physical abuse,
extortion and other violations of the rights and physical

4

security of women and children during and after
conflict. The recent horrifying mass rapes in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo were just the latest
reminder of the challenges we face and of the vital
importance of fully implementing resolution 1325
(2000).
As my current report (S/2010/498) indicates,
progress is difficult to quantify. We lack adequate
methods for monitoring our impact. That is why I call
on the Council to endorse the comprehensive set of
indicators first presented in April (see S/2010/173) and
refined since then. The indicators will enable us to
identify progress and provide the Council with
systematic comparable information for effective
monitoring and accountability. As Member States and
civil society representatives have repeatedly stated, this
comprehensive set of indicators is among the most
constructive additions to the 1325 (2000) toolkit. But
of course, it is also just a beginning.
Resolution 1325 (2000) will never be
implemented successfully until we end sexual violence
in conflict. We must hold those responsible to account,
whether the crimes are committed by State or non-State
parties. I call on the Council to take appropriate steps
to end impunity. We must intensify efforts to prevent
brutality against women and girls. Let us recognize the
important role of women in the justice and security
sector and support their participation. And let us
eliminate stereotypes and ensure women’s meaningful
participation in all stages of peace processes and
decision-making.
The creation of UN Women will enable us to
better assist Member States in addressing all issues of
gender equality and the empowerment of women,
including those related to women and peace and
security. To head this effort, we are fortunate to have
the dynamism and political skill of Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, who will present my report to Council
members today.
I am determined that the United Nations system
should lead by example. That is why I have appointed
11 women Special Representatives or Deputy Special
Representatives
of
the
Secretary-General
to
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
It is why our heads of mission — women and men
alike — held 27 open day meetings this year to consult
with women’s organizations and receive their insights.
And it is why I will continue to push for full

10-60258

S/PV.6411

accountability in how our own peacekeepers conduct
themselves in the field. On this, I trust that I can count
on the Council’s full support.
I look forward to our continued collaboration in
the coming decade. I am committed to working with
the Council to ensure the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and its related resolutions 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009). Only by acting
on our promises can we hope to create change.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Michelle Bachelet,
Under-Secretary-General for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women.
Ms. Bachelet: It is an honour for me to address
the Security Council for the first time since assuming
my position as Under-Secretary-General and Executive
Director of the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN Women). I would like to express deep gratitude to
you, Sir, for giving me this opportunity to address the
Council and to present the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2010/498). I commend your commitment
and leadership in the intense preparations and
deliberations leading up to this open debate.
I would also like to recognize the unprecedented
level of representation by ministers at this historic
tenth-anniversary meeting on resolution 1325 (2000). I
take inspiration from this presence, which clearly
shows that Member States are determined to see
accelerated implementation and concrete results in
women’s protection and in their full engagement in
making, keeping and building peace.
The report before the Council presents a
comprehensive overview of progress made, as well as
the obstacles encountered in the first decade of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in response
to a number of mandates of the Security Council. It
responds to the Security Council’s request to the
Secretary-General in paragraph 18 of resolution 1889
(2009) to present an overview of progress in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000). The report also
provides an assessment of the processes by which the
Security Council receives, analyses and takes action on
information pertinent to resolution 1325 (2000), and
recommendations on further measures to improve
coordination across the United Nations system and

10-60258

with Member States and civil society to deliver
implementation.
Furthermore, it gives highlights of progress
achieved in implementing the 2008-2009 System-wide
Action Plan for implementing resolution 1325 (2000),
as well as an update on the further development of the
set of indicators contained in the April 2010 report of
the Secretary-General (S/2010/173), as requested in
operative paragraph 17 of resolution 1889 and in the
presidential statement contained in document
S/PRST/2010/8. The report ends with a number of
recommendations for consideration by the Security
Council. These recommendations, if accepted, will
provide the Council with tools to ensure accelerated
implementation. They offer a monitoring framework
for the Council’s work on women, peace and security.
I am confident that with strong Council
leadership, Member State determination, civil society
engagement and United Nations commitment and
assistance, we will together ensure coherent
implementation of the important work on women,
peace and security.
The report before you presents a mixed picture. It
highlights areas in which progress has been made in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) in the last
decade, outlining a great number of activities that have
been carried out by various stakeholders, including
Member States, entities of the United Nations system,
civil society and the Security Council itself.
United Nations system entities have invested in
training and the development of policies, action plans,
guidelines and programming to ensure women’s access
to resources, justice and opportunities to participate in
decision-making.
United
Nations
peacekeeping
missions have become more effective in engaging
women in peacebuilding. As a result, most reports of
the Secretary-General on peacekeeping missions now
include information on actions taken to ensure the
participation of women in conflict resolution, public
decision-making and recovery efforts. They also detail
the consequences for women and girls of armed
conflict and its aftermath. There has been an effort to
develop consistent standards and procedures to guide
various aspects of the work of the United Nations on
women, peace and security.
The need for coordination of the activities on
women, peace and security in the United Nations
system was recognized and led to a call by the Security

5

S/PV.6411

Council for the development of a United Nations
System-wide Action Plan on implementing Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) across the United
Nations system (S/PRST/2004/40). The first evaluation
of the performance of this Plan led to its revision and
the definition of a new System-wide Action Plan as a
results-based programming, monitoring and reporting
tool.
Within a few years of the resolution’s adoption, a
number of Member States were actively working on
their own initiatives at the national level, often
reaching out to women’s organizations to create
partnerships to implement resolution 1325 (2000).
Spearheaded by Canada, an informal group of Member
States, the Friends of Women and Peace and Security
or the Friends of 1325, continues to advocate for and
support intergovernmental coordination, the allocation
of resources and the acceleration of implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) by United Nations entities.
Twenty-two countries have so far developed national
action plans on women, peace and security. In a
number of post-conflict countries there has been a
dramatic increase in the number of women in national
politics, in part because of the use of electoral quotas.
In Nepal, women hold one third of the seats in the
Constituent Assembly. More than half of Burundi’s
Senate is female. The Sudan’s general election this
year resulted in a National Assembly with women
winning over a quarter of the seats.
Just this month, 90 female police advisers from
Rwanda were deployed to the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to
serve as gender-based violence and child protection
advisers. Sierra Leone, which only allowed women into
its armed forces in 2008, recently sent seven female
peacekeepers to the Sudan, including one female
Brigadier General, and will shortly send 20 more. In
addition to facilitating the gender-responsiveness of
UNAMID military and police components, these
examples show that post-conflict countries are
emerging as the standard bearers of the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). There are many other
examples of Member States’ commitment to resolution
1325 (2000), which are highlighted in the report.
Civil society has played a key role in advocating
for accountability in the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Within the United Nations, the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security
continues to emphasize accountability and the need to

6

establish
a
monitoring
framework
for
the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In 2010, a
high-level civil society advisory group was established
and its chair has participated as an observer in a highlevel steering committee, chaired by the United
Nations
Deputy
Secretary-General,
to
guide
preparations for the commemoration of the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). The
involvement of civil society has provided essential
guidance and insights from women around the world
on their priorities and concerns.
On a country-specific level, we have seen
important examples of women’s peace activism. This
year, women in Afghanistan lobbied consistently and
successfully to ensure that an unprecedented number of
women participated in the important June Peace Jirga.
In Kyrgyzstan, after the ethnic clashes of June 2010,
women peace activists struggled to have their voices
heard at the high-level donors forum, held on June 27.
A persistent campaign reiterating that “women count
for peace” and “nothing for us without us”, resulted in
the allocation of five seats at the donor conference and
an invitation to participate in the peace negotiations
committee. Civil society has a crucial role to play in
promoting resolution 1325 (2000).
This Council itself has continued to play an
active role. The role of women in peace and security is
now more clearly integrated into the Council’s
deliberations. The past year’s heightened activities on
the part of the Security Council and the United Nations
to achieve coordination and bring sharper attention to
the issues of women and peace and security in general,
and sexual violence in conflict in particular, are worthy
of note. This Council’s adoption of resolutions 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009) illustrates the
increased commitment of the Council to the issue of
women and peace and security. In response to Security
Council resolution 1888 (2009), the Secretary-General
appointed a Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict to bring greater focus to this challenging
aspect of the area of women, peace and security.
The call of the Security Council in resolution
1889 (2009) for indicators to monitor the
implementation of the resolution was a bold and an
important step towards the development of a much
needed monitoring framework for resolution 1325
(2000). The Council’s persistence in requesting the
development and operationalization of those indicators
has kept up the pressure needed to transform the

10-60258

S/PV.6411

implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) from just a
focus on activities to an output and results-driven
endeavour.
Despite these activities and implementation
successes, there are a number of sobering messages in
the report before you that call for our concerted and
urgent action. Ten years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), significant achievements are difficult to
identify or quantify. Although activities to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) have been carried out with
increasing intensity over the years, those activities
have lacked a clear direction or time-bound goals and
targets that could accelerate implementation and ensure
accountability. While those discrete activities have
indeed contributed to improvements in efforts to
address the needs of women and girls in the context of
armed conflict, evidence of their cumulative impact is
inadequate. Because of design, implementation and
resource limitations, the System-wide Action Plan
devised to bring greater coherence to the United
Nations system implementation efforts has fallen short
of its goals.
Given
the
urgent
need
to
accelerate
implementation of the resolution and the formidable
obstacles to be overcome, the Security Council may
wish to consider a range of initiatives and interventions
to ensure that the coming years see more determined
and effective implementation.
The report before you recommends the
development of a single comprehensive framework
consisting of an agreed set of goals, targets and
indicators to guide the implementation of the resolution
in the next decade. The Council, in that regard, could
convene a review or summit at the ministerial level
every five years to assess progress towards the goals
and targets and to address the obstacles in their
implementation. This framework should build on the
comprehensive set of indicators presented in the annex
to the report.
The comprehensive set of indicators in the
present report has been acknowledged as a
breakthrough in the architecture for monitoring the
implementation of 1325 (2000) and as a crucial
building block of stronger accountability. They
represent a highly practical new tool to support the
implementation of the women, peace and security
agenda.

10-60258

I strongly urge the Council to endorse the
indicators contained in the annex as a preliminary set
and to begin to use them as a basis for the Council’s
review, analysis and intervention on issues related to
women and peace and security at both the global and
the country levels. This would demonstrate a new level
of commitment of the Council to act on the information
that it receives. As section III of the report before you
notes, the effectiveness with which the Security
Council processes and takes action on information
pertinent to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) will make the difference in achieving its
objectives.
Actions such as the horrific mass rapes in July
and August 2010 in the eastern provinces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot be allowed
to continue with impunity. These events are an affront
to humankind and underline the desperate urgency of
accelerating the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) to strengthen the capacity of Member States to
resolve conflict and build security and justice systems
that protect the human rights of all. Therefore, as
indicated in the Secretary-General’s report, the
Security Council may wish to instruct that those who
abuse women and girls and violate their human rights
in conflict and post-conflict situations, including those
who commission such abuses, must be brought to
justice in accordance with national laws, international
law and international humanitarian law. The Council
must remain vigilant and relentless in bringing pressure
on perpetrators and their supporters.
The creation of UN Women in July this year was
the result of an exceptional commitment by Member
States seeking greater leadership, coordination and
coherence from the United Nations on gender equality
and women’s empowerment. For my part, I can assure
the Council of my determination to work to chart a
clear path to achieve that goal. Along with the
Secretary-General, I especially recognize the need to
identify better ways to achieve progress in addressing
the challenges in the area of women and peace and
security and in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).
What is needed now is determined leadership by
all of us working together. UN Women will support
existing and new efforts to improve the protection
environment for women during and after conflict, to
engage women in conflict prevention, and to ensure

7

S/PV.6411

that peacebuilding processes are guided by women’s
perspectives and address their needs.
UN Women will be an essential partner to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict in building the capacity of
the United Nations system to protect women in
conflict. UN Women will use the resources at its
disposal to work with the entire United Nations system
and other relevant stakeholders to enhance
coordination and coherence on women and peace and
security.
I mentioned earlier that the key ingredients are in
place for much more determined implementation. The
Security Council is better equipped than ever before to
ensure that women engage in peace talks and to build a
stronger protection environment for women.
We all know that women count for peace, but for
them to count for peace, they need us all. Let us make
this the beginning of a new decade in which women
can put their stamp on conflict resolution so that we
can have more effective peacemaking and more
sustainable peacebuilding throughout the world. I look
forward to the support of all here in the next decade of
the implementation of that landmark resolution.
The President: I thank Ms. Bachelet for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Alain Le Roy, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): Resolution 1325
(2000) has fundamentally changed the conduct of
peacekeeping operations over the past 10 years. As we
implemented a wide range of multidimensional
mandates to stabilize and support peaceful transitions
in every region of the globe, from Afghanistan to
Liberia to Timor-Leste, that landmark resolution
guided us in our efforts to support women’s
participation in peace processes and to improve the
protection of women in post-conflict situations. It
placed women’s participation at the centre of all efforts
for an inclusive and lasting peace.
Ten years on, we have made some progress, but
not as much as we would have wanted. We still face
immense challenges.
A few months ago, the Departments of
Peacekeeping Operations and of Field Support —
DPKO and DFS — launched a joint study to review

8

with our partners our implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) in post-conflict situations, the impact of
our efforts to date and the implications for our
workplan. That exercise has confirmed a certain
number of important lessons. Allow me to underscore
some of them here.
In Afghanistan, Darfur and Timor-Leste, we have
seen to what extent the leaders of our peacekeeping
operations can use their good offices to facilitate
women’s participation in political processes. The
experience in the Democratic Republic of Congo
clearly shows that forming partnerships with women in
post-conflict
situations
greatly
enhances
our
understanding of the operational environment. It
should, therefore, enable us to further increase our
ability to protect women and children from sexual
violence in those countries, which is clearly vital
despite the very difficult circumstances of which we
are all aware.
We have seen in Liberia and Haiti how effective
the links of female peacekeepers with the local
population have been, particularly in internally
displaced persons camps, as in Haiti, for example.
Besides their professional qualities, those women
model the principle of gender equality.
With regard to police personnel, beyond the
presence of a woman — who is seated behind me — at
the head of our entire police force around the world, we
have set up a plan to enable us to achieve a 20 per cent
proportion of our worldwide police personnel being
female by 2014. As for our 15 peacekeeping missions,
three are now led by women, while none were a few
years ago. That is a proportion of 20 per cent — 20 per
cent of our peacekeeping operations are led by women.
Moreover, our multidimensional operations have
greatly benefited from the recruitment of gender
advisers in each of our missions. Those advisers have
provided valuable technical expertise in the Sudan, on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; in
Chad, on prison reform; in Burundi, on election
support; and in Afghanistan, on constitutional reform.
That helped gain significant percentages of female
representation in the parliaments, as Ms. Bachelet said,
in particular, 25 per cent in Afghanistan and more than
30 per cent in Burundi.
The development of manuals and training tools
for the Blue Helmets has promoted gender
mainstreaming in peacekeeping missions and in

10-60258

S/PV.6411

predeployment planning and training of troops and
police.

contributions in the planning and drawdown phases of
peacekeeping missions to ensure sustainable outcomes.

Naturally, we know that peacekeeping missions
must cooperate closely with other United Nations
partners present in the country in order to deliver
coherent support that can be sustained when our
missions withdraw. Our common response should, of
course, demonstrate our unwavering commitment to
the rights of women.

Thirdly, we will continue to engage closely with
troop- and police-contributing countries to help them
prepare military and police personnel with the
knowledge, skills, expertise and profile to effectively
implement resolution 1325 (2000). To ensure that
women are included among civilian peacekeepers, we
will also press forward with efforts to improve
conditions in the field and to realize the goal of
harmonized conditions of service across the common
system.

(spoke in English)
In addition to those lessons, we can also cite a
number of developments on the broader global and
peacekeeping agenda in recent years that will influence
our future strategy.
In the first instance, there are many more actors
engaged in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) at the field level today than was the case 10 years
ago. Besides the gender expertise available within
peacekeeping missions, many of our United Nations
partner entities are also deploying gender experts to
post-conflict countries. That requires that we strengthen
the coordination of our efforts on the ground. Too often,
actual strength on the ground to coordinate and
implement is weak.
The protection of civilians has assumed central
priority in the work of peacekeeping today. We have
initiated a broad policy and operational reform effort,
including training, guidance and planning. Together
with the Office of the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Wallström, and other United
Nations partners, we are advancing a broad protection
agenda.
Drawing on lessons and emerging trends, I would
like to advance five key elements of our future
strategy.
First, the necessary financing must be in place to
support implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) —
which has not always been the case.
Secondly, our focus in future must be on building
the capacities of women to build and sustain peace in
their own countries. We must invest more in
facilitating women’s participation in political processes
and in newly restructured security sector institutions.
We must also work closely with local women to
identify and implement protection strategies. That
requires us to draw on local women’s perspectives and

10-60258

Fourthly, during the early post-conflict phases,
when peacekeeping missions have the largest presence
and resources on the ground, we will continue to
provide the leadership and coordination of an
integrated United Nations response. Like everyone
here, I am sure, we welcome the establishment of
UN Women and the appointment of Under-SecretaryGeneral Bachelet, and we look forward to the promise
of strengthened field coordination to ensure that we
deliver as one.
Fifthly, we will actively support the strengthening
of accountability and monitoring mechanisms for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The recently
developed standardized indicators are a welcome
development. The specific indicators related to
peacekeeping are, in fact, part of our existing reporting
templates and guidelines.
Our greatest indicator of success must remain,
however, the extent to which our collective energies
contribute to building a sustainable, nationally owned
platform from which local women, working with men,
can themselves define, shape and influence the course
of peace in their countries.
The President: I thank Mr. Le Roy for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Hamidon Ali, President of the Economic and
Social Council.
Mr Ali: At the outset, Sir, I would like to thank
you for giving me the opportunity to address the
Security Council in my capacity as President of the
Economic and Social Council on the important issue of
women, peace and security.

9

S/PV.6411

Gender equality and the empowerment of women
are cross-cutting issues for all development policies
and, indeed, increasingly for all international policies.
The Economic and Social Council has taken the full
dimension of this requirement and reviews on an
annual basis how the United Nations system
mainstreams gender perspectives in its activities. This
exercise is of much relevance to the activities carried
out in the field of peace and security, as many of the
issues at stake are multifaceted.
Over the years, the Economic and Social Council
has promoted a comprehensive approach to peace,
stability and development. Its discussions on the
transition from relief to development, leading to
groundbreaking agreed conclusions in 1998 and an
annual follow-up process at the Council’s substantive
sessions, are based on the demonstrated need to
integrate relief, rehabilitation, reconstruction and
development into a continuum that increases the
coherence of international support. Peacebuilding is an
additional dimension of international efforts that can
now be added to this approach. The Council’s Ad Hoc
Advisory Group on Haiti has also formulated specific
recommendations on the gender dimension of
international support to Haiti. I invite the Security
Council to take them into account.
Violence against women in conflict and postconflict situations is both a development and a security
challenge that calls for action on a common front by
United Nations Charter and other intergovernmental
bodies. Violence against women profoundly affects not
only the health and safety of women but also the
political, economic and social stability of their nations.
As such, United Nations intergovernmental bodies —
in particular, the General Assembly, the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council and its
Commission on the Status of Women, as well as the
Peacebuilding Commission — all have a role to play in
fostering international action to eliminate this scourge
and deliver results.
I therefore wish to suggest a sharing of tasks
among these various bodies in order to accelerate
mutually reinforcing efforts in this crucial field. For
example, the Economic and Social Council could
ensure follow-up and monitoring of the indicators
developed by its Statistical Commission on violence
against women. Given its strong experience in
reviewing the achievement of development objectives,
particularly the Millennium Development Goals, the

10

Council could engage in this task with the real knowhow and institutional backup of the United Nations
system at large.
2010 has been a very constructive year for the
promotion of gender equality and the empowerment of
women at the United Nations. The Commission on the
Status of Women reviewed the Beijing Platform for
Action in March; the Economic and Social Council
adopted a ministerial declaration on the matter in July
following its annual ministerial review devoted to
gender equality and the empowerment of women; and
the General Assembly decided on the creation of
UN Women in July, a major step forward for the
operationalization of United Nations work in this field.
2011 will provide important opportunities to
follow up on those events. At its coordination segment
in July, the Economic and Social Council will review
the coordinated follow-up and implementation of the
ministerial declaration adopted this year. In so doing, it
will focus on the further mainstreaming of the gender
dimension in the work of the system at large and will
address the programmatic aspect of the work of
UN Women. The specific constituency, institutional
weight and networks of the Council, which relate to
what is commonly presented as its convening power,
will be used to ensure the political significance and
broad visibility of this exercise. This opportunity could
be used for a joint event with the Peacebuilding
Commission in order to review the status of women in
peacebuilding settings. It could also be an opportunity
for a presentation by the President of the Security
Council to the Economic and Social Council.
By maintaining close dialogue among our
different bodies, we can strengthen the impact of the
United Nations voice in our common areas of work. I
trust that this meeting today has been a valuable step in
this direction.
The President: I thank Mr. Ali for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Thelma Awori of the
Civil Society Advisory Group to the United Nations on
Women, Peace and Security.
Ms. Awori: I am grateful for the honour and
privilege of addressing the Council today and of
sharing the perspectives of civil society. A full
statement has been distributed, and out of respect for
the time constraints of this meeting I shall limit myself
to reading out a few paragraphs of that statement. I ask

10-60258

S/PV.6411

members to kindly take the time to read the full
statement later.
I would like to begin with one clear message
from civil society: We can no longer afford to wait. It
is time for action, not words. The experiences of
women during war are horrendous and their exclusion
from peace processes is frustrating. This exclusion is
costly not only to women but to the sustainability of
peace. Survivors of conflict and millions of women and
men around the world are looking to the Security
Council today to be bold. Communities rebuilding after
conflict cannot afford to omit more than 50 per cent of
their population from these efforts. To do so would
mean institutionalizing inequality, which is a recipe for
further conflict and instability.
The Security Council now has at its disposal all
the tools it needs to build a pragmatic programme of
accelerated implementation of its landmark resolution
1325 (2000). We have no need now to wait another
10 years for action. Indicators are in place, as
requested by the Council, and these will provide a
system for organizing evidence and an impetus for
cooperation within the United Nations and between the
United Nations and Member States. We look forward to
the Council endorsing these global indicators.
We urge the Security Council to endorse the
seven-point action plan included in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2010/466). There should be
systematic procedures to ensure that mediators consult
with women and that negotiators dialogue with
women’s groups. We look forward to seeing a greater
number of women mediators.
We all have our roles to play in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Civil
society has been at the forefront of these efforts,
bringing to public awareness the scope and breadth of
the problem. We have done much, but there is much to
be done. Civil society will continue to work to
empower women in war-affected regions, and to work
on the ground with policymakers to bring about global
peace and human security. We urge Member States to
commit to powerful and concrete steps to fully
implement resolution 1325 (2000) and to support
UN Women as a system lead on women, peace and
security. We urge Council members to be bold in
meeting this challenge. We look forward to the Council
taking up its commitments by endorsing the global
indicators on women, peace and security; by setting up

10-60258

consistent leadership and action on women, peace and
security; and by ensuring that there is accountability
for those whose lives have been affected by the
conflict. Member States should ensure that UN Women
is fully equipped with the resources to become the
United Nations system’s guide on women and peace
and security. A large portion of such resources should
be used to support programmes that allow women to
participate directly in all aspects of conflict
reconciliation, prevention and reconstruction.
Let us look at the past 10 years as years of
preparation, of building awareness of the breadth and
depth of the problem, of putting in place the structures
and the tools. But we must also note that these 10 years
of preparation have been costly to women’s health and
well-being. Hence the urgency of action. This second
decade must be the decade of action on resolution 1325
(2000). We cannot wait another 10 years for action.
The President: I thank Ms. Awori for her
briefing.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes,
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I shall now give the floor to the representatives of
Council members. I invite His Excellency Mr. Michael
Spindelegger, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Austria,
to take the floor.
Mr. Spindelegger (Austria): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative to convene
this high-level open debate on women and peace and
security, marking the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000). Your presence here today
shows the support of Uganda for the issue. Let me
further congratulate you on the efforts that resulted in
the presidential statement issued by Council today
(S/PRST/2010/22). I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for joining us from far away, which
is testimony to his personal commitment to this
subject.
It is a particular pleasure to welcome UnderSecretary-General Michelle Bachelet to the Chamber. I
would like to congratulate her on her appointment and

11

S/PV.6411

assure her of Austria’s full support. We are convinced
that UN Women will play a central role in further
advancing this agenda. We are equally grateful for the
valuable input of Ms. Thelma Awori, representing the
Civil Society Advisory Group on Women, Peace and
Security. Civil society has always been a driving force
behind this issue, and we look forward to further
advancing this agenda in close partnership.
When adopting that landmark resolution 10 years
ago, the Security Council recognized that equal
participation and representation and full involvement
of women in all aspects of peacebuilding and security,
and the protection of women as a group with specific
needs and concerns, as well as the prevention of sexual
and other violence, are not only security issues but also
vital to sustainable peace and stability. With the
adoption of resolutions 1888 (2009), on sexual
violence, and 1889 (2009), on women and girls in
post-conflict situations, the Council now possesses a
strong and well-developed normative framework.
Over the past decade, progress on implementation
has been slow and uneven. The real impact of resolution
1325 (2000) in many areas is yet to be felt on the
ground. All too often, women do not make it to the
tables where decisions that have a direct impact on
their lives are taken in peace processes or post-conflict
reconstruction. There are no issues that are not also
women’s issues. Every month, hundreds of women and
children fall victim to sexual violence before the eyes
of their Governments and the international community.
Women and girls with disabilities remain even more
vulnerable. Ten years on, our focus must therefore be
on how we can ensure better and more coherent
implementation of the objectives enshrined in these
resolutions and make a real difference for women in
conflict and post-conflict situations.
The Council has at its disposal a whole range of
tools for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
These include measures such as the mandates of
peacekeeping and other relevant missions, briefings
and reports and commissions of inquiry, as well as
targeted measures and sanctions. We have to be ready
to use these tools and to translate words into practice in
a consistent manner. We have to ensure that those who
disregard the Council’s decisions are held accountable.
The Arria Formula meeting of the Security
Council on 19 October, co-chaired by Austria, Mexico
and the United Kingdom, made it clear that we need

12

more information on progress and on what measures
have been successful. The comprehensive set of
indicators on resolution 1325 (2000), which received
the Council’s support today, will finally close this
important gap and provide us with qualitative and
quantitative data on important areas such as the
prevalence of sexual violence and the number of
women participating in peace processes. Such
information will allow us to better guide and target our
actions in the future. We hope that the indicators will
now become operational as a matter of urgency. We
believe that all Member States should use the
indicators relevant to their countries’ situation,
including in their national action plans, in order for us
to obtain a truly global picture of the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000).
As a next step, we request the Secretary-General
to include the information gathered on the basis of the
indicators in his country-specific and relevant thematic
reports in a systematic and comprehensive manner.
Without accurate and timely information, it is difficult
for the Council to take appropriate action in areas that
need our urgent attention, such as the prevention of
sexual violence. We hope the Council will in the future
also receive briefings on situations where data gathered
through the indicators suggests an outbreak of violence
against women or further deterioration of a situation.
Early warning and prevention are still the best
protection by far.
The issue of women and peace and security
should be on the agenda of the Council every time the
Council considers a country situation or a relevant
thematic issue. The establishment of an informal expert
group would have further enabled the Council to
evaluate information on the situation of women and
girls in conflict situations around the globe. We hope
that the Council will revert to this question in the near
future, once the indicators are fully operational. The
Security Council has to show active leadership and
shoulder its responsibility for implementing resolution
1325 (2000).
The high-level event on resolution 1325 (2000)
organized by Canada in the margins of the General
Assembly’s general debate has already provided us
with an opportunity to make concrete and measurable
commitments to implement the resolution. On that
occasion I announced some Austrian contributions, and
today I would like to add more. Due to limited time, I
will highlight only a few commitments; I refer the

10-60258

S/PV.6411

Council to the written version of my statement for
further details.
At the national level, Austria will take the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) as an
opportunity to revise our national action plan,
incorporate the crimes listed in the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, including gender crimes,
into
the Austrian
Criminal
Code,
improve
pre-deployment training of the Austrian armed forces
on gender relations and the role and participation of
women.
At the international level, Austria will provide
active support for UN Women, work together with
partner countries in the context of a twinning project to
support national action plans on resolution 1325
(2000), deploy gender experts and make available
immediate response personnel to address women’s and
girls’ needs.
Finally, let me reiterate my hope that the
commitments for action will not be a one-time effort
limited to the tenth anniversary. We are ready to follow
up on our commitments and review progress in
implementation on an annual basis at the open debates
on women and peace and security.
The President: I invite the Secretary of State of
the United States of America, Mrs. Hillary Rodham
Clinton, to take the floor.
Ms. Rodham Clinton (United States of
America): Mr. President, I want to thank you and the
Government of Uganda in its role as Council President
for convening this important meeting on the occasion
of the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000).
This meeting gives Member States and
non-governmental
organizations
an
invaluable
opportunity to reflect on what we have achieved over
the past decade, but more importantly, to look very
honestly at what remains to be done to fulfil the
promise we made to women a decade ago. We
promised that women would be treated as agents of
peace and reconciliation, not just as victims of war and
violence.
I would like to thank Secretary-General Ban for
his leadership. He has defined a vision for women’s
empowerment and protection that is guiding the
Organization, and he is helping to build the institutions
that can advance our collective mission.

10-60258

We are very fortunate to have with us today the
United Nations Under-Secretary-General, Michelle
Bachelet, the first head of UN Women. I am delighted
by her appointment and am very grateful for her
commitment and the excellent presentation that she has
already delivered. I also want to recognize Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Wallström,
who is working very hard and needs the support of all
of us to implement resolution 1888 (2009) on sexual
and gender violence. Those women are both dedicated
advocates for women’s rights and participation.
I also want to thank Under-Secretary-General Le
Roy, whose Department of Peacekeeping Operations
has taken groundbreaking steps to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). I thank him for increasing
protection measures for vulnerable women and
children and for integrating gender advisers into all
missions.
Finally, I would like to honour our colleagues in
civil society, many of whom are on the front lines,
literally on the battle lines, in the fight for gender
equality in conflict zones around the world. In
particular, I would like to thank Bineta Diop and Mary
Robinson, co-Chairs of the Civil Society Advisory
Group to the United Nations on Women, Peace and
Security, who have been tireless advocates for peace
and for women’s inclusion.
So here we are at the tenth anniversary of United
Nations Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). We
are here to reaffirm the goals set forth in that historic
resolution, but more than that, to put forth specific
actions, as my colleague, the Foreign Minister of
Austria, just did in such a commendable set of
proposals. The only way to achieve our goals, to
reduce the number of conflicts around the world, to
eliminate rape as a weapon of war, to combat the
culture of impunity for sexual violence, to build
sustainable peace, is to draw on the full contributions
of both women and men in every aspect of
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Women’s participation in those activities is not a
nice thing to do. It is not as though we are doing a
favour for ourselves and them by including women in
the work of peace. It is a necessary global security
imperative. Including women in the work of peace
advances our national security interests and promotes
political stability, economic growth and respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms. Just as in the

13

S/PV.6411

economic sphere we cannot exclude the talents of half
of the population, neither, when it comes to matters of
life and death, can we afford to ignore, marginalize and
dismiss the very direct contributions that women can
and have made.
President Obama’s national security strategy
recognizes that countries are more peaceful and
prosperous when women are accorded full and equal
rights and opportunity. When those rights and
opportunities are denied, countries lag behind. That is
also true when it comes to issues of human security,
accountability for sexual violence and the trafficking of
women and girls, and all of the other characteristics of
stable thriving societies that provide maternal and child
health care, education and so much else.
In defence, diplomacy and development, which
we consider to be the three pillars of our foreign
policy, we are putting women front and centre, not
merely as beneficiaries of our efforts, but as agents of
peace, reconciliation, economic growth and stability. In
Afghanistan, for example, our diplomatic efforts have
been rooted in the notion that respect for the rights of
women, as protected in the Afghan Constitution, is an
essential element of democracy and stability. The
United States has backed women’s inclusion at all
levels, including in the recently formed High Peace
Council, because we believe the potential for
sustainable peace will be subverted if women are
silenced or marginalized.
Our military has also begun to play an active role.
In Namibia, for example, the United States military
helped train nearly 600 peacekeepers on women’s
issues, who were then deployed to Chad. That type of
military-to-military engagement helps ensure that
soldiers understand their obligation to protect women
and girls in conflict areas and receive the training on
how to do that.
From Nepal to Guatemala to Uganda, our
development agency, USAID, is promoting women’s
roles in politics, supporting their participation in local
peace committees and helping develop plans to
implement resolution 1325 (2000). In fact, in the
future, every USAID project on conflict prevention or
management will study conflicts’ effects on women
and will include them in the planning and
implementation of such projects.
But neither the United States nor Member States
can do this work alone. We need the international

14

community. We certainly need organizations like the
International Committee of the Red Cross, which trains
women to treat landmine victims in Afghanistan, and
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
which works with men and boys to promote support for
women’s rights, and the United Nations itself, which is
building up new capacities to combat sexual violence.
These and other partners are absolutely essential for
fulfilling the promise of resolution 1325 (2000).
There is no starker reminder of the work still
ahead of us than the horrific mass rapes in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo last summer. Those
rapes — and our failure as an international community
to bring that conflict to an end and protect women and
children in the process — stand as a tragic rebuke to
our efforts thus far.
We all must do more, and we must think
creatively. Yes, we may have to challenge some
conventional wisdom about how best to end the
impunity not only of those who commit those horrible
violations of human rights, but also of those who
permit them to do so. While visiting Goma last year, I
pledged $17 million to help prevent and respond to
sexual and gender-based violence. This money is now
flowing to provide medical and legal services for
survivors.
In addition, the United States military’s Africa
Command has trained a battalion of Congolese soldiers
to work to prevent sexual violence, help victims and
prosecute perpetrators. We know that that is still not
happening. And we know that, unfortunately, there is
not yet the will either in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo itself, in the United Nations, or in the
international community to help bring about an end to
impunity.
Looking ahead, I am pleased to announce two
important steps the United States is taking to advance
the goals of resolution 1325 (2000). First, the United
States will commit nearly $44 million to a set of
initiatives designed to empower women; the largest
portion of approximately $17 million will support civil
society groups that focus on women in Afghanistan.
The women of Afghanistan are rightly worried that, in
the very legitimate search for peace, their rights will be
sacrificed. I have personally stated and I state here
again in the Security Council that none of us can
permit that to happen. No peace that sacrifices
women’s rights is a peace we can afford to support.

10-60258

S/PV.6411

Some
$14
million
will
also
go
to
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) working to
make clean water more available in conflict zones
because in these areas, when women and girls go
looking for water, they are at higher risk of being
attacked. Similarly, I had the honour of announcing the
Global Alliance for Clean Cookstoves last month —
another initiative that, with our support, can protect
women, who will not have to go out seeking firewood
or other forms of fuel if we can revolutionize the way
they are able to cook food for their families.
Another $1.7 million will help fund United
Nations activities, including Special Representative
Wahlström’s office, and $11 million will help to
expand literacy, job training and maternal health
services for refugee women and girls.
In addition to this new funding, our second step
will be to develop our own national action plan to
accelerate the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) across our Government and with our partners in
civil society. To measure progress on our plan, we will
adopt the indicators laid out in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2010/173). We will measure whether women
are effectively represented in the full range of
peacebuilding and reconstruction efforts, whether they
are protected against sexual violence and whether they
are the focus of conflict prevention, relief and
reconciliation efforts.
Measuring our progress will help us to be held
accountable and to identify those areas where we need
to do more. The national action plan and the new
funding I have announced are two important steps and
we will pursue them with total commitment, but as
several have already said, action plans and funding are
only steps towards a larger goal.
The draft presidential statement that we hope will
be adopted calls for another stocktaking in five years,
but we had better have more to report and we had
better have accomplished more between now and then.
If we have not, there will be those who will lose faith
in our international capacity to respond to such an
overwhelming need because, ultimately, we measure
our progress by the improvement in the daily lives of
people around the world. That must be our cause, and
empowering women to contribute all their talents to
this cause is our calling.

The President: I give the floor to Her Excellency
Ms. Makiko Kikuta, Parliamentary Vice-Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Japan.
Ms. Kikuta (Japan) (spoke in Japanese; English
text provided by the delegation): I am very pleased that
today’s open debate has been organized under the
leadership of the First Deputy Prime Minister of
Uganda, Mr. Eriya Kategaya, with high-level
participants from Member States.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon; the Executive Director of the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN Women), Ms. Michelle Bachelet;
Mr. Hamidon Ali, President of the Economic and
Social Council; and Ms. Thelma Awori, on behalf of
the Civil Society Advisory Group to the United Nations
on Women, Peace and Security, for their insightful
presentations.
First of all, on this tenth anniversary of the
adoption of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), I
would like once again to affirm, together with all
present here, the essential message of the resolution
that lasting peace can never be achieved without the
participation of women.
Over the past 10 years, Member States, the
United Nations system and civil society have engaged
jointly in an effort to achieve peace by enhancing the
protection and participation of women. However, when
we recall that innocent women and children remain the
principal victims of every conflict, we know that there
are many challenges yet to be overcome. In order to do
so, the international community needs to address in a
comprehensive manner the issues of prevention,
participation, protection and recovery.
One key to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) is monitoring. Japan therefore attaches great
importance to using the set of indicators that has been
developed to aid us in identifying comprehensively
how much needs to be done to make the objectives of
the resolution a reality. I believe that the indicators
must be applied globally with a view to both
preventing conflicts and providing early warning when
a conflict is about to erupt. Japan therefore supports
the Security Council’s endorsement of the set of
indicators and encourages its early use by United
Nations entities and Member States.

I thank the Member States, NGOs and others
represented here for joining us in this mission.

10-60258

15

S/PV.6411

Japan also welcomes the commitments contained
in the action plan for gender-responsive peacebuilding,
presented by the Secretary-General (see S/2010/466),
and hopes that they will be translated into action on the
ground with all due speed.
In the implementation of peacebuilding
strategies, the ways in which the international
community, including the United Nations, provides
support are of considerable consequence, as the
ownership of the countries concerned must be
respected. In particular, since we have a different
support structure in each country, we need to formulate
a country-specific strategy with a gender perspective
by enhancing the integration of peacekeeping
operations, political missions, the work of United
Nations country teams and other efforts.
The Government of Japan hopes that when it
becomes operational in January 2011, UN Women, led
by Ms. Bachelet, will provide leadership in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). For its part,
Japan is a candidate to join the first Executive Board of
UN Women and is determined to provide all possible
support for the activities of the new entity.
In April this year, Japan hosted the Security
Council ministerial open debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding (see S/PV.6299), with then-Minister for
Foreign Affairs Okada serving as President. The
presidential statement adopted at that meeting pointed
out the need for “an integrated approach, which
strengthens coherence between political, security,
development, human rights and rule of law activities”
(S/PRST/2010/7). We believe that the same approach
would prove effective in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).
When conflicts break out, civilians are always
under threat of violence, and the protection of women
and girls is therefore an important responsibility the
international community must shoulder. To that end,
cooperation between peacekeeping operations and
humanitarian organizations needs to be strengthened,
so that the voices of the people in the area where a
conflict is raging may be heard and their problems
properly addressed. We must also strengthen
governance in such countries, including in the areas of
the rule of law and the protection of human rights;
promote security sector reform, including in the
military and police sector; and ensure that a gender

16

perspective is incorporated into all of those activities in
order to protect women and girls.
And another point to be borne in mind is that
efforts for peace and security must be accompanied by
social and economic development. In particular, for
achieving stability in post-conflict societies, not only
must there be reconstruction at the country level, but it
is also essential to rebuild communities and empower
people affected by conflicts, employing a bottom-up
approach. Women must participate fully and effectively
in the reconstruction of society, development, and the
formulation
of
post-conflict
strategies.
And
cooperation with civil society is vital. Those elements
constitute the human security approach, to which Japan
attaches great importance.
In its Initiative on Gender and Development,
announced in 2005, Japan stipulated that, in the
implementation of official development assistance in
countries in or having just emerged from conflict, the
needs of women and the vulnerable would have to be
properly considered from the perspective of gender in
all phases, from emergency humanitarian assistance to
post-conflict peacebuilding. Through this initiative,
Japan has been contributing to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).
In Afghanistan, where many women still face
poverty and violence, Japan has been providing a range
of support for women, including efforts to promote
their economic empowerment and reduce poverty.
Now, at this critical moment for the country, Japan is
committed to enhancing its assistance for the
empowerment of women, with a view to helping
Afghan women transform themselves from the victims
of conflict to agents of peace.
By applying a gender perspective in the fields of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, the Government of
Japan has been attempting to create an environment in
which more women can play active roles. To cite a few
examples of its efforts in this area, Japan has sent
female Self-Defence Force personnel to train
peacekeepers in Africa, and it has also accepted women
from Timor-Leste at its National Defence Academy,
who are expected to join their country’s national forces
when they finish. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as part of its assistance to democratize the
police sector, it is providing training to a number of
women police officers, with a view to protecting and
promoting the human rights of women and children.

10-60258

S/PV.6411

Through its Programme for Human Resource
Development in Asia for Peacebuilding, which targets
both Japanese and other Asian participants, Japan has
also trained 55 women as professional civilian
peacebuilders over the last three years, and many are
now working in the field.
In preparation for the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of the resolution, the partnership among all
stakeholders
was
strengthened
through
the
establishment of the high-level steering committee and
the Civil Society Advisory Group. Today, however, we
need to reaffirm our commitment to implementing that
resolution, and to maintaining the momentum
generated at this meeting over the next ten years. For
its part, Japan would like to reaffirm its commitment to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000), both on its own
and working with the rest of the international
community.
The President: I now give the floor to the Head
of the National Commission to Prevent and Eradicate
Violence against Women of Mexico, Ms. Laura
Carrera.
Ms. Carrera (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I am
grateful for the valuable introductory remarks made by
the Secretary-General, Michelle Bachelet, Alain Le
Roy, Ambassador Hamidon Ali and Thelma Awori. I
also thank Mr. Eriya Kategaya, the First Deputy Prime
Minister of Uganda, for having convened this very
important debate.
I should like to convey to Ms. Bachelet the most
heartfelt congratulations from the Government of
Mexico upon her appointment as head of UN Women.
As she carries out her important mandate, she can rest
assured that in Mexico she has an ally committed to
gender equality. The women of the world and the
women of Latin America in particular are very proud
of her appointment.
Ten years ago, when it adopted resolution 1325
(2000), the Council acknowledged that women and
girls suffered disproportionately from the effects of
armed conflicts and were frequently the specific and
deliberate victims of various forms of violence. The
Security Council took an important step in
incorporating the agenda of women and peace and
security into its work and in recognizing the
importance of the participation of women in all stages
of armed conflict, post-conflict reconstruction and
peacebuilding.

10-60258

Women are part of the solution to the structural
problems of conflict and one of the driving forces
behind reconstruction. However, unless we provide
effective tools and mechanisms to ensure their
participation, we are perpetuating inequality,
maintaining the spiral of violence and delaying the
very solution of these conflicts.
The international community has developed a
robust legal framework for the protection of women in
armed conflicts. The challenge now is to achieve its
full implementation, given the lack of respect for the
standards of international law by parties to conflicts.
My delegation reiterates the importance of having a
comprehensive
strategy
for
compliance
with
international humanitarian law and human rights law as
an essential component in conflict situations.
The establishment of the International Criminal
Court represented an important step forward in the
fight against sexual violence and gender-related
violence. Mexico is fully convinced that we cannot
achieve lasting peace without guaranteeing the delivery
of justice, promoting accountability and fighting
impunity. We therefore support the decision of the
Secretary-General to carry out or support impartial and
independent investigations into cases of sexual
violence against women in the Republic of Guinea,
Timor-Leste and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to mention only a few cases.
The number of women appointed as Special
Representatives or to other senior positions has
increased since 2000, and gender advisors have been
deployed in almost half of the political and
peacekeeping missions. Furthermore, we have seen an
increase in the participation of women in decisionmaking, as well as in the operational functions in
peacekeeping operations.
Despite some progress, much remains to be done
for us to meet our responsibility to effectively address
the needs of women and to ensure that they do not
suffer the effects of violence inherent to armed
conflict.
Mexico believes it is crucial that the Security
Council adopt a systematic gender approach in its
activities and resolutions as a central element for
international peace and security and not as something
marginal or separate. Incorporating the gender
perspective in peacekeeping requires close cooperation
and coordination in the following areas: first, clear and

17

S/PV.6411

consistent decisions; complementary efforts with other
political bodies of the United Nations within their
respective mandates; support from the various
programmes, funds and agencies of the United Nations
and cooperation with regional organizations;
strengthening of the activities of strategic partners such
as civil society and humanitarian agencies; and, lastly,
timely action by States at the national level.
That is why we welcome the indicators
introduced by the Secretary-General in his report, as
they can serve as a valuable instrument for planning
and decision-making and can be used as a diagnostic
tool and road map. The most important thing is that we
be able, in coming years, to assess with certainty that
we are heading in the right direction.
The indicators could lay the foundations for a
coherent and coordinated approach for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). To achieve
this, we need additional efforts in order to ensure its
effective implementation and, above all, to change the
reality on the ground. The Council must begin by
implementing the indicators in its own work and
decisions.
The empowerment of women and gender equality
are our common responsibility. Every State must take
the necessary measures, in the light of its own
particular situation. Mexico understands that the
provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) are also relevant
for countries that are not facing a situation of armed
conflict. Under a violence-prevention approach, my
country has highlighted the need for a discussion on
the implementation of that resolution.
Mexico is not a stranger to the phenomenon of
violence and its consequences for women and girls. We
have sought to adopt a comprehensive approach for the
social prevention of violence, together with efforts to
strengthen protection measures. While my country
faces challenges, the institutions in charge of ensuring
security and law enforcement — the federal police and
the armed forces — are receiving gender training, and
increasing numbers of women are joining this
important effort.
Furthermore, as we know that women must take
part in all aspects of public life, we have promoted the
legislative changes necessary to ensure their equal
inclusion in decision-making processes in the areas of
public security and the prevention of violence.

18

My country is pleased with the tireless efforts
carried out by civil society as the engine for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), as it is a
force for change on the ground. We draw the attention
of the Security Council to the importance of the gender
perspective and to reprehensible acts of gender related
and sexual violence against women.
The recent Arria Formula meeting drew our
attention to the importance of broadening the
involvement of women in peace processes, as well as
addressing the needs of particularly vulnerable groups,
such as women with disabilities.
The scope of resolution 1325 (2000) has not been
exhausted, as has often been said in this forum. On the
contrary, much remains to be done to ensure the
implementation of the four resolutions that have been
adopted on the subject. Today we can say that we are
on the right track.
Mexico believes that this joint discussion is
bringing us closer to the goal of eliminating the effect
of conflict on women and ensuring their involvement
on an equal footing in all aspects of international peace
and security. The decisions that we have adopted to
protect women’s rights and to ensure their participation
will be our best investment in a future of peace and
stability. Today we have this opportunity, as well as the
responsibility that goes with it towards the women and
girls of the world.
I would like to conclude by expressing Mexico’s
support for the presidential statement that the Council
adopted at this meeting.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina):
Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes and greatly
appreciates the convening of this meeting to mark the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). We view this anniversary as an
opportunity to look back on our achievements while
also assessing what remains to be done in the next
decade in order to fully implement the resolution’s
provisions and advance women’s participation in peace
and security.
We would like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, Under-Secretary-General Michelle Bachelet,
Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy, the President
of the Economic and Social Council His Excellency

10-60258

S/PV.6411

Datuk Hamidon Ali and Ms. Thelma Awori for their
comprehensive briefings. We extend our warm
welcome to the ministers from Austria, the United
States and Uganda, the Vice-Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Japan and Ms. Laura Carrera of Mexico, as
well as the other ministers present here today.
At the outset, I would like to emphasize that
Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), the
provisions of which have been incorporated into the
Bosnia and Herzegovina gender action plan and the
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in Bosnia and Herzegovina for the period
2010-2013.
The establishment of UN Women, the
appointment of its head and the appointment of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict are important recent
developments. We believe they will ensure that the
United Nations is working in a concerted and
coordinated manner and will strengthen the capacity of
the United Nations system to match the commitment to
gender equality with the leadership, resources and
expertise needed to deliver changes on the ground. The
further development of indicators to track the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) will be a
significant step in broadening this agenda.
Contemporary conflicts create situations in which
women and children are most affected by the
deterioration of living conditions and fundamental
rights. Deprivation of rights and violence often go hand
in hand with conflict. We emphasize that rape as a
weapon of war is unacceptable. Efforts
to
fight
impunity, provide assistance to victims and hold
perpetrators accountable must be intensified and better
coordinated. Regrettably, sexual and gender-based
violence often continue after peace deals are reached,
due to insufficient investment in protection and
prevention strategies or weak security and justice
institutions.
We are aware of the fact that peace cannot be
sustained unless women play a critical role in the
process. We therefore underscore the importance of full
and effective participation of women at all stages of
peace processes, giving them an equal role in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts as well as in
early peacebuilding. Women must be fully engaged in
peace talks, post-conflict needs assessments and

10-60258

planning frameworks. This is particularly relevant with
regard to financial allocations to address their specific
needs and improve gender equality.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has taken significant
steps to integrate the gender perspective into national
policies. We are among the first countries in the
Western Balkans region to have adopted a national
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Goals in the plan include increasing the
participation of women in decision-making positions at
all levels of public administration, increasing the
number of women in leadership positions within police
and military forces, increasing the participation of
women in peacekeeping operations and introducing a
gender perspective in the training of personnel for
peacekeeping missions. The goals also include
increasing the knowledge and capacity of State
services to apply resolution 1325 (2000) and improving
cooperation with non-governmental and international
organizations in the implementation of the resolution.
Each goal in the national action plan has a timeline and
indicators for monitoring implementation.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has also adopted a
gender action plan. The two documents link activities
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and international activities
by addressing a broader concept of women and peace
and security, translating them into genuine political
commitments and mainstreaming 1325 issues across
the relevant Government and non-government sectors.
We are convinced that these activities will certainly
accelerate the implementation of the resolution in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and contribute to the common
goal of empowerment and protection of women.
Indeed, much has been accomplished in the past
decade. But much remains to be done to obtain real
results for women on the ground. To that end, it is of
vital importance for the Security Council to continue to
use all tools at its disposal for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), as appropriate.
At the same time, Member States need to take
decisive action, accompanied with clear goals,
baselines and indicators to monitor and assess its
implementation. The goals for the future have been
identified. Now we must have the will and persistence
to achieve them. I can assure the Council of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s full cooperation in that endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of France.

19

S/PV.6411

Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): France
aligns itself with the statement that will be made on
behalf of the European Union.
Implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
remains imperfect. Sexual violence continues at an
intolerable level, and only 7 per cent of peace
negotiating teams are women. Hence, a great deal
remains to be done. This tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) should mark the
start of fresh efforts by the international community.
France is fully playing its role in these efforts, as
reflected in its adoption of a national action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The
national action plan sets out four strategic goals:
protecting women from violence and mobilizing efforts
to ensure respect for their basic rights; ensuring the
participation of women in the management of conflict
and post-conflict situations by promoting the direct
participation of women in peacekeeping missions and
supporting civil society efforts; increasing awareness
of women’s rights through training programmes; and
developing political and diplomatic action to promote
the women and peace and security agenda, particularly
in the European Union and in the Security Council.
France was instrumental in recasting operational
documents of the European Security and Defence
Policy to include protection of women in conflict
situations and promotion of their role with respect to
emerging from crisis. In that regard, France believes
that the United Nations should in the future focus on
three priorities: combating sexual violence; employing
indicators to monitor implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) by the United Nations system; and
increasing the contribution of women to conflict
resolution.
With respect to combating sexual violence,
France supports the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and calls for accelerated
appointment of women’s protection advisers in
peacekeeping missions. We look forward to specific
proposals in the next report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolution 1820 (2008),
which is due in December.
In more general terms, France will continue its
efforts to integrate into peacekeeping operations the
approach recommended in resolution 1325 (2000) and

20

to convince parties to conflict themselves to do the
same in their peace processes.
The fight against impunity is integral to our
approach. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
following the mass rapes that took place in Walikale
last summer, we call upon the Council to remain
vigilant in monitoring compliance with the
recommendations set out its presidential statement of
17 September (S/PRST/2010/17) with a view to
punishing the perpetrators and to preventing such
horrors from happening again.
Also, indicators to monitor the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) are a useful tool for Member
States and the United Nations system in monitoring
progress and, when necessary, in noting setbacks. They
can also provide early warning, making it possible to
anticipate crises and prevent them from degenerating
into armed conflict. We call on the Secretary-General
to operationalize these indicators as quickly as
possible. This would help improve the monitoring of
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
In that regard, let me once again draw attention to
the situation in Guinea, where the announced
postponement of the presidential election and the
incidents of recent days are cause for concern,
including as regards women if we bear in mind what
happened during the massacre of 28 September 2009
and the ensuing days.
Finally, with respect to the participation of
women in conflict resolution, France welcomes the
progress that has been made. This has been outlined by
Ms. Bachelet and Mr. Le Roy, and I shall not return to
it now.
In closing, I commend the establishment of
UN Women and the appointment of Ms. Bachelet as its
Executive Director. Beyond the contribution of the
Security Council, the entire United Nations system
needs to intensify its action to free women from the
scourge of war.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset,
Mr. President, let me thank you for organizing this
high-level open debate. I commend the efforts of the
Ugandan delegation in the preparation of the
presidential statement we adopted earlier today. We
also welcome the presence of ministers from Austria,

10-60258

S/PV.6411

the United States and Japan, as well as of other
ministers and high officials and representatives of civil
society organizations. I wish also to express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2010/498), which contains
valuable recommendations on addressing the
challenges regarding women and peace and security.
I
take
this
opportunity
to
welcome
Under-Secretary-General Michelle Bachelet and to
assure her of my country’s full support and cooperation.
As we mark the tenth anniversary of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), Turkey is strongly
committed to the full implementation of that resolution
and three subsequent resolutions on women and peace
and security.
Since the adoption of the landmark resolution
1325 (2000), there has been progress across a broad
range of issues with regard to the protection and
promotion of women’s and girls’ rights in conflictaffected situations. Thanks to the efforts of the
international community, a strong understanding of the
need for gender equality and women’s empowerment
as a prerequisite for international peace and security is
taking hold. In that context, I should like to commend
the efforts by various United Nations entities and those
of non-governmental organizations and women’s
organizations that are working selflessly to achieve the
goals of resolution 1325 (2000).
However, despite the progress achieved so far, we
cannot fail to note that much remains to be done,
particularly in the area of implementation. As today’s
debate and the report of the Secretary-General have
shown us, many structural and institutional
impediments remain, which we should overcome in
order to meet the challenges before us.
We believe that urgent action is needed to protect
and empower women. Likewise, equally strong
measures are needed to increase the participation of
women in the work of peace, including post-conflict
recovery efforts, as that will increase the effectiveness
of such efforts. Indeed, we should not forget that
women in post-conflict countries are not merely
victims of war. As underlined by the Secretary-General
today, they are also agents of change towards
modernization and transformation.
We have to redouble our efforts in the fight
against impunity. Targeted and graduated measures

10-60258

should be imposed against the perpetrators of sexual
and gender-based violence and rape. We believe that in
tackling the issue of women’s security, we should
move from ad hoc approaches towards a systematic
one. To that end, the calls of resolutions 1325 (2000),
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009) should all
become a regular part of the work of the Council. The
comprehensive set of indicators set out in the annex to
the report of the Secretary-General is extremely useful
in helping the United Nations and Member States to
assess the status of implementation and determine the
actions
needed
to
overcome
implementation
challenges.
We are confident that the newly established UN
Women will further strengthen our work by helping the
United Nations pursue its efforts in a more systemized
and coordinated manner in areas related to women,
peace and security.
We believe that gender equality and the
empowerment of women should be at the core of our
efforts. The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs),
in particular Goal 3 — promoting gender equality and
the empowerment of women — will no doubt reinforce
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The
international community should regularly review the
implementation of MDG3, including its commitments
in that regard.
In our opinion, the United Nations should
develop and adopt a comprehensive framework that
includes agreed goals and time-bound targets and
guidelines for the realization of gender equality and the
empowerment of women.
I wish to conclude by underlining my country’s
commitment to the human rights of women all around
the world. We wish to see women take their rightful
place in the economic, social and political life of their
societies. In Turkey we are committed to that goal. We
will therefore continue our support for the
implementation of the resolutions on women and peace
and security.
The President: I
representative of Nigeria.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): My first words must be to
commend you, Mr. President, for convening this
auspicious debate to mark a decade since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000). I must also thank the
Secretary-General for his report in document

21

S/PV.6411

S/2010/498 and indeed for his earlier report in
document S/2010/466, on women’s participation in
peacebuilding. We believe that both reports
exhaustively consider how we can together better the
situation of women at every stage of the conflict cycle.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the presence of several ministers, Economic
and Social Council President Hamidon Ali and others
who have joined us to mark the anniversary. I
congratulate and welcome in particular Ms. Michelle
Bachelet in her new role as Executive Director of
UN Women. Nigeria recognizes the value of pooling
the efforts of the various United Nations actors in this
area. We are certain that Ms. Bachelet and her team
will make a major contribution to mainstreaming
gender perspectives in the area of women, peace and
security.
It is a well-known fact that women rarely initiate
violent conflicts, yet they suffer its worst consequences
on multiple fronts: physically, psychologically,
economically, socially and politically. Too often,
women fall victim to predatory warlords, who
systematically use rape and sexual violence as a
weapon of war. Their suffering is compounded by their
exclusion from key decision-making processes that
might lead to peace and stability.
As sombre as that background may be, there is
reason to celebrate the modest progress made in the
first decade of resolution 1325 (2000).
At the global level, the Council has devoted more
attention to the issue of on women and peace and
security, leading to the adoption of resolutions 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009). The appointments
of Ms. Wallström as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
of Ms. Bachelet to head the newly created UN Women
combine to give greater impetus to the efforts to place
women at the top of the global agenda. Taking into
account the work of other United Nations actors, the
Organization’s collective effort on resolution 1325
(2000) this past decade has been very significant.
Nigeria is pleased to count its achievements as
part of that modest progress. Our priorities on women
can be summed up in four words: empower, prevent,
protect and promote. We acknowledge the pivotal role
that women play in conflict prevention, and we pay
particular attention to their unique vulnerabilities in
time of conflict.

22

In all aspects of Government, including our
military and policing strategies, we have worked to
ensure that women are adequately represented. We
have eight female ministers in the Federal Executive
Council, eight female senators and 280 female judges,
including three on the Supreme Court of Nigeria. The
highest-ranking police officer in Nigeria’s centralized
police force is a woman. In 2007, a Nigerian woman
was elected for the first time in Africa as Speaker of
the House of Representatives, Nigeria’s fourth highest
political office.
As a signatory the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Dakar Declaration of last
month, Nigeria has committed to accelerate the
national and regional implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). The Declaration calls for a regional
action plan within ECOWAS to support national action
plans. ECOWAS will coordinate and collaborate with
the United Nations Office for West Africa and with
UN Women in this process.
With 373 female peacekeepers, Nigeria ranks first
among troop-contributing countries in the number of
women among its military and police personnel
wearing the Blue Helmet in ongoing peacekeeping
operations. We believe that female peacekeepers have a
comparative advantage when liaising with local
communities on matters such as sexual exploitation,
abuse and violence. In this regard, we applaud the
production this year of the analytical inventory of good
practices used by military peacekeepers to prevent
sexual violence against women and girls, and the
overall increase in the number of women police
officers and gender advisers in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and political missions.
In spite of the hard work and oft-expressed
commitments of the international community to the
principles of resolution 1325 (2000), serious challenges
remain. The Secretary-General observes in his report
that “10 years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), significant achievements are difficult to
identify or quantify” (S/2010/498, para. 3). The July
mass rapes in the Walikale region of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo reminds us of how ineffective
our efforts in combating sexual violence still are. This
is a failure not of one country or organization, but of
our collective international response.
many

Nowhere is this failure more pronounced than in
of our decision-making structures, which

10-60258

S/PV.6411

underrepresent women in conflict prevention and
peacemaking processes. Not only do we lose out on the
unique contribution that women can make to peace and
stability, but we also render ourselves complicit in their
marginalization. It is little wonder that these omissions
have contributed to poor social cohesion, fragile social
value systems and the culture of impunity.

This Council has adopted many resolutions over
the decades, but few have changed the way in which
we look at conflict. Resolution 1325 (2000) did just
that. In many respects, it opened the Council’s eyes to
what now seems obvious — that women are not only
the principal victims of many conflicts, but also that
they are essential to preventing and resolving conflict.

The Secretary-General’s report highlights areas of
strength and weakness in our current approach. His
recommendations,
if
supported,
can
enhance
coordination and effectiveness. The problem of
fragmentation and overlap in the United Nations
system demands a framework for implementation and
accountability. Given that the System-wide Action Plan
has not resulted in measurable improvements in that
contribution of the United Nations system to the
empowerment of women in conflict situations, it is not
a model for replication at the country level. We
recognize the need for the further elaboration of the
envisaged reporting template and guidance for data
collection in order to ensure that the indicators
contained in the Secretary-General’s report can be
applied in order to truly monitor and appraise the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) worldwide.

British Foreign Secretary William Hague regrets
that he is not able to be here, but he has today issued a
statement to mark this debate, from which I shall now
quote.

The members of the entire United Nations family
are accountable for the change that we all seek today. It
is therefore vital that the Security Council take forward
the indicators and remain apprised of the ongoing
challenges in implementing the resolution. I would
encourage countries that are yet to do so to develop
and deploy their national action plans in line and in
consonance with resolution 1325 (2000), and indeed
make efforts to infuse gender perspectives into
policymaking at all stages of the conflict cycle.
We believe that true peace can be sustained only
when each individual human being achieves freedom,
secures dignity and leads a fulfilled life. This is the
ultimate aim of resolution 1325 (2000).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Kingdom.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his introduction
this morning and to congratulate Ms. Bachelet, Alain Le
Roy, Ambassador Ali, Thelma Awori and the
participating ministers for their important interventions.
I would also like to thank you, Sir, and Uganda for
leading the Council’s efforts to mark the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).

10-60258

“Countless women have dedicated their
lives, and in some cases sacrificed their lives in
order to bring peace to societies ravaged by war
and to stand up for human rights.
“Today … we pay tribute to these women
and reaffirm our commitment to work for the
protection of women in armed conflict and for
their active involvement in conflict resolution.
“No society can address its problems by
drawing solely on the talents of only half of the
population. Lasting peace cannot be …
achieved … unless there is justice for the female
victims of war and unless they are actively
involved in rebuilding societies in which their
rights are respected and their voices are heard.”
Today is first an opportunity to reflect on the
progress we have made since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000). At the United Nations, we now have a
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
tackle violence against women in conflict, a new agency
in the form of UN Women, and a greater number of
women in leadership roles. Outside the United Nations,
22 Member States have adopted national action plans.
Partnerships between Governments and women’s
organizations and the integration of gender perspectives
into development, political and defence policies are
increasingly common. We should pay particular tribute
to the role that is being played by women’s groups and
civil society to build awareness and strengthen the
argument for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) on the ground.
But recent events in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo serve as a sobering reminder of the scale of
the challenges we still face. We welcome the two
high-profile arrests for the mass rapes that took place in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo this summer as

23

S/PV.6411

the first sign that impunity will not be tolerated. As the
Security Council witnessed on our recent mission to the
Sudan, devastating sexual violence continues to destroy
the lives of women trying to rebuild communities in
Darfur. And yet, during that visit we also had the
chance to hear how inspiring women leaders are
striving to rebuild inclusive and democratic societies in
southern Sudan. Overall, as the Secretary-General’s
latest report (S/2010/498) confirms, the burden of
conflict still falls primarily on the very part of society
that we rely on to rebuild families and communities.
Looking forward, there are three main challenges
on which we shall need to focus in the coming years.
First, we still lack effective methods for
understanding the problem and monitoring the impact
of our work. The adoption today of indicators
represents an important step forward. We will, for the
first time, be able to understand the scale of the
challenges we face, evaluate the progress we are
making and target our approaches more effectively. We
encourage the Secretary-General to operationalize
these indicators as widely as possible.
Secondly,
women
remain
acutely
underrepresented in peace negotiations, and they are
often marginalized in efforts to build sustainable peace.
As others have said, fewer than one in five peace
agreements contain specific provisions on women’s
rights and needs. We need to ensure that women are
included in conflict resolution and post-conflict
peacebuilding as a matter of course. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s report on women’s participation in
peacebuilding (S/2010/466) as an important step in that
direction.
Thirdly, we must ensure that the entire
international community takes responsibility for
implementing resolution 1325 (2000). This requires
more than just warm words; it requires meaningful
actions that will ultimately make a difference to the
situation of women on the ground. Making this
difference, i.e. protecting women and supporting their
participation in conflict resolution and peacebuilding,
is a global challenge that requires action by all Member
States.
The tenth anniversary has brought new
momentum to this Council’s work on women, peace
and security. The challenge now is to translate that
momentum into concrete action on the ground. The
United Kingdom stands ready to play its part. The

24

British Government has just approved a new action
plan that sets out our future commitments, including
specific strategies for supporting women in priority
countries, such as Afghanistan, Nepal and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
All of us, the United Nations, Member States and
regional organizations, must seize the opportunity and
take forward this ambitious agenda.
The President: I
representative of Brazil.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his statement to us this morning.
I would also like to extend a special greeting to UnderSecretary-General Michelle Bachelet, who joins us
today for the first time in her capacity as head of
UN Women. We are delighted at her appointment and
pledge our full support to her.
I welcome the contributions of several ministers
and high-level officials. I also recognize the presence
of Ms. Margot Wallström, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. I
am grateful to Ambassador Hamidon Ali, to UnderSecretary-General Alain Le Roy and to Ms. Thelma
Awori for their remarks.
Since its adoption 10 years ago, resolution 1325
(2000) has sparked a revolution of ideas. It has placed
the role of women as agents of peace at the forefront of
the multilateral agenda. It has made the case for the
appointment of women to positions of decision-making
related to peace and security. It has galvanized civil
society and transformed the way it interacts with the
Council. It has helped us to understand the importance
of women in peacekeeping missions and induced many
Governments to deploy more female troops and police
officers and, in some cases, all-female units.
Yet much remains to be done. Sexual violence
continues to be used as a weapon of war, and
peacekeeping missions still struggle to protect women.
The participation by women and the representation of
women still represent small fractions of what those
rates should be. But, at least today we have a much
better understanding of the challenges we face and the
goals we must meet. This is no small achievement and
it should be celebrated and built upon.
In the discussions of ways to enhance
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), the role of
indicators has become a focus of our attention.

10-60258

S/PV.6411

Indicators are an important tool to improve information
on the impact of armed conflict on women and on the
role they can play in peacebuilding. They will enable
us to respond more effectively and improve our action
in protecting women and involving them in peace
processes. Brazil welcomes such efforts and will
closely follow the Secretariat’s endeavours to render
them operational.
Like much of resolution 1325 (2000), most of the
indicators apply only to countries in conflict or
emerging from it. Nevertheless, some indicators have a
much wider applicability, such as the ones pertaining to
United Nations field missions or investigation of
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse by
peacekeepers. This gives the set of indicators a truly
global character. In this context we note with
appreciation the wide-ranging consultations undertaken
by the Secretariat with regional groups while preparing
the indicators.
Valuable as they may be, indicators are not
enough. They are but a means to an end. We must work
harder to effect concrete changes through action. It is
important to increase engagement by the Governments
concerned. National action plans are important vehicles
in this regard, especially if they also involve a broad
range of actors, including civil society. It is also
important that action plans be supported by adequate
funding.
If women’s concerns and needs in conflict
situations are to be properly addressed and if women
are to play an equal part in maintaining peace, they
must be politically and economically empowered.
Representation at all levels of decision-making and
access to economic opportunities are key in this regard.
In post-conflict situations, where institutions are rebuilt
and gradually consolidated, there is often a window of
opportunity to surmount historical gender inequalities.
In that context, it is essential that constitutional,
political and educational reform processes, as well as
programmes aimed at economic revitalization, give
special attention to the role of women.
Peacekeeping and peacebuilding are important
ways by which the United Nations can strengthen the
role of women as agents of peace; so much so that
empowering women and protecting their rights should
not be the exclusive task of gender advisers in
peacekeeping operations, but rather a responsibility
shared by all mission components. Mission-wide

10-60258

strategies, encompassing United Nations country-teams
and other actors whenever possible, can develop
protection plans, ensure that the voices of women are
heard, facilitate women’s participation in peace
negotiations,
foster
women’s
leadership
and
organization, and promote capacity-building that will
support women’s empowerment. We commend the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations for the
progress it has made in this regard and welcome the
suggestions just offered by Under-Secretary-General
Alain Le Roy to further strengthen women’s role in
peacekeeping.
In my own country there has been compelling
evidence that, when women are empowered, they can
act successfully to change their lives and the lives of
those around them. Under “Bolsa Familia”, a
conditional cash transfer programme that has lifted
millions of Brazilians out of poverty, women are the
preferred recipients of transfers. As a result, their
bargaining power in family relations has increased, and
their influence has become stronger on issues such as
family planning, education of children and use of the
family’s income. Although Brazil’s reality differs
greatly from those of post-conflict countries, we feel
that our experience validates a principle that is
essential to the promotion of women’s role in such
societies.
That is why we are actively seeking to ensure that
women and their needs are taken into account in our
cooperation with post-conflict countries. Two examples
come to mind, both regarding Haiti: our collaboration
with the United Nations Population Fund and with
OXFAM to support the implementation of Haiti’s
National Plan for the Prevention of Violence Against
Women, through capacity-building and awarenessraising; and our support to establish a trades and
services vocational training centre, which will have
programmes especially geared towards women.
In conclusion, resolution 1325 (2000) has enabled
us to gain a better understanding and appreciation of
the transformative role women can play in conflict and
post-conflict situations. We must strive to ensure that
its goals are fully realized.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like to begin by thanking you,
Sir, for taking the initiative to organize this debate to
assess the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on
its tenth anniversary, which the Council is celebrating

25

S/PV.6411

today. We would also like to pay tribute to your
country, Uganda, for the efforts made to organize this
important meeting. My delegation also thanks the
Secretary-General for his important communication.
We welcome the presence here of Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, Under-Secretary-General for Gender Equality
and the Empowerment of Women and thank her for
introducing the annual report of the Secretary-General
on women, peace and security (S/2010/498). Lastly, we
would like to welcome the participation of the
Ministers who have come here to lead their delegations;
Mrs. Asha-Rose Migiro, Deputy Secretary-General; His
Excellency Mr. Hamidon Ali, President of the
Economic and Social Council; Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations; and
Ms. Thelma Awori. We thank them for their respective
contributions.
In your concept paper, Mr. President, you invite
us to review the progress made ten years after the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) by the Council. We
would like to speak on two points — the progress we
have made and the challenges that remain ahead as we
seek to achieve the effective implementation of this
major resolution.
The adoption of this resolution has marked a
historic step in the United Nations consideration of the
participation of women in the peace process and the
strengthening of protection for women and girls from
violence in conflict and post-conflict situations.
Council resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and
1889 (2009) have made it possible to better coordinate
the efforts of the international community aimed at
ensuring a greater involvement of women in seeking
solutions to problems of peace and security.
As
the report of the Secretary-General rightly points out,
this issue is now an integral part of the Security
Council’s agenda. Similarly, many reports of the
Secretary-General on peacekeeping operations contain
information on actions that are aimed at guaranteeing
the participation of women in conflict prevention,
management and peacebuilding.
At the national level, many countries have taken
the issue on by adopting action plans that seek to give
effect to the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council. For its part, Gabon has taken concrete
measures that make it possible today for many women
to assume important responsibilities, including at the
highest levels in all branches of the army and the

26

police force. Their role in seeking solutions to security
problems in our country is crucial.
The President of the Republic, His Excellency Ali
Bongo Ondimba, has given expression to this
important endeavour by promoting a woman of great
experience to the high-level functions of the Minister
of Defence. She now has the onerous responsibility of
steering government action in the areas of defence and
security.
Within the framework of the United Nations, we
must welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General
aimed at ensuring an increasing participation of women
in positions of responsibility in peace missions. That
has been the case in the Central African Republic,
Liberia, Timor-Leste, Nepal and Cyprus.
Operationally, the important contribution of
women in the various areas of peacekeeping operations
is an achievement that deserves to be noted, as
Ms. Bachelet and Mr. Le Roy have done so well. I
would like to reaffirm here that the readiness of Gabon
to continue to work closely with the United Nations
and other Member States in order to assume its share of
the responsibility in strengthening the progress
achieved thus far.
While we are pleased with those important
achievements, we are forced to acknowledge that much
remains to be done in order to reach the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). This leads
me to my second point.
Everyone agrees that women and children are the
main targets of armed conflict. They make up the
majority of refugees and displaced persons in the
world. Violence against women and girls is a flagrant
violation of human rights. Those responsible for such
heinous crimes should be prosecuted and brought to
justice. In this area, the Security Council must ensure,
through its sanctions committees, a scrupulous respect
for international humanitarian law in armed conflict
situations and promote capacity-building for States in
the area of criminal justice in order to bring an end to
impunity. Therefore, peace missions must be equipped
with greater operational capabilities for the protection
of women and girls. Indeed, the real challenge here is
to transform the strategic vision expressed in resolution
1325 (2000) into a tangible reality.
From this point of view, the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General’s report warrant our

10-60258

S/PV.6411

consideration. As for the indicators, the SecretaryGeneral’s report points out that many of them will not
be operational until two years from now. We therefore
encourage the Secretary-General to continue his
consultations with Member States and regional groups
on the practical modalities of those indicators.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
provide its full support to the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2010/22) that was adopted at the beginning of
this discussion. We express the wish that, under the
leadership of Ms. Michelle Bachelet, whose
appointment we once again welcome, the new entity,
UN Women, will enable better coordination and more
effective action by the United Nations in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) throughout the upcoming
decade. We are convinced that it is with the essential
contribution of women that we will manage to achieve
our aspirations for more peace and security in an
international environment characterized by recurring
conflict.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Allow me first to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this important and
timely debate. Allow me also to thank His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Mrs. Asha-Rose
Migiro, Deputy Secretary-General; Ms. Michelle
Bachelet,
Under-Secretary-General
for
Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women; Mr. Alain
Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; His Excellency Mr. Hamidon Ali,
President of the Economic and Social Council; and
Ms. Thelma Awori for their briefings. I would also like
to take this opportunity to welcome the Ministers
participating in our debate today.
As we mark the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), let us take this opportunity
to examine the progress that has been achieved, as well
as the challenges that persist. Over the past decade, the
United Nations system, Member States and civil
society have made significant efforts to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) through a wide spectrum of
measures and initiatives. Considerable progress has
been made in increasing awareness of the threat that
sexual violence constitutes to peace and security and of
the cost of excluding women from peace processes. In
the 10 years since the adoption of the resolution, many
steps have been taken on the ground, including

10-60258

increasing the number of gender advisers, the adoption
of guidelines for field action and the elaboration of a
System-wide Action Plan. Member States have
organized consultations and developed national action
plans, and civil society organizations have stepped up
their activities to support the role of women in areas of
conflict and post-conflict. The creation of a new United
Nations gender entity and the appointment of President
Michelle Bachelet as its head, the appointment of
Ms. Margot Wallström as the Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict and the creation of a
High-Level Steering Committee for Women, Peace and
Security have generated unique momentum within the
United Nations and beyond.
However, despite these important efforts, the
conditions that women and girls face in situations of
armed conflict continue to be abhorrent, and effective
methods for monitoring the impact of the measures put
in place to protect them are lacking, as pointed out by
the Secretary-General in his report (S/2010/498). Rape
continues to be used unabated as a weapon of war, as
the events of July 2010 in the eastern provinces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo shockingly
reminded us. Out of 300 peace agreements negotiated
since 1989, only 18 contain even a passing reference to
sexual violence, which remains the least-condemned
war crime. Of particular concern is the problem of
sexual violence against displaced women, a
phenomenon that is widespread and growing. One way
to ensure prevention and a more effective response to
such acts of violence is through the dissemination of
the guidelines established by the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee.
As they care for their families and raise their
children, women play a crucial role in restoring the
fabric of society and overcoming war wounds. Yet,
their own wounds are still not being properly remedied.
In that regard, reforming the security sector and
ensuring respect for the rule of law in a genderresponsive manner is of crucial importance. Conflict
and post-conflict societies should be assisted in those
areas at the earliest possible moment in order to ensure
that the police and military do not abuse the very
population whom they are supposed to be protecting.
In recent peace negotiations, women represented
less than 8 per cent of the participants and less than 3
per cent of the signatories. That endangers the
prospects for long-lasting peace since women are
crucial partners in shoring up three of its pillars:

27

S/PV.6411

economic recovery, social cohesion and political
legitimacy, as affirmed by the Secretary-General in his
recent report (S/2010/466).
Including women in peace talks is not enough by
itself. In some post-conflict societies, women who have
been victims of sexual violence, widows and orphan
girls are ostracized, exacerbating the challenges that
they must overcome and compromising the prospects
for enduring peace. Hence, more concerted efforts must
be made in order to raise awareness among men and
sensitize them to the importance of safeguarding
women’s rights for durable peace and the well-being of
society as a whole.
A shortfall in the financing of women’s needs in
post-conflict recovery plans persists. Donors could play
a very constructive role in that regard by supporting
women’s and girls’ education. Donors should also help
women to attain economic independence through land
ownership, micro-enterprise and skills training.
As pointed out by the Secretary-General, Member
States must ensure that their support for women’s
engagement in peacebuilding is consistent. While
Governments have the primary responsibility to take
action in their countries, when need be, they must be
able to count on the predictable support of United
Nations partners. Despite the increase in female
participation in United Nations missions, only 3 per
cent of uniformed peacekeepers and 8 per cent of
United Nations police are women. Increasing their
numbers would help improve the sense of security of
women in vulnerable situations.
Finally, efforts to implement resolution 1325
(2000) should be more coherent. There is, therefore, a
need for a strategic framework that includes
well-defined targets and indicators. The preliminary set
of indicators annexed to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2010/498), is an important tool for taking stock of
the progress achieved and for tracking the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in conflict
and post-conflict situations. The indicators should not
be seen as a reporting obligation, but rather as a means
to facilitate Member States’ engagement. Progress
should not be measured exclusively through data and
figures, and each indicator should be read in its
specific context.
Over the next decade, our success in protecting
women in conflict situations will be measured by the
real impact that our actions have on the ground. The

28

framework and tools are there. Let us make sure that
we back them with the necessary political will.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to all those who opened
today’s debate for their assessments and information.
In particular, we would like to welcome Ms. Michelle
Bachelet in her new post as Under-Secretary-General
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
and Executive Director of UN Women. We anticipate
that the activities of that entity will help to strengthen
and enhance the effectiveness of the United Nations on
gender issues.
In the 10 years since the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000), that instrument has become an
effective reference for protecting women in conflict and
enhancing the role of women in the prevention and
settlement of conflict and in post-conflict recovery.
Regrettably, women and children continue to be victims
of deliberate attacks, including terrorist acts and other
violations of international humanitarian law. Recent
developments in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have demonstrated how tragic the problem of sexual
violence continues to be.
At the same time, the diverse nature of violence
means that due attention must be paid to all its
categories. The theme of women and peace and
security should not be reduced to individual
manifestations alone. Just such a balanced approach
formed the basis for resolution 1325 (2000).
We are gravely concerned at the killing or
wounding of women and children, including through
the indiscriminate and excessive use of force.
Frequently, such crimes go unpunished. We believe
that the Council should without question review such
cases.
The manifold crisis situations in which women
suffer require that they be addressed not only by the
Security Council, but also by the General Assembly,
the Peacebuilding Commission, the Human Rights
Council and the Commission on the Status of Women,
within their respective mandates. We believe in this
context that it is important to avoid duplication and to
seek complementarity among the relevant functions of
those bodies. Given their range, limiting gender issues
exclusively to the Security Council would create

10-60258

S/PV.6411

imbalances from the standpoint of system-wide
coherence and would undermine the effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
preparing the report before the Council (S/2010/498). At
the same time, we believe that the indicators that it sets
out still need to be verified against the realities and
practice in terms of their effectiveness vis-à-vis full
realization of the potential of resolution 1325 (2000).
The effectiveness of the indicators should be considered
again after they have been validated by the United
Nations system and following the relevant report of the
Secretary-General. While they are being validated, the
indicators should be used in a measured way and only in
situations relating to the implementation of 1325 (2000),
as provided for by the presidential statement adopted
today (S/PRST/2010/22).
In commemorating today 10 years since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we should
emphasize that much still needs to be done. Our
partners in the Council and the relevant agencies and
mechanisms of the United Nations system should give
greater attention to how to involve women in
implementation by enhancing gender equality when
establishing peacekeeping contingents and in other
relevant issues in mission mandates. Clearly, such
issues will need to be approached on the basis of the
characteristics of each specific situation.
We are convinced that clear efforts by the
Security Council, within its mandate, to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) will ensure that the resolution’s
effectiveness is preserved and enhanced in coming
decades. Russia intends to actively contribute to that.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of China.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): This
year marks the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and the
fifteenth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference
on Women, held in Beijing. Today’s open Security
Council debate on women and peace and security has
special significance.
Resolution 1325 (2000) focused the international
community’s attention on women in conflict and
provides the basis for the international community to
cooperate in helping countries in post-conflict
situations to protect women’s rights and interests. The

10-60258

international community has much to do for the
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Here, I wish to emphasize the following four
points.
First, to ensure that women are protected from
harm in armed conflict, efforts must be made to
remove the root causes of conflict. Enabling women to
play a full role in the peace and security sphere will
make a positive contribution to the prevention and
reduction of conflicts. Also, preventing the outbreak of
conflicts and protecting the rights and interests of
women depend on efforts by the international
community to engage in preventive diplomacy and
peaceful settlement of disputes through dialogue and
consultation and through the elimination of the root
causes of conflict.
Secondly,
Governments
in
conflict
or
post-conflict situations bear primary responsibility for
the protection of women in their own countries. The
international community should provide assistance to
the countries concerned and obtain their understanding
and cooperation in order to help them in capacitybuilding, including promotion of security sector
reform, strengthening the rule of law and improving
judicial and relief mechanisms. China supports the
Secretary-General appointing more women as special
representatives to provide good offices and political
mediation.
China condemns the use of sexual violence as a
means of war. The international community shares a
common responsibility to prevent sexual violence in
conflicts. China supports the relevant United Nations
agencies in their active efforts to provide the needed
support to the victims of sexual violence.
Thirdly, ensuring women’s participation in
political processes, recovery and reconstruction is an
important part of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). The effective participation of women in
political processes, national reconstruction and national
reconciliation will contribute to the maintenance of
social stability and the consolidation of peace in
post-conflict countries. In the process of post-conflict
reconstruction, women should be given a greater voice
and a larger role in decision-making. Their special
needs and concerns should be taken care of and
employment should be provided to ensure a livelihood
for them.

29

S/PV.6411

Fourthly, there should be a division of labour
among the relevant United Nations organs; they should
work together on the basis of their respective mandates
to address the question of women and peace and
security. While the Security Council should be
concerned with situations that constitute a threat to
international peace and security, other United Nations
entities, such as the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the Human Rights Council and UN
Women, should all have a full role to play so as to
achieve synergy.
The President: I now invite Her Excellency
Ms. Beverley J. Oda, Minister of International
Cooperation of Canada, to take the floor.
Ms. Oda (Canada): On behalf of the Government
of Canada, I wish to thank the Ugandan presidency for
convening this open debate on women and peace and
security, in time to mark the tenth anniversary of the
landmark resolution 1325 (2000).
Let me first say a few words on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security, an
informal network of over 40 interested Member States,
chaired by Canada. The Group of Friends has played an
active role in the effective implementation of the
Security Council resolutions on women, peace and
security. On 25 September, Canada, as Chair of the
Friends, co-hosted a ministerial event with the
Secretary-General, ministers from Austria, Bangladesh,
Chile, Liberia, Namibia, Sierra Leone and the United
Kingdom, and the Civil Society Advisory Group. The
event demonstrated the international community’s
intention to take concrete, time-bound and measurable
actions on women and peace and security. We hope to
see that come to fruition today.
The
Group
of
Friends
welcomes
the
recommendations set out in the Secretary-General’s
report on women and peace and security (S/2010/498),
including the global set of indicators on resolution
1325 (2000). The Friends call on the Security Council
to endorse those indicators and put them into use. We
urge the Council to establish a framework of
accountability to ensure that it systematically addresses
gaps and challenges and accelerates progress in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000). And we call on
the Security Council to ensure leadership on women
and peace and security within the Council.

support the role of UN Women to provide support and
leadership on women, peace and security within the
United Nations system.
Speaking in my capacity as representative of
Canada, I can assure the Council that Canada strongly
supports the Secretary-General’s recommendation for
the establishment of an agreed set of goals, targets and
indicators to guide implementation of the resolution
over the next decade. In addition to calling for the
endorsement of the global set of indicators, Canada
calls on the Security Council to ensure that those
indicators are piloted in the field as soon as possible.
Canada looks forward to the Security Council
reviewing the data collected by the indicators in the
future. Such information would be very helpful in our
efforts to protect civilian populations in armed conflict.
For example, that information should assist in the
development of clearer mandates for United Nations
peace operations, which would thereby assist
peacekeepers on the ground in implementing targeted
protection strategies. The data would also assist in the
development of targeted predeployment and in-mission
training for peacekeepers. Canada notes that the
Secretary-General’s report points to an ongoing need to
enhance the meaningful participation of women in peace
processes. Canada is pleased to support the work of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women and the
Department of Political Affairs as they work together to
ensure that peace processes benefit from the direct
participation of women at all levels, that mediators
exhibit better understanding of gender-specific
implications of various aspects of peace agreements and
that agreements provide remedy for the experiences of
women and girls in conflict and enable them to
participate fully in post-conflict recovery.
As we said in the open debate on 13 October (see
S/PV.6396), Canada is pleased with the SecretaryGeneral’s concrete efforts to redress the disparity in
women’s participation in peacebuilding efforts, and we
support the Secretary-General’s seven-point action
plan. Canada reiterates the concerns raised in the
review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. We encourage the United Nations and
Member States to ensure that the voices and concerns
of women are integrated across the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission, through the countryspecific configurations and at the field level.

The Friends congratulate Ms. Michelle Bachelet
on her appointment as head of UN Women and strongly

30

10-60258

S/PV.6411

Canada supports the efforts of Ms. Margot
Wallström, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, to provide
strategic leadership and strengthen United Nations
coordination mechanisms in order to address sexual
violence in armed conflict. The recent systematic acts
of sexual violence perpetrated in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo demonstrate the
necessity of Ms. Wallström’s work. Canada calls on the
United Nations system to ensure that her Office is
adequately resourced and capable of timely action.
More broadly, we strongly support the SecretaryGeneral’s recognition of the need to take effective
measures to address sexual violence in conflict. In this
regard, we welcome the jurisprudence of the
international courts and tribunals, recognizing that rape
and sexual violence can be war crimes and crimes
against humanity. Individuals responsible for those
crimes must be brought to justice. This includes those
responsible by virtue of command responsibility.
Canada continues to call on States to investigate and
prosecute those crimes and to cooperate with
international prosecutions where necessary.
To assist in bringing perpetrators to justice,
Canada supports the Justice Rapid Response Initiative.
This multilateral standby facility gives United Nations
entities and Member States access to a roster of rapidly
deployable criminal justice professionals, who conduct
human rights and international criminal justice
investigations, and undertake special political and
fact-finding commissions and commissions of inquiry,
as well as security sector reform assessments.
Today’s open debate is an opportunity to focus on
what remains to be done to implement the women and
peace and security agenda. In that spirit, Canada’s
action plan for the implementation of Security Council
resolutions on women, peace and security was
launched on 5 October. Canada’s action plan includes
comprehensive and consistent whole-of-Government
action supported by clear national objectives and
performance indicators. The implementation of the
plan will enhance the effectiveness and accountability
of Canadian and United Nations peace operations, and
will help build peace that respects the fundamental
equality of men and women. I would like to share some
activities that we will carry out in implementing
Canada’s action plan.

10-60258

We will ensure that our non-governmental
partners delivering Canadian humanitarian assistance
have codes of conduct concerning sexual exploitation
and abuse. We will develop training modules that
address prevention and protection issues on the
women, peace and security agenda for Government of
Canada personnel deployed to peace operations, fragile
States or conflict-affected situations. We will also
identify Canadian specialists with expertise in issues
related to women and peace and security who may be
called on to support future peace operations, including
peace processes.
Much has been achieved in the 10 years since
resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted. However, much
remains to be done. Through our commitment to acting
and to being accountable for our actions, we can move
forward together to ensure that all members of the
international community — women and men, girls and
boys — participate equally and benefit from our work.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Maria Rosaria Carfagna, Minister of
Equal Opportunities of Italy.
Ms. Carfagna (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
European Union.
First, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on organizing this open debate of the Security Council
on an issue of the utmost importance to the international
community. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and all previous speakers for their insightful
presentations. I take this opportunity to express Italy’s
strong support for Under-Secretary-General Michelle
Bachelet as she undertakes her new, important
endeavour.
The anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
provides a unique opportunity for Member States and
the United Nations system to take concrete steps to
enhance its implementation. In this regard, allow me to
express my appreciation for the Council’s decision to
take forward the set of indicators developed by the
Secretary-General to track the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). We consider this to be a first
step, and we now call on the Council to ensure the
indicators’ swift operationalization. In this spirit, I will
focus my statement on one of the most effective tools
for strengthening the resolution: the adoption of
national action plans by Member States.

31

S/PV.6411

Let me start by reiterating Italy’s full commitment
to adopting a national action plan. An inter-ministerial
committee of committed administrations and departments
has been working on a draft action plan, which is now at
an advanced stage, and I am pleased to announce that it is
expected to be finalized and adopted by the end of this
year.
One of the main objectives of the Italian action
plan is to strengthen the participation of women in
peacekeeping missions and their decision-making
bodies. Italy has long honoured its pledge to avoid
gender discrimination, enrolling women in all its
national armed forces. This has resulted in an increase
in the number of women in that field and in their
participation at all levels and stages of peacekeeping
operations. In 1999, a consultative committee of the
Defence Chief of Staff and the Financial Police
General Command on voluntary military service for
women was set up to monitor the correct
implementation of the law in this regard. According to
the data provided by the committee, women have been
recruited in all segments of the military. However, their
presence is still sparse and almost non-existent in top
positions. This is mainly due to the fact that Italy is
new to the conscription of women, compared to other
countries where female participation is a long-standing
tradition and thus significantly higher.
Adopting a gender perspective for all
peacebuilding activities is another essential priority of
the action plan. In my capacity as Minister of Equal
Opportunities, I can only stress the importance of
adopting a gender-oriented approach to all
peacebuilding operations, conducting gender-sensitive
surveys, collecting statistics with gender-disaggregated
data and carrying out specific studies on other
discriminatory factors. Moreover, the plan focuses on
the protection of human rights in post-conflict areas,
particularly women’s rights. The staff of peacekeeping
missions should be trained to deal with these
situations, where women are the most affected and
most vulnerable. Specific training is required in the
following areas: equal opportunities, international
humanitarian law, resolution 1325 (2000) and human
rights, with particular reference to issues relating to
gender-based violence, sexual violence and human
trafficking.
Another priority of the plan is cooperation with
countries beset by conflict and with their institutional
stakeholders, non-governmental organizations and civil

32

society to enhance their invaluable work. One possible
example of such cooperation would be opening ad hoc
local facilities to accommodate and rehabilitate women
who fall victim to violence and sexual abuse.
Lastly, the plan addresses the issue of providing
women with greater opportunities to voice their views
and show their capabilities. It seeks to strengthen their
presence in post-conflict processes, where they are
often at a disadvantage in competing for resources,
such as access to microcredit.
These are the most significant elements of Italy’s
national action plan. We are convinced that it will
enhance our efforts to promote peace and strengthen
human rights in conflict areas.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Fatou Mass Jobe-Njie, Minister of
Tourism and Culture of the Gambia.
Ms. Jobe-Njie (Gambia): I am deeply honoured
and humbled to address the Security Council on the
issue of women and peace and security, and resolution
1325 (2000), on behalf of the Vice-President and
Minister of Women’s Affairs of the Republic of the
Gambia, Ms. Isatou Njie-Saidy.
First and foremost, my delegation would like to
take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for
his explicit report and the practical recommendations
therein on resolution 1325 (2000) (S/2010/498). We
also align ourselves with the statement that will be
delivered on behalf of the Group of African States.
Allow me at this juncture to recognize and
acknowledge the United Nations for taking bold steps
towards the reforms that gave birth to the new entity,
UN Women, inter alia, holistically providing for
improved collaboration and greater efficiency in order
to achieve a speedy and positive impact. In that regard,
we join other Member States in congratulating and
applauding the appointment of the dynamic lady sitting
next to me right now as head of UN Women,
Ms. Michelle Bachelet. We have no doubt that her level
of experience and dynamism will help to usher in a
new impetus, enhancing existing efforts of the United
Nations to promote gender equality, increase
opportunity for women and girls and tackle
discrimination and gender-based violence around the
world. Those efforts are being made in tandem with
commitments that were made at the twenty-third
special session of the General Assembly, entitled

10-60258

S/PV.6411

“Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace
for the twenty-first century” (see A/S-23/10/Rev.1), in
particular the commitments concerning women and
armed conflict.
The Government of the Gambia, having
recognized the prevailing poor indicators for the social,
economic and health status of women and girls in
developing countries, has joined the rest of the
international community as signatory to several
relevant treaties and resolutions, including the 1990
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Programme
of Action of the 1994 International Conference on
Population and Development, the 1995 Beijing
Platform for Action, the 2000 Millennium Declaration
and the Millennium Development Goals, the 2006
Maputo Plan of Action, the African Charter on Human
and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa,
as well as Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).
The various Security Council resolutions on
women and peace and security allude to the necessity
of ensuring the active participation of women in peace
processes, particularly in conflict prevention and the
protection of women from gender-based violence and
the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war, as well
as the promotion of women’s and girls’ rights during
and after conflicts and in post-war rehabilitation and
reconstruction. Furthermore, resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1889 (2009) also call for the elevation of women
to leadership positions, while resolutions 1820 (2008)
and 1888 (2009) emphasize the importance of
prevention and protection from sexual violence as a
weapon of war.
As it seeks to fulfil the vital commitments
contained in these resolutions, the Government of the
Gambia, in collaboration with relevant stakeholders,
has embarked on a series of actions and has been
guided by the slogan “From commitment to action”.
Key among these actions are the following.
First, the Gambia is actively participating in
conflict
prevention,
peace
negotiations
and
peacebuilding in affected countries in our subregion
and beyond. The Gambia has also maintained a central
role in peacekeeping missions at the subregional,
regional and international levels, and more than ever
before, the outstanding performance of our female
contingent has been widely recognized and applauded
by recipient countries.

10-60258

Secondly, the Gambia has adopted, ratified and
enacted the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, the African
Union Protocol on the Rights of Women in Africa, the
Trafficking in Persons Act in 2007, the Children’s Act
in 2005 and the Women’s Act in 2010.
Thirdly, the Gambia’s validated Gender and
Women Empowerment Policy 2010-2020 has been
submitted to the Cabinet for approval before submission
to the National Assembly — our Parliament — for
enactment.
Fourthly, in line with relevant provisions
contained in Chapter IV, Section 3, of the Gambia’s
Constitution of 1997, women have been proactively
involved in all spheres of national development, both
from the peaceful transition to the second Republic and
to date. The Gambia has the longest serving woman
Vice-President in Africa. Women have assumed key
ministerial posts in such areas as finance, justice,
education, health, tourism and culture — which is my
Ministry — and energy. The Speaker of our National
Assembly is also a woman.
Suffice it to mention that the Gambia, popularly
known as the smiling coast of Africa, has — knock on
wood — enjoyed relative peace and stability since
independence in 1965. As a result, it has served as a
safe haven to brothers and sisters from the subregion
fleeing from conflict. The Government of the Gambia,
together with its partners in its proactive efforts to
build the capacity of women, continues to sponsor
women counsellors from the National Women’s
Council, the advisory organ of the Government on
women’s issues, to attend international meetings on
gender and women’s affairs, including on resolution
1325 (2000), in order to broaden their knowledge base.
It is worth mentioning, however, that no country
is immune to threats to absolute peace and that no
country is an island. In that regard, the Gambia
continues to use various traditional mechanisms, such
as the Council of Elders and religious and community
organizations, to enhance peace and participation,
prevent conflicts, support refugees, and continue to
promote and nurture peace and stability.
We are happy to inform the Council that the
Gambia is in the process of finalizing its national
action plan and is grateful to both the Economic
Community of West African States Gender
Development Centre and the United Nations

33

S/PV.6411

International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women for their support in that
regard. We call on other organizations, in particular
other United Nations agencies, to partner with us in our
efforts to realize the implementation of landmark
resolution 1325 (2000).
In conclusion, allow me to mention some
challenges that we expect to encounter on our way
forward. There is still a low level of awareness at all
levels of the existence and content of resolution 1325
(2000), which explains why the Gambia has yet to
attain a 50 per cent involvement of women in
peacebuilding and negotiation processes undertaken
pursuant to the resolution.
Secondly, as women attempt to take on new
political roles, they continue to be challenged by
traditional beliefs and values, certain sociocultural
factors and misguided religious interpretations. They
are further constrained by the limited nature of their
skills as they try to influence peacebuilding processes
in an effective manner, and sometimes they feel
threatened, reluctant to participate, especially if they
were victims of sexual violence.
But there is a way forward. National
Governments, as far as the Gambia is concerned, must
sustain the political will and momentum now being
given to women’s empowerment and must satisfy the
need to establish gender-responsive budgeting, where it
is nonexistent, or strengthen it, where it does exist,.
Governments must strengthen donor coordination in
order to enhance funding for the implementation of the
action plan under resolution 1325 (2000). All Member
States are urged to conduct aggressive campaigns to
raise awareness at all levels on the content and
meaning of resolution 1325 (2000) and associated
resolutions.
Because setting indicators is crucial to monitor
progress and aid reporting, Member States should
receive assistance in the country assessments or
situational analyses they are conducting to obtain
baseline information with a view to developing, inter
alia, evidence-based policies, planning and target
setting. Standardized and functional coordination
mechanisms need also to be put in place, and common
strategies and indicators to facilitate subregional
collaboration and reporting on progress are also
crucial.

34

The President: I now invite the Minister of
Gender and Development of Liberia, Her Excellency
Ms. Vabah Gayflor, to take the floor.
Ms. Gayflor (Liberia): Liberia is pleased to be
participating in this open debate on women and peace
and security. We commend the delegation of Uganda
for convening this discussion in commemoration of the
tenth anniversary of the landmark United Nations
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) during its
presidency of the Council.
We are heartened and very encouraged by the
increasing global recognition of the important role of
women in all facets of national life, from peacebuilding
to recovery and development. We have also utilized
resolution 1325 (2000) as a tool for promoting the
involvement of Liberian women in all sectors of
society.
The Liberian national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is a response
by the President, Ms. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, and the
Government of Liberia, to the Secretary-General’s call
for the development and implementation of action
plans. The plan complements initiatives such as the
poverty reduction strategy and the joint programmes of
the Government of Liberia and the United Nations
already in place, focusing on additional and specific
actions needed to promote and advance gender
mainstreaming and ultimately to promote sustainable
development. The Liberian national action plan
strengthens efforts to advance gender equality,
including Millennium Development Goal 3. Liberia has
made significant efforts with great impact in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), including
the national action plan.
We Liberians are proud to have been among the
first to develop a national plan through a collaborative
effort of the Government, United Nations agencies,
local and international non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), civil society organizations and other partners.
Our plan was launched in 2009 during the International
Colloquium on Women’s Empowerment, Leadership
Development, International Peace and Security.
We would like to thank our partners, who were
very supportive of us in this endeavour. In particular, I
would like to thank the International Research and
Training Institute for the Advancement of Women, the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) and, of course, the United Nations family

10-60258

S/PV.6411

in Liberia and other partners from the international
community.
We have also set up a national steering committee
on the Liberian national action plan, comprising the
Ministers of Gender, Justice, Defence and Foreign
Affairs, United Nations agencies, civil society, and
local and international NGOs to guide the
implementation of the plan and provide oversight and
accountability. The implementation of the plan is not
limited to the actions included therein; additional
activities and measures can be initiated as necessary,
bearing in mind the need for coherence.
Discussions with different stakeholders in Liberia
highlighted the importance of implementing the
Liberian national action plan at the local, national and
subregional levels over four years. The implementation
periods are thus designed as short term, lasting
18 months; medium term, lasting 30 months; and long
term, lasting 36 months. The plan also acknowledges
that the roles and responsibilities for its full
implementation must be clear and involve all relevant
actors.
Further, the plan identifies the roles and
responsibilities of the Government of Liberia, United
Nations partners, civil society, and international and
national NGOs, donors, the private sector and
beneficiaries. It places lead responsibility for the
promotion and implementation of the plan on the
Government.
To make specific roles and responsibilities clear,
the Liberian national action plan delineates a lead
agency and collaborators for each activity, in addition
to ensuring coordination for the implementation of the
activities. A secretariat has been established, county
steering committees have been set up in five counties,
and a civil society observatory group is being set up to
monitor and evaluate the implementation of the plan
and to prepare a shadow report.
The Government has also taken measures at the
institutional, political and legal levels to ensure the
plan’s implementation, including an amendment to the
penal code extending the legal definition of rape,
making it a non-bailable offence, and increasing its
penalty to life imprisonment. We have also established
a criminal court to specifically adjudicate sexual
offence cases, and established a sex crimes unit at the
Ministry of Justice to prosecute sexual offence cases.
In addition, and among others, a national commission

10-60258

on disabilities has been established and a national
gender policy has been launched and is being
implemented.
We also have undertaken the training of border
security officials in handling gender-based violence
issues, including sexual exploitation and abuse, and the
development and current implementation of a national
gender-based violence plan of action to prevent and
respond to gender-based violence issues. Presently, the
action plan is under review to ensure that those
emerging issues are captured.
A gender equity in politics bill, designed to
increase women’s participation in governance, political
parties and other institutions, has been introduced in
Parliament and is awaiting approval for passage into
law. A civil service code of conduct — proposing that
all public institutions establish an environment
conducive to the meaningful participation and
advancement of women through the adoption of
policies and procedures to address gender inequalities,
including language on sexual harassment — has been
developed and is currently under review.
We have also established a national rural
women’s structure to ensure that rural women’s
participation in the development and reconstruction
process is part of the development agenda. We also
held a conference on women in cross-border trade to
recognize the role women play across borders as they
help to sustain our economies. We have also
established community policing forums nationwide,
mainly headed by women, to improve citizen-police
relations.
However, some challenges remain, and I will
name a few that militate against the effective
implementation of the plan. These include the
challenges of harmonizing international, regional and
subregional instruments with national laws; capacitybuilding and training; recruiting and retaining women
in the security sector, particularly in the armed forces;
the passage into law of the gender in politics bill; weak
traditional peacebuilding structures and mechanisms; a
high maternal mortality rate due to inadequately
trained health practitioners and limited health care
facilities; and women’s limited access to microcredit
and control over resources.
However, we have taken some concrete steps, and
the plans for the next two years include the development
of a strategy to ensure 20 per cent participation of

35

S/PV.6411

women in the security sector by 2011. Presently, women
constitute 30 per cent of immigration officers and 15 per
cent of the national police. We also plan to earmark
funding for long-term plans and the sustainability of the
programmes; develop a fund-raising exercise and
strategy and a donor roundtable to raise funds for the
effective implementation of the plan; develop and
implement a comprehensive communications strategy;
initiate affirmative action processes that will address the
gaps in women’s participation at all levels; and promote
strong partnerships and strategic linkages.
We have also taken steps to work with UNIFEM
to develop indicators. We note that this is an important
subject here, and we support the recommendation
contained
in
the
presidential
statement
(S/PRST/2010/22) to incorporate the indicators as a
measurement of progress. Furthermore, this positive
experience has led us to support the indicators annexed
to the Secretary-General’s report on women and peace
and security (S/2010/498). We believe that these
indicators constitute a work in progress and that the
Secretary-General should be requested to continue to
support the development of a comprehensive
framework that can be used as a yardstick for
assessment of global progress. Liberia would further
support the elaboration of guidelines for data collection
and analysis, as well as for a reporting template
involving appropriate training opportunities.
We would also like to commend the UnderSecretary-General for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women and Executive Director of
UN Women, Ms. Michelle Bachelet, and thank her for
her presence here today. We pledge our full
commitment to the process and ask Governments to
wish us well as we strive to improve the condition to
women around the world.
The President: I now invite Her Excellency
Ms. Anne Holmlund, Minister of the Interior of
Finland, to take the floor.
Ms. Holmlund (Finland): Ten years ago, the
Council recognized that conflicts have a differing
impact on the lives of women and men, and that
women and men alike have a valuable contribution to
offer in advancing peace. In short, the Council
recognized gender equality and the promotion and
protection of women’s rights as central issues of its
mandate of maintaining international peace and
security. We congratulate the Council, the United

36

Nations, regional organizations and all Member States
for the work done over the past decade, and we thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this
anniversary meeting.
Despite substantial efforts, there is no place for
complacency. We hope that the next decade will be one
of more strategic and systematic action, improved
accountability and measurable progress. The
recommendations and the comprehensive set of
indicators in the Secretary-General’s report on women
and peace and security (S/2010/498) provide a tool for
accountability. The seven-point action plan presented
in the Secretary-General’s report on women’s
participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466) is a very
good framework for systematic action. We encourage
the Council and the United Nations as a whole to put
them to full use, and we stand ready to do our part.
Finland aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union to be delivered later today.
In addition, I wish to offer some insights into
what Finland has done and learned during the past
decade, and to commit ourselves to future action with
regard to the participation of women at all stages and
all levels of peace processes, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and post-conflict recovery; national
action plans; and working to combat impunity,
including paying due attention to victims.
Finland believes that conflict prevention,
mediation, and the peaceful settlement of disputes
should occupy a more central place in the peace and
security agenda of the United Nations. Equal and
effective participation of women at all stages and at all
levels of peace processes is an integral part of our
policies. For example, Finland supports the African
Union in strengthening its mediation capacities. We
recently carried out a very successful training exercise
on the participation of women in preventive diplomacy
and mediation.
As we mentioned in this Chamber a few weeks
ago when speaking on peacebuilding, even if outside
actors cannot dictate the composition of the negotiating
delegations, there is a lot that can be done (see
S/PV.6396). Peace mediators and their supporting
teams can always ensure that sufficient genderexpertise is provided to the parties and can organize
parallel consultations with women’s groups if they do
not have a seat at the table. Those measures should

10-60258

S/PV.6411

help us change the currently dismal record of women’s
participation in peace processes.
The participation of both women and men in
peacekeeping,
peacebuilding
and
post-conflict
reconstruction is crucial for the sustainability of their
ultimate objective: peace. Let me be clear. Full and
equal participation is important for the delivery of the
mandates that this Council has provided. A recent study
from Afghanistan showed that women’s participation in
provincial reconstruction teams was beneficial to the
operational effectiveness of those teams. That is why
one of the goals of Finland’s National Action Plan has
been to increase the numbers of women in both
military and civilian positions in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations. It can be done.
Before we initiated our Plan in September 2007,
women represented 19 per cent of our seconded experts
deployed in civilian positions in peace operations.
Through consistent efforts, we have increased that
proportion to a high of 34 per cent last August. We also
believe that understanding gender aspects is important
for all members of peace operations, and we have
therefore supported the work of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations in developing gender training
for all United Nations peacekeepers.
Increasing the number of women in the highest
positions can wait no longer. The United Nations and
regional organizations have a responsibility to set
examples and to promote gender equality, while
Member States have a responsibility to provide and
support female candidates. Accordingly, Finland
commits itself to nominating an increasing number of
female candidates.
National action plans on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) have proved to be the primary
tool in strategic and systematic implementation.
Finland’s National Action Plan was jointly drafted by
five ministries and civil society partners, which are
also actively engaged in its implementation and followup. As we look forward to the Council supporting the
comprehensive set of indicators today, we commit to
including the indicators in our own National Action
Plan when it is revised next year.
Including civil society in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) is vital. For its part, Finland
actively seeks advice from and forms partnerships with
non-governmental
organizations
(NGOs)
in
implementing its National Action Plan. For example, in

10-60258

our national Anniversary Seminar, held in Helsinki last
Friday, our President, our Foreign Minister and I were
honoured to hear from Special Representative Margot
Wallström and representatives of civil society. Many
ideas for improved concrete action and new best
practices emerged from that exchange, including a
proposal to include medical professionals in our crisismanagement teams in order to better respond to victims
of sexual and gender-based violence.
Finland also gives financial support to several
NGOs working in the area of women, peace and
security. One example is Femmes Africa Solidarité.
Among other invaluable activities, it supports drafting
of national action plans and a regional action plan for
the Great Lakes region in Africa.
We are willing to share our lessons learned and
experiences with other countries engaged in the
preparation and implementation of their own national
action plans. At the moment, Finland is cooperating
with Kenya in drafting its national action plan through
a twinning project. Should the experiences from that
programme be successful, we remain open to
considering twinning with another partner country in
the future.
Finally, I shall say a few words on the centrality
of the work against impunity and due attention to the
victims of human rights violations and serious crimes.
Justice for victims is essential in restoring the
confidence of people in their Government and in
promoting sustainable peace. There should never be
amnesties for the most serious crimes, including sexual
and gender-based violence, which can constitute war
crimes and crimes against humanity. Finland fully
supports the efforts of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) and the ad hoc tribunals in that regard.
As an additional tool, I wish to highlight the
potential of the Justice Rapid Response mechanism, a
multilateral stand-by facility to rapidly deploy criminal
justice and related professionals, trained for
international investigations and at the service of States
and international institutions. While still in its first
year of operations, the Justice Rapid Response
mechanism has already successfully completed three
deployments and trained over 80 experts, thus proving
its value. We are convinced that participation in the
Justice Rapid Response mechanism is yet another
example of concrete action for realizing the women,
peace and security agenda.

37

S/PV.6411

Justice is not only prosecutions. It includes the
reform and strengthening of the security sector and the
rule of law structures and, very importantly, addressing
the needs of victims and their right to reparations.
Among other things, Finland continues to provide
financial contributions to the ICC Trust Fund for
Victims and to United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict.
In closing, let me repeat our hope that the next
decade will be one of strategic and systematic action,
accountability and measurable progress. We look to the
Council for continued leadership and to the newly
established UN Women and the whole of the United
Nations system for enhanced action. You have our full
support.
The President: I now invite Her Excellency
Ms. Grete Faremo, Minister of Defence of Norway, to
take the floor.
Ms. Faremo (Norway): Ten years ago, atrocities
in Somalia, Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia made
even the hardliners soft — or at least softer. For the
first time, they let this Council discuss and agree on
key questions for sustainable peace: What do women
want? What do women need? How can women
contribute? Thus resolution 1325 (2000) came about.
At least on paper, this resolution gives women a voice
and better protection.
Mr. President, I thank you and the Council for
convening this open ministerial meeting to remind us
all of what a long way we still have to go to make the
good intentions of resolution 1325 (2000) a reality.

improve the quality of the process and the service,
making the result more sustainable. We simply cannot
afford to ignore half of society’s talent and capacity.
We must also ensure greater accountability. I call
on the Security Council to show leadership by
maintaining its focus on the full implementation of all
resolutions on women and peace and security; by
endorsing today the indicators proposed by the
Secretary-General for this purpose; and by making the
prosecution of perpetrators a political priority. I
commend the work of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Wallström in this regard.
We must provide the United Nations with
resources, including financing, to follow up on the
ground. I welcome the establishment of UN Women,
and I congratulate its first Executive Director, UnderSecretary-General Michelle Bachelet. I trust that she
will monitor and support Member States and the
United Nations in ensuring the full implementation of
all the resolutions on women and peace and security.
Beyond what we have already done, I hereby
announce that Norway will immediately take on the
following commitments.
We will continue to increase the number of
female soldiers and officers, both in standing military
forces and in our contributions to international
operations. The next two commanders of Norway’s
national command in Afghanistan will be women.

Ten years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), at the NATO Ministerial Council meeting
earlier this month, I called for including resolution
1325 (2000) in the NATO concept of operations. We
obviously have a job to do to make the military men
take this seriously.

Recognizing that we also have a long way to go, I
will now make sure our military operations rest on a
gender analysis and adjust our operational demands
accordingly. We will strengthen the gender education
of our armed forces and our police, and we will
introduce a new system of reporting on gender and the
role of women in field missions, starting in December
with the Norwegian-led provincial reconstruction team
in Meymaneh, Afghanistan.

As Minister of Defence, I note that all of the
United Nations force commanders are men. It is high
time to rectify this. I call on the United Nations to start
searching for women commanders while we continue
to improve the gender ratio of our forces.

We will contribute experts on gender and genderbased violence to international peacekeeping
operations. Last week, we deployed a team of such
experts from Norway’s national police to the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.

We must get better at explaining that resolution
1325 (2000) is not about political correctness. The
better protection and more equal participation of
women in social, economic and political life —
including in peace processes and security services —

Norway will further strengthen our support to the
United Nations work to promote and protect gender
equality and the empowerment of women. Our
proposed allocation for 2011 is more than $30 million.

38

10-60258

S/PV.6411

Finally, we will also act urgently to boost the
work of UN Women and will support its new and
welcome strategic partnership with the Department of
Political Affairs, specifically the project to increase
women’s participation in peace processes and to
improve the gender balance at all levels of mediation.
The Norwegian Government will immediately provide
$1 million to this project.
Norway supports the women and peace and
security agenda because we know that it is the only
way to achieve sustainable peace and to free millions
of women and children from the appalling suffering we
have seen in too many current conflicts. This suffering
and humiliation is a scar on humanity’s face. We
cannot tolerate this.
The President: I now invite Her Excellency
Ms. Mary White, Minister of State for Equality,
Integration and Human Rights of Ireland, to take the
floor.
Ms. White (Ireland): Ireland aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered later today by the
representative of the European Union.
Ireland welcomes the opportunity to address the
Security Council during this open debate, which marks
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security. Ireland
is deeply committed to the principles enshrined in this
groundbreaking resolution and will continue to strive
for its full implementation, both in Ireland and
internationally.
Ireland has been very active on resolution 1325
(2000) and has long been reflecting the spirit of the
resolution in its external actions. In order to formalize
this commitment, my department is working closely
with other Government departments, as well as with
members of civil society and academia, towards the
development of an effective national action plan, which
we hope to launch early next year. This is our principal
pledge here today.
Ireland has also appointed a special envoy and
launched a cross-learning initiative on resolution 1325
(2000) in 2009. Yesterday afternoon, I had the honour
to present the findings of this initiative to the head of
UN Women, Under-Secretary-General Michelle
Bachelet. This innovative initiative involved
participants from Timor-Leste, Liberia, Ireland and
Northern Ireland, and was designed to draw upon the

10-60258

experiences of those directly affected by conflict in
order to discuss the most critical issues facing women
and girls in conflict and post-conflict settings. The
participants, experts in their field, met three times, in
Belfast, Dili and Monrovia. Each meeting focused on
one of the “three p’s” of resolution 1325 (2000) —
participation, protection and incorporating gender
perspectives in policymaking — and addressed issues
such as transitional justice, mediation, gender-based
violence and the application of international human
rights and international humanitarian law.
While the outcome of the cross-learning initiative
may not easily be quantified, it is our hope that the
recommendations included in the final report will have
a direct and immediate impact on women experiencing
conflict, and that this impact will continue to resonate
for years to come.
One important issue highlighted throughout the
cross-learning initiative was the urgent need to fight
the culture of impunity in relation to sexual violence.
Impunity and justice are mutually exclusive. To let
perpetrators of sexual violence roam free is to tell their
victims that the world is not listening.
But we must listen, and we must act. Effective
mechanisms must be put in place to bring perpetrators
to justice and to send a clear message that such acts
will no longer be tolerated. Crimes of a sexual nature
must not be included in amnesties. Impunity must no
longer be allowed to flourish. We have talked about a
policy of zero tolerance; it is now time to stand
together and demand that this policy be taken seriously.
Another central idea arising from the
cross-learning initiative was the need to engage with
men. Women, peace and security is not just a women’s
issue. In order to achieve true gender equality, men and
women must work side by side. We had several male
gender champions involved in the initiative, and their
contribution to the process was invaluable.
Resolution 1325 (2000) permeates all facets of
conflict prevention and resolution and post-conflict
reconstruction. Men involved in those processes must
be convinced of the relevance of the resolution to their
work. Given the patriarchal nature of many societies,
men can and should become positive role models to
younger boys. In that way, resolution 1325 (2000) will
become a global normative issue, as opposed to a
women’s issue. Peace is not sustainable, nor can it be

39

S/PV.6411

sustained, without the support of all members of
society.
I would also like to take this opportunity to note
Ireland’s warm support for Michelle Bachelet and the
recently established UN Women. I am confident that
that body’s core work will benefit the lives of women
and girls who experience, or who have experienced, the
atrocities of conflict, in particular the atrocities that
target them specifically. International support for it will
be integral to its success. I am delighted to confirm
Ireland’s pledge to commit $1 million to UN Women
this year. We look forward to hearing of its progress.
I would also like to pay tribute to the excellent
work of Margot Wallström, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
She has focused the world’s attention on the recent
unacceptable spate of sexual violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In doing so, she is
ensuring that action is being taken to bring the
perpetrators to justice. Her commitment and
determination in her role as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General will be vital in transforming the
current landscape of impunity into a legacy of zero
tolerance.
Ireland also welcomes the recent report of the
Secretary-General on women, peace and security
(S/2010/498). We note in particular the comprehensive
recommendations and the update on the set of
indicators that will be used to track the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) at the global level. We also
warmly welcome the Secretary-General’s recent report
on
women’s
participation
in
peacebuilding
(S/2010/466), in particular its resolute and forwardlooking seven-point action plan. The commitment to
allocate 15 per cent of United Nations-managed funds
in support of peacebuilding to projects whose principal
objective is to address women’s specific needs,
advance gender equality and empower women is
especially laudable.
The tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
is an important milestone in the evolution of the
women, peace and security agenda. Events marking
this anniversary, both here in New York and
worldwide, highlight the significant progress that has
been achieved, but also the long road yet to be
travelled. Women are more visible in many areas,
including peacekeeping, mediation and post-conflict
recovery. There is, however, no room for complacency.

40

Recent events in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo alone highlight that much more remains to be
done.
The objectives and principles of resolution 1325
(2000) underpin the core tenets of international human
rights law, international humanitarian law and the
Charter of the United Nations itself. The protection of
women and girls from sexual violence in armed
conflict and their participation in conflict resolution
and post-conflict peacebuilding are integral to the
maintenance of international peace and security. Let us
not forget that. In that context, Ireland commends the
Council’s continued attention to resolution 1325
(2000).
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Andraz Zidar, Director-General of the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Slovenia.
Mr. Zidar (Slovenia): I would like to thank
Uganda for the initiative to convene this important
open debate on women, peace and security. I also thank
the Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-General for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
Bachelet and other distinguished guests for their
presentations today.
Slovenia fully aligns itself with the statements to
be delivered by the representative of the European
Union and by the representative of Costa Rica on
behalf of the Human Security Network.
Resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and
security acknowledged that women are not just victims
of armed conflict and that their equal and full
participation is of vital importance in conflict
prevention,
peacekeeping,
conflict
resolution,
peacebuilding and post-conflict recovery.
In the past 10 years, many activities have been
carried out to strengthen the role of women during and
after conflict. However, this anniversary reminds us
that despite those efforts, much needs to be done in the
protection of women and in the promotion of the
participation of women at the decision-making level, in
conflict resolution and in peace processes.
Violence against women, especially sexual and
gender-based violence, persists in conflicts. Recent
events in the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
shown that women continue to be deliberate targets of
injustice and sexual violence in the conflict and its
aftermath.

10-60258

S/PV.6411

In his report (S/2010/498), the Secretary-General
takes up United Nations activities in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The report
shows that a vast range of activities has been carried
out in the past 10 years. However, the fragmentation of
those activities demonstrates the need to streamline and
coordinate the action of all members of the
international community. Slovenia supports the
Secretary-General’s recommendation to develop a
single comprehensive framework that consists of an
agreed set of goals, targets and indicators to guide the
implementation of the resolution in its second decade.

In Slovenia, gender equality is a priority not only
in the field of human rights and development
cooperation but also in security and defence policy.
Since 2008, much has been done to promote gender
equality in the security and defence sector. Those
activities range from awareness-raising and training to
the adoption and modification of legislation and other
measures, including codes of conduct. The recently
adopted strategy on the participation of the Republic of
Slovenia in international operations and missions
promotes equal opportunities with regard to such
efforts at all levels, irrespective of gender.

We are of the opinion that the issue of women,
peace and security needs to be addressed in a holistic
and comprehensive manner. We welcome the Security
Council’s decision to take forward the set of indicators
developed by the Secretary-General to track the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in situations
of armed conflict as well as post-conflict and other
situations. We hope that the indicators will now
become operational.

Lastly, let me take this opportunity to encourage
the Security Council to continue to address the issue of
women, peace and security and to seek the most
effective means to improve the situation of women in
armed conflict. With a comprehensive United Nations
approach and increased ownership by Member States
over their activities, the plight of women in situations
of armed conflict and its aftermath can be eliminated.

Slovenia also supports the recommendation to
establish a dedicated working group to review progress
in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and to
make recommendations to the Security Council on how
to address gaps and challenges to accelerate progress in
the implementation of the resolution.
Stronger steps should be taken to address
accountability and to end impunity for perpetrators of
violations. The Security Council should impose
targeted and graduated measures against all parties to a
conflict responsible for grave violations of women’s
rights, including sexual violence. Sexual violence
should be a priority element in all Council resolutions
mandating the sanctions committees.
We all have a responsibility to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). The development of national
action plans is a key means by which Member States
commit themselves to fulfilling that responsibility. I
would like to report that Slovenia is about to finalize
and adopt such an action plan. The goal is to
interconnect existing national and international
activities addressing a broader concept of women,
peace and security in order to translate them into
genuine political commitments, and thus accelerate the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
contribute to the empowerment and protection of
women.

10-60258

The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Bathabile Dlamini, Deputy Minister
for Social Development of South Africa.
Ms. Dlamini (South Africa): Let me take this
opportunity to thank you, Sir, for organizing this
important debate. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his report on the subject under consideration
(S/2010/498).
My delegation aligns itself with the statements to
be delivered by the representative of Namibia on behalf
of the Southern Africa Development Community and
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to welcome the appointment of Ms. Bachelet. This
move was a demonstration of the firm commitment of
United Nations Member States and the SecretaryGeneral to achieving the objectives and goals of
advancing the equal participation and full involvement
of women in the maintenance and promotion of peace
and security. We would like to assure Ms. Bachelet of
our full cooperation and support in the fulfilment of
her mandate. We appreciate the Security Council’s
invitation to UN Women to contribute regularly to its
work on women, peace and security. We are convinced
that the new entity will be very strategic in
coordinating women’s efforts in peacebuilding and the
prevention of sexual violence in conflicts.

41

S/PV.6411

It has been 10 years since the Security Council
adopted resolution 1325 (2000), following the adoption
of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women. Resolution 1325
(2000) reaffirms the need to implement the obligations
of these instruments, aimed at addressing the situation
of women in armed conflict. The adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) at the dawn of the twenty-first century and
the new millennium was a significant milestone in the
recognition of the role that women played and continue
to play in the maintenance of international peace and
security. In South Africa, women played a critical role
in the struggle for liberation, the transition to
democracy, and post-conflict reconstruction and
development.
As we commemorate the tenth year of resolution
1325 (2000), South Africa believes that, while progress
has been made in the implementation of its provisions,
a lot remains to be done in achieving its objectives.
Today’s meeting presents a perfect opportunity to
review the impact of interventions and to assess
progress in order to identify gaps and consolidate new
perspectives towards streamlining and accelerating the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
In Africa, the African Union and subregional
organizations, as well as civil society, play a pivotal
and strategic role in the prevention and resolution of
conflict. Women are always ready to play a role in
conflict resolution initiatives, such as the promotion
and protection of human rights and the rule of law,
both of which are vital to peace, security, stability and
prosperity. Consistent with these efforts, and in order
to promote the effective participation of women in
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and security, the African
Union in February 2009 declared 2010-2020 as the
African Women’s Decade. It further committed its
subregional organizations and member States to use the
frameworks of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008) to integrate gender policies, programmes and
activities on conflict and peace, and to create regional
consultative platforms on peace for the sharing of
knowledge and information and the harmonization of
strategies.
The South African Women in Dialogue forum has
initiated dialogue between South African women and
women in conflict countries, in particular Burundi, on
how best to mainstream gender in peace missions in
Africa and beyond. The African Women’s Peace Table

42

was established in 2007; it is another South African
initiative whereby female soldiers and civil society
define the peace agenda and discuss strategies for
peacebuilding in the continent.
South Africa today stands as one of the top
troop-contributing countries in the world, with the
largest women’s contingent deployed in peace support
missions. Currently, 19 per cent of South African
National Defence Force personnel deployed in peace
support operations are female.
It is a shame that sexual violence against women,
particularly in armed conflicts, still exists and has not
yet been fully resolved. Sexual violence is one of the
major tragedies in conflict and post-conflict situations,
where women and girls bear the brunt and often
become casualties. Sexual violence constitutes a war
crime and a crime against humanity when committed as
part of a widespread and systematic attack on a civilian
population by State and non-State actors. It was for this
reason that, when the International Criminal Court was
created, South Africa recommended that sexual
violence be among the crimes referred to the Court,
which is a tool against impunity.
It is also for this very reason that South Africa
condemns in the strongest terms possible the mass
rapes committed in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the past two months. We call
for the urgent identification of the perpetrators of these
war crimes so that they may be brought to justice. The
days of impunity at the expense of women and children
are over.
My delegation believes that the full participation
of women in the prevention and resolution of conflict
has become a critical element in adequately addressing
such tragedies. Placing women in leadership positions,
at senior levels, as decision makers in peace
consolidation processes, in public life and in
transitional Governments could provide space for
gender perspectives in order to resolve conflict and
achieve stability.
In conclusion, we support the set of indicators
contained
in
the
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2010/498) and trust that their application will go a
long way towards speeding the implementation of 1325
(2000). The United Nations has come a long way and
played a critical part in defining the role of women,
particularly in conflict situations. Nonetheless, a lot of
support to these women is still required. My delegation

10-60258

S/PV.6411

supports the presidential statement on women, peace
and security (S/PRST/2010/22) and welcomes its
adoption.

intend, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 3.15 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 2.10 p.m.

The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. I

10-60258

43
