RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE
AD HOC POLITICAL COMMITTEE

CONTENTS
Page

916 (X). Report of the Director of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (3 December 1955) (item 22).....
917 (X). The question of race conflict in South Africa resulting from the policies

fi 5ia?~~ 11 /~~- ~o-~e_r~~~~~ ~-f.~~ ~~'.~~ -~f. ~-~~t~- ~f_r_i~~. \ ~ -~~~~~~~~

918 (X). Admission of new Members to the United Nations (8 December 1955)
(item 21) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
919 (X). Treatment of people of Indian origin in the Union of South Africa
(14 December 1955) (item 20)................................. . . . . . . .

7
8
8
8

prejudice to paragraph 11 of resolution 194 (III), to
make a determined effort, in co-operation with the Direc·
tor of the Agency, to seek and carry out projects capable
of supporting substantial numbers of refugees;

916 (X). Report of the Director of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
The General Assembly,

4. N ates with gratification that the Government of
the Hashemite Kingdom of the Jordan and the Agency
have made substantial progress toward resolving the
difficulties which impede the granting of rations to all
qualified refugee children in Jordan;

Recalling its resolutions 194 (III) of 11 December
1948, 302 (IV) of 8 December 1949, 393 (V) of 2
December 1950, 513 (VI) of 26 January 1952, 614
(VII) of 6 November 1952, 720 (VIII) of 27 November 1953 and 818 (IX) of 4 December 1954,

5. N ates the serious need of the other claimants for
relief as described in the special report• prepared by the
Director pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 818 (IX),
namely, the frontier villagers in Jordan, the non-refugee
population of the Gaza strip, a number of the refugees
in Egypt, and certain of the Bedouin;

Noting the annual report1 and the special report2 of the
Director of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the
special report 3 of the Advisory Commission of the
Agency,
Having reviewed the budgets for relief and rehabilitation prepared by the Director of the Agency,

6. Appeals to private organizations to give them increased assistance to the extent that local Governments
cannot do so ;

Noting that repatriation or compensation of the refugees, as provided for in paragraph 11 of resolution 194
(III), has not been effected, that no substantial progress
has been made in the programme for reintegration of
refugees endorsed in paragraph 2 of resolution 513
(VI) and that the situation of the refugees therefore
contmues to be a matter of grave concern,

7. Urges all Governments and individuals to support
these private organizations with food, goods and
services;
8. Requests the Negotiating Committee for ExtraBudgetary Funds, after the receipt of the budgets from
the Director of the Agency, to seek such funds as may
be required by the Agency;

1. Directs the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to pursue its programmes for the relief and rehabilitation of
refugees, bearing in mind the limitations imposed upon
it by the extent of the contributions for the fiscal year;

9. Appeals to the Governments of Member and nonmember States to make voluntary contributions to the
extent necessary to carry through to fulfilment the
Agency's programmes, and thanks the numerous religious, charitable and humanitarian organizations for
their valuable and continuing work in assisting the
refugees;

2. Requests the Agency to continue its consultation
with the United Nations Conciliation Commission for
Palestine in the best interest of their respective tasks,
with particular reference to paragraph 11 of resolution
194 (III);

10. Expresses its thanks to the Director and the staff
of the Agency for their continued faithful efforts to
carry out their mandate, and requests the Governments
of the area to continue to facilitate the work of the
Agency and to ensure the protection of its personnel
and property ;

3. Requests the Government of the area, without
1 · Official Records of the General Assembly, Tenth Session,
Supplement No.15 (A/2978).
2 lbid., Supplement No. 15 A (A/2978/Add.1).
, Ibid., Tenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 22, document
A/3017.

11. Requests the Director of the Agency to continue
7

8

General Assembly -

to submit the reports referred to in paragraph 21 of
resolution 302 (IV) as well as the annual budgets.

550th plenary meeting,
3 December 1955.
917 (X). The question of race conflict in South
Africa resulting from the policies of apartheid
of the Government of the Union of South
Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the question of
race conflict in South Africa resulting from the policies
of apartheid of the Government of the Union of South
Africa,
Recalling section E of resolution 377 A (V) of 3
November 1950, in which it expressed its conviction
that a genuine and lasting peace depends also upon the
observance of all the principles and purposes established
in the Charter of the United Nations, upon the implementation of the resolutions of the General Assembly
and other principal organs of the United Nations intended to achieve the maintenance of international peace
and security and especially upon respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms
for all,
Reiterating its resolutions 103 (I) of 19 November
1946 and 616 B (VII) of 5 December 1952 in whi, 1
the General Assembly has declared, inter alia, that it is
in the higher interests of humanity to put an immediate
end to religious and so-called racial persecution and discrimination, and that governmental policies which are designed to perpetuate or. increase discrimination are inconsistent with the pledges of the Members under Article
56 of the Charter,
1

Noting that the United Nations Commission on the
Racial Situation in the Union of South Africa has now
submitted its third report,•

Tenth Session

6. Calls on the Government of the Union of South
Africa to observe the obligations contained in Article 56
of the Charter.
551st plenary meeting,
6 December 1955.

918 (X). Admission of new Members to the
United Nations 5

The General Assembly,
Having noted the general sentiment which has been
expressed on numerous occasions in favour of the widest
possible membership of the United Nations,
Having received the preliminary report6 of the Committee of Good Offices established by General Assembly
resolution 718 (VIII) of 23 October 1953,
Taking into account the statements about the admis·
sion of new Members made by permanent members of
the Security Council in the general debate at the present
session of the General Assembly,
Believing that a broader representation in the membership of the United Nations will enable the Organization to play a more effective role in the current international situation,
1. Expresses appreciation of the work and efforts
of the Committee of Good Offices ;

2. Requests the Security Council to consider, in the
light of the general opinion in favour of the widest possible membership of the United Nations, the pending
applications for membership of all those eighteen countries about which no problem of unification arises;
3. Requests further that the Security Council make
its report on these applications to the General Assembly
during the present session.
552nd plenary meeting,
8 December 1955.

1. Commends the United Nations Commission on the
Racial Situation in the Union of South Africa for its
constructive work;

919 (X). Treatment of people of Indian origin
in the Union of South Africa

2. Notes with regret that the Government of the
Union of South Africa again refused to co-operate with
the Commission;

Having considered the report 7 of the Secretary-General relating to the question of the treatment of people
of Indian origin in the Union of South Africa, sub-.
mitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 816
(IX) of 4 November 1954,

3. Recommends the Government of the Union of
South Africa to take note of the Commission's report;
4. Expresses its concern at the fact that the Government of the Union of South Africa continues to give
effect to the policies of apartheid, notwithstanding the
request made to it by the General Assembly to reconsider its ,position in the light of the high principles contained in the Charter and taking into account the pledge
of all Member States to promote respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms without distinction as
to race;
5. Reminds the Government of the Union of South
Africa of the faith it had reaffirmed, in signing the
Charter, in fundamental human rights and in the dignity
and worth of the human person;
4

Ibid., Tenth Sessi~1, Sutplrment No. 14 (A/2953).

The General Assembly,

1. N ates that the negotiations envisaged in resolution 816 (IX) have not been pursued;
2. Urges the parties concerned to pursue negotiations
with a view to bringing about a settlement of the question
of the treatment of people of Indian origin in the Union
of South Africa;
3. Invites the parties to report as appropriate, jointly
or separately, to the General Assembly at its next session.

554th plenary meeting,
14 December 1955.
5

See also resolution 995 (X).
Official Records of the General Assembly, Tenth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 21, document A/2973.
1 Ibid., agenda item 20, document A/300i.
6
