S/PRST/2005/23

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 June 2005
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5201st meeting of the Security Council, held on 15 June 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Letter dated
31 March 1998 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Papua
New Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1998/287)”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the First General Elections for the
President and Members of the House of Representatives of the Autonomous
Region of Bougainville held from 20 May through 9 June 2005, and considers
that they were competently and transparently conducted, as noted by the
International Observer Team. The Council congratulates the Autonomous
Bougainville Government and the people of Bougainville on this achievement
and takes note that these elections, which reflect the expressed will of the
people of Bougainville, mark a significant and historical landmark in the
Bougainville peace process and make it possible to enter into a new stage for
further implementation of the Peace Agreement.
“The Council further welcomes the inauguration of the Autonomous
Bougainville Government in its full capacity, and affirms its continuing
support for the people of Bougainville.
“The Council urges those who did not participate in the electoral process
to respect the outcome of the elections and support without delay the
Autonomous Bougainville Government in its peacebuilding efforts.
“The Security Council pays tribute to the efforts of the Government of
Papua New Guinea and the Bougainville leaders for fully implementing the
Bougainville Peace Agreement. The Security Council commends the support
by the international community, in particular the significant contributions
made by the countries in the region, partners in the donor community as well
as the United Nations. The Council also expressed its appreciation for the
commendable role played by the Commonwealth and the Pacific Islands
Forum in dispatching electoral observers for the smooth conduct of the
elections.
“The Security Council notes with satisfaction that the performance of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Bougainville (UNOMB), as well as that
of its preceding United Nations Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB),

05-38626 (E) 150605

*0538626*

S/PRST/2005/23

manifested that a small United Nations special political mission with a clearly
defined mandate can make a critical contribution to a regional conflict
resolution effort in an efficient and effective manner.
“The Security Council encourages the ongoing support and commitment
by the international community to the efforts by the Government of Papua
New Guinea and the people of Bougainville in pursuit of their economic and
social development, as well as, for a sustainable peace in the region.”

2
