UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
TWENTY-NINTH

COUNCIL
RECORDS

YEAR

1,773”

MEETING:

NEW

30 MAY

1974

Jg[f

1 ij

‘$63

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/1773)
of the agenda

.......................,............

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*..............................

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 30 May 1974 from the Permanent Representative of $khe United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1304);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General
(S/l 1302 and Add.1) . . . . . . . . ,:. . . . . . . . .

Page
1
1

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
dqcument.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/...) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

1773rd MEETING

Held in New York on Thursday, 30 May 1974, at 3 p.m.
President:

Mr. Charles Gatere MAINA

presided over these meetings and to express my admiration
for your performance as a valued member of the Council.

(Kenya).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya,
Mauritania, Perp, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon and United States of
America.

3. I welcome also the opportunity to discuss the situation
in the Middle East. In view of the importance of the subject
matter which is to be disclosed to members of the Council, I
should like-while
reserving my right to speak later-to
request you to give the floor to the Secretary-General, who,
I understand, has a report on important developments.
4. The PRESIDENT:
General.

Provisional agenda (WAgendaI1773)
1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda

I now give the floor to the Secretary-

5. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
The Security Council
has before it my report contained in document S/11302/
Add.1 to which are annexed the texts of the Agreement on
Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces and the
Protocol concerning the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force.

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 30 May 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/l 1304);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General (S/11302 and
Add. 1)

6. The announcement of this Agreement, which is the
result of many days of hard negotiation and which will be
signed at Geneva tomorrow, 31 May, is most welcome and
encouraging news. It is an achievement upon which all those
concerned are to be congratulated. I hope and believe that
the achievement of this Agreement on Disengagement will
constitute another important step towards a just and lasting
settlement in the Middle East, for which the Council has
worked for so many years.

l%e meeting was called to order at 3.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
l%e agenda was adopted.
‘Ihe situation ln the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 30 May 1974 from the Permanent Representative of the United States of America to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/11304);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General (S/11302 and Add.1)

7. The Agreement and the Protocol call for the creation of
a United Nations Disengagement Observer Force. I shall
take the necessary steps in accordance with the provisions of
the Protocol, if the Security Council so decides, I should like
to inform the Council, in a preliminary way, that in this
event it would be my intention to set up the Force on the
basis of the same general principles as those defined in my
report on the implementation of Security Council resolution
340 (1973) [S/110.52/Rev.Z], which was approved by the
Council in its resolution 341 (1973) of 27 October 1973.

1. The PRESIDENT:
This meeting of the Security
Council has been convened in accordance with the
request of the representative of the United States contained in a letter [S/II304J dated 30 May 1974 addressed
to me. In the letter the representative of the United States
requested an urgent meeting of the Council to consider
the situation in the Middle East, in particular the disengagement of Israeli and Syrian forces. Also inscribed on
the agenda is the report of the Secretary-General
[S/11302 and Add. I-J.

8. It would also be my intention that the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force be drawn, in the first
instance at any rate, from United Nations military personnel
already in the area. I would, of course, be in consultation
with the Security Council and the Governments concerned,
as well as those providing personnel, about the selection of
the elements of the Force.

2. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): Mr. President,
since this is my first opportunity to address you in your
capacity as President of the Council, I wish to take note of
the patience, dignity and wisdom with which you have

9. As members of the Council are probably aware, I have a
long-standing plan to visit the United Nations peacekeeping operations in the Middle East next week. At that
1

.Ytime I shall have the opportunity for direct consultations
with the Governments concerned, as well as with the United
Nations personnel on the spot. In view of this new develop
ment, my trip will provide a useful opportunity to clarify a
number of practical issues. I’shall, of course, keep the Security Council fully informed of the developments in this
matter.

ready to assist the parties concerned and the Security Council in any way we can.
11. The PRESIDENT: As no other representative wishes
to speak, I assume that the business of this brief meeting is
concluded. However, as the Council has heard from the
report of the Secretary-General, we shall most likely have
business before us very soon, and, if that does prove to be
the case, it is my intention to call a meeting of the Council
tomorrow morning at -an appropriate time.

10. Before concluding, I wish to express again my satisfaction at this positive development and my hope that it will
lead to further progress. In this connexion, it goes without
saying that I and my colleagues in the Secretariat stand

7Xe meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

/

2

00300

.

.

74-82001-April

1983-2,200
