S/PV.8230

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8230th meeting

Thursday, 12 April 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Michon
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Ms. Pierce
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-10453 (E)
*1810453*

S/PV.8230

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing
by Ambassador Sacha Sergio Llorentty Solíz of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, in his capacity as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Llorentty Solíz.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia): I
am pleased to have this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) in its task of
overseeing the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
As we all recognize the importance of resolution
1540 (2004) as a key element in the global effort to
prevent the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons and their means of delivery to
non-State actors, including terrorists. I must stress
that we have a truly challenging task in overseeing the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Resolution
1540 (2004) is a platform for cooperation to prevent
non-State actors from gaining access to weapons of
mass destruction. We need to be clear that without
cooperation it would be impossible to address the
issue at the global level. In that context, I would like to
inform the Security Council about the main activities
of the 1540 Committee since my previous briefing to
the Council (see S/PV.7985) and to give an overview of
upcoming events and some prospects for this year.
In 2018, the Committee continues to build on the
momentum imparted to its work by the outcome of
the 2016 comprehensive review and the subsequent
resolution 2325 (2016), of 15 December 2016. Under
that resolution the Security Council directed the 1540
Committee to intensify its efforts to promote the full
implementation of all obligations under resolution 1540
(2004) by all States. To that end, detailed proposals
were incorporated into the programme of work for 2018,
which will shortly be submitted. The Committee, inter
alia, plans to hold discussions on enforcing appropriate
2/16

12/04/2018

effective laws for the prohibition of activities under
paragraph 2 of resolution 1540 (2004); to take note
of the continually evolving nature of the risks of
proliferation; and to hold a closed expert-level meeting
of the Committee to consider other issues highlighted
in resolution 2325 (2016).
In addition, a report on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) from all Member States remains
one of the highest priorities for the Committee. In that
regard, I am pleased to inform the Security Council that
we received two first reports in 2017, from Equatorial
Guinea and Zimbabwe. More recently, in early 2018,
we also received a first report from Timor-Leste.
That brings the number of States that have submitted
national reports to 180. However, we still have before
us the challenge of 13 non-reporting States. To achieve
universal reporting as soon as possible may include
issuing notes verbales to Member States that reiterate the
requirements on reporting on national implementation
and meeting country representatives on the margins of
the General Assembly.
States are also encouraged to inform the Committee
of their points of contact for the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). In 2017, Belize, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Costa Rica and Mauritania did that,
bringing the number of States that have now done so
to 101. To strengthen the capabilities of the points of
contact and of their network as a whole, in 2017 the
Committee organized one regional training course for
the Asia-Pacific region. The seminar was hosted for
the second time by China. Two more training courses
for national points of contact are planned in 2018:
one for the African region in Addis Ababa in June,
in cooperation with the African Union, and the other
for the region of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe in Russia in September.
Voluntary national action plans for the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) were another priority of
the Committee, which continued to work with the
support of regional and subregional organizations to
help Member States to develop and to implement such
voluntary action plans. The Committee received five
new national action plans during 2017, while Kyrgyzstan
and Uzbekistan already submitted their reviewed and
second voluntary national action plans. As of today,
31 national action plans have been received.
The Group of Experts of the Committee participated
in round tables intended to develop new national action
18-10453

12/04/2018

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

plans in El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Mongolia,
Suriname, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.
The work on national action plans with other countries
will be continued at their request during the current year.
The Committee also continued to promote the
sharing of experience, including through peer reviews,
in order to evaluate and to reinforce effective practices
in the effective implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). The peer review meetings conducted in 2017
by Colombia and Chile and by Belarus, Kyrgyzstan and
Tajikistan, respectively, constitute very good examples
of that effective mechanism. The Committee will
continue to support States that wish to conduct peer
reviews and will actively encourage such meetings,
where appropriate.
To enhance its capacity to better monitor the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), the
Committee considered and approved a revised matrix
format last year. The changes made streamlined the
existing matrix by better reflecting the obligations
set out in resolution 1540 (2004). In accordance with
resolution 2325 (2016), the revised matrix also takes
into account the specificities of States with respect
to their ability to manufacture and to export related
materials. During 2018, the Group of Experts will
convert the existing matrices to the new format.
With the objective of better supporting States
in developing more detailed and effective assistance
requests and, in response to their requests, better
providing them with effective assistance that meets their
needs, the Committee revised its assistance template
in March 2017. That will, in effect, strengthen the
Committee’s efforts as matchmaker. The new assistance
template is published on the Committee’s website. The
Committee received new assistance requests from
Belize, Kenya and Tajikistan. The requests were sent
to potential assistance providers, and summaries were
published on the Committee homepage, as usual.
In 2017, the Committee also considered how to
improve the facilitation of technical assistance to States
and decided to task its Group of Experts, at a State’s
invitation and subject to available resources, to actively
facilitate assistance. The Committee thereby seeks to
close the gap in assistance for those States and regions
that are committed to implementing their obligations
but have not been recipients of assistance offers so far.
In 2017, the Committee continued to exchange
information with the relevant international, regional

S/PV. 8230

and subregional organizations, involved them in its
outreach activities, for example, the training courses
for national 1540 points of contact, and encouraged
them to highlight obligations pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) in their model legislation and/or guidelines
or training of States, as appropriate. In 2017, there was
a total of 53 outreach events by and with international,
regional or subregional organizations in which the
Chair, Committee members and experts participated.
The Committee also continued to develop its
website as a tool to raise public awareness and to serve
as a source of information and a resource on resolution
1540 (2004) for use by Member States, Committee
members, civil society and industry. The new design
of the website, finalized in 2016, provides enhanced
usability and appeal.
On 24 December 2017, after consultations with the
Committee, the Secretary-General appointed six new
experts to the Group of Experts, as during the year
the term of some previous experts had ended. Three
new experts have already joined the Group, while the
remaing new colleagues will join by the end of April.
In that regard, a process will be initiated to select a new
Coordinator for the Group of Experts in the near future.
The outgoing members of the Security Council, Japan
and Egypt, respectively, serve as the Coordinators of
the Committee’s Working Group I, on monitoring and
national implementation, and Working Group III, on
cooperation with international organizations, including
the Security Council committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015),
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, and the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC), established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001). I would like to thank both
delegations for their vital contributions to the work of
the Committee. On behalf of the Committee, I would
like to welcome Mr. Enri Prieto of the delegation
of Peru, as Coordinator of Working Group I, and
Mr. Antonin Benjamin Bieke of the delegation of Côte
d’Ivoire, as Coordinator of Working Group III, both of
whom started working as Coordinators on 4 April.
I sincerely thank those States that have made
substantial contributions to the United Nations
Trust Fund for Global and Regional Disarmament
Activities, directly in support of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). Without those contributions the
Committee would be severely hampered in fulfilling

18-104533/16

S/PV.8230

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

its mandate in overseeing the implementation of the
resolution and in facilitating capacity-building where
it is needed most. In 2017 funds were used from grants
provided in previous years by Canada, Germany, Japan,
Kazakhstan, the Republic of Korea and the United
States, and from new donations made by Japan and the
European Union in 2017.
Before I conclude, I would like to make a few
additional points with regard to the Committee’s
planned outreach activities in the near future.
My own country, Bolivia, plans to host a regional
conference for Latin American and Caribbean countries
on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in May.
The Government of the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
together with the 1540 Committee, will convene a
conference for the States of Latin America and the
Caribbean on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and its follow-up resolutions in La Paz from
9 to 10 May. The conference is geared towards actively
supporting the implementation of the resolution in the
Latin American and Caribbean region. It will provide
a platform for States to present existing laws and
regulations that serve to facilitate the implementation
of the resolution. It will also provide an opportunity to
exchange views and effective practices on the handling
of related materials, with a view to strengthening the
region’s record on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). The Committee is considering holding
another regional assistance conference at an appropriate
time in 2018. The Committee will continue to build on
the good collaboration already established with key
international organizations in order to facilitate the
delivery of assistance and support for related activities.
With regard to cooperation with international
and regional organizations and United Nations
entities, the tasks set out in resolution 2325 (2016)
are specific. The Committee’s Group of Experts has
already held a meeting with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate to plan country visits
to be conducted later this year and with the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force to discuss how
best to collaborate to support the activities of the 1540
Committee, in particular with regard to scientific
and technological trends and the risk of misuse by
non-State actors. With regard to the key international
organizations that support its work, the 1540 Committee
will take advantage of visits to New York by the heads
of those organizations to meet with the Committee in
4/16

12/04/2018

order to encourage their support for the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004).
In continuation of the German initiative known
Wiesbaden process, which is synonymous with active
dialogue between States and industry on the effective
implementation of export controls, two more regional
events designed to engage the private sector are planned
for 2018. One is a regional meeting to be held on 16 and
17 April in New Delhi, and the other will take place
in September in the Republic of Korea. Such activities
are supported by a grant provided by Germany to the
Trust Fund. If members of the Committee would like
to receive additional information on the events, in
particular with regard to possible participation, I urge
them not to hesitate to contact the Group of Experts.
I would like to conclude by reiterating my
commitment to the full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). The threat of the use of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors is a clear and evolving
reality. With the strong support of the States Members
of the United Nations and other international partners,
the 1540 Committee will continue its efforts to prevent
that risk. With the support of its Group of Experts and
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs,
the Committee stands ready to cooperate with and, as
requested, provide assistance to States in their efforts
to implement resolution 1540 (2004) so as to contribute
to achieving our common objective of preventing the
catastrophic use of weapons of mass destruction by
non-State actors.
I would like to thank all delegations that participated
not only in our work but also in developing our
programme of work, which has just been distributed.
Without the continuous assistance of all delegations, it
would be impossible to achieve our goals.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Llorentty Solíz for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I sincerely thank
our Bolivian colleague for his briefing on the work of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). We welcome the new
Coordinators. At the outset, I would like to state that we
were very pleased to have been paired with Equatorial
Guinea in terms of capacity-building.
18-10453

12/04/2018

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Resolution 1540 (2004) was the first subject on
which I worked when I came to the Security Council,
10 years ago — my first time here. I am therefore very
pleased to have this opportunity to talk about it today
and to be able to say that for the United Kingdom the
1540 Committee is a vital component of the international
order. We need to empower it to fulfil its mandate, and
we need to support it to the hilt.
As many of us have already said this week, we
risk seeing a situation that the Security Council
should dread — chemical and biological weapons
becoming a routine part of fighting. Regrettably, we
have been confronted in very recent times by multiple
incidents of the use of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) by non-State actors. The Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism found that Da’esh used
mustard gas on at least two occasions in Syria. There
are multiple instances of mustard gas use by Da’esh in
Iraq. A planned chemical terrorism attack was thwarted
in Australia in July last year. Those incidents clearly
exemplify why the 1540 Committee and its work to
prevent the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons by non-State actors is so important.

S/PV. 8230

with impunity, where our citizens live in real fear of an
indiscriminate attack at any time and without warning.
It is not enough just to condemn that, we need to find a
way to take meaningful action and ensure that there are
meaningful consequences for perpetrators. We have all
benefited from the international order that has kept us
safe since the end of the Second World War. It behooves
us all to make every effort to uphold that international
architecture. It is clear that not all countries share that
view, and we have talked about that several times this
week. With respect to the 1540 Committee, there is one
Council member that has sought, at every opportunity,
to slow progress and dilute the substance of every
proposal, whether that be the programme of work,
deadlines, calls to action or efforts to take progress
forward. All of those have, sadly, been consistently
watered down, and the Group of Experts has even been
prevented from travelling.

Those events are awful enough. Yet, in acts of
unbelievable irresponsibility, those risks have been
exacerbated by the use of weapons of mass destruction
by State actors. The chemical-weapons attacks in
Douma and the attempted murders in Salisbury are the
most recent examples, but there is also the assassination
of Kim Jong-nam in Malaysia and the horror of Khan
Shaykhun a little more than a year ago. I take this
opportunity to state that, with regard the invitation from
the Council for us to update members on the incident in
Salisbury, we have requested a meeting next week to
deliver a briefing on the findings of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.

If we are serious about dealing with the threats
that the Committee was set up to counter, then this
state of affairs cannot continue. Since last February
the 1540 Committee has met formally only once, and
barely any progress has been made with respect to the
actions agreed in the 2017 programme of work. That
means also that the commitments made in the relatively
modest resolution 2325 (2016) have not been fulfilled.
The new programme of work has only just been agreed,
two months later than legally mandated. In those two
months, the Committee was left without clear objectives
or activities to pursue. I cannot think of any legitimate
reason that any country would want to affect the work
of the 1540 Committee in such an adverse way. I appeal
to everybody around the table to redouble efforts so
that we have an ambitious programme of work for the
Committee. We must stand up for the universal norms
and standards we have spent decades building to create
an effective and powerful non-proliferation regime,
whether that deals with State actors or non-State actors.

The use of WMD by States is a worrisome pattern
that clearly undermines our collective efforts to deter
and eradicate the use of such weapons by State and
non-State actors alike. We very strongly support the work
to increase the capacity of States and are encouraged by
the fact that there are now only 13 non-reporting States.
Any non-reporting is troubling, but it is good that the
number is decreasing. As I said, we were delighted to
be paired with Equatorial Guinea and provide support.

Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First, let me
express our gratitude and appreciation to the Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), my esteemed colleague from Bolivia, for his
briefing on the work of the Committee and for his efforts
to achieve the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). We furthermore welcome the new members and
Coordinators of the Group of Experts and wish them
well in their new positions.

Nonetheless, it is clear that we stand on the cusp of a
nightmare where weapons of mass destruction are used

I would like to touch upon three points: first, the
threat of weapons of mass destruction; secondly, the

18-104535/16

S/PV.8230

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

12/04/2018

importance of resolution 1540 (2004); and thirdly, our
work going forward.

the autonomous countries in our Kingdom are found
there: Aruba, Curaçao and Sint Maarten.

On my first point, regarding the threat of weapons
of mass destruction, the use and the threat of use of
such weapons to international peace and security is and
remains real. When such attacks occur, death comes in
a gruesome way, and survivors have to deal with the
aftermath of such attacks for the rest of their lives. The
challenges and opportunities presented by scientific
and technological developments also have an impact
on the current situation. We feel very strongly that this
aspect should not be forgotten in the Committee’s work.
Let me also reiterate that we fully support the ambition
of the Chair to bring the number of national reports to
100 per cent, as he just mentioned.

Let me conclude by reiterating our support for
the important work of the 1540 Committee. It is
necessary to build on the momentum created by the
2016 comprehensive review. It is only by working
better together to implement the resolution, both in the
Council and among the wider membership, that we can
prevent weapons of mass destruction from falling into
the hands of terrorists.

That brings me to my second point, the importance
of the mechanism to prevent the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction among non-State actors.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is key to addressing that
threat. With its focus on the use of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors, the resolution fills a
clear gap in the international non-proliferation regime.
Resolution 1540 (2004) also complements the other
important work being undertaken in the area of nuclear
security, such as by the International Atomic Energy
Agency, as well as the impetus in this field that was
achieved through the Nuclear Security Summit cycle.
Therefore, the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) should be a priority to us all. We underline the
importance of capacity-building in States that need
assistance when it comes to export controls, an issue
also mentioned earlier by the Chair. That issue is not
only relevant for the 1540 Committee, but for many of
the subsidiary organs.
Turning to my third point, the urgent need for
concrete measures to strengthen the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), in the light of the importance
of that implementation, we are pleased that agreement
was finally reached this morning on a programme
of work. Let me congratulate my colleague from
Bolivia for that achievement. However, this is not a
time to be complacent. Now we need concrete action.
The Committee must continue its work effectively
and efficiently in line with the measures set out in
resolution 2325 (2016), especially those in paragraphs
8 and 9. Outreach towards the wider membership
remains a key priority for us. In particular, we welcome
the conference just mentioned by the Chair focused on
Latin American and Caribbean countries, as three of
6/16

Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Peruvian presidency for holding this meeting. I
also thank Ambassador Llorentty Solíz and his team
for their briefing, as well as for the work done at the
healm of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). The adoption
today of its programme of work, which has been under
discussion for some time, and the content of which
needed to be commensurate with our expectations, is
an important and positive development. It allows us to
propose and define future activities by capitalizing on
the achievements of previous years.
With the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004)
and all subsequent resolutions, the Security Council
established the threat of the proliferation and use of
weapons of mass destruction, in particular by non-State
actors, as one of its priorities, thereby asserting its role
as guarantor of the non-proliferation regime. However,
that regime is now clearly threatened. It is being tested
across the board by the persistent risk of a nuclear
North Korea, the continuation of destabilizing ballistic
activities in the Middle East and by the re-emergence
of chemical weapons in Syria — where they are used
by the Al-Assad regime and by Da’esh, and in Salisbury
and elsewhere. Ultimately, proliferation is no longer
the monopoly of a single type of actor; the risk of
non-State actors getting hold of sensitive materials is a
dangerous reality. That is why the 1540 Committee is
more relevant than ever. In that context, to contain and
halt proliferation, we must, more than ever, increase
our mobilization. That is why the raison d’être of the
1540 Committee and the related resolutions are more
relevant than ever.
The 1540 Committee is the architect of the action
taken by all States that contribute concretely to joint
efforts against proliferation. I would like to pay tribute
to the Group of Experts, whose analysis and efforts to
raise awareness are indispensable to the work of the
18-10453

12/04/2018

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

1540 Committee. The review they conducted in 2016
confirmed that. The progress in the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and subsequent resolutions are
tangible at the national and regional levels. However,
despite the undeniable progress of recent years, much
remains to be done.
Each of us must strive to calibrate our efforts to
implement resolution 1540 (2004). We must all prevent
and suppress the financing of proliferation. We must
secure the most sensitive goods and materials in our
territories, and strengthen export controls, especially
against the risk of the instrumentalization of emerging
technologies, which we must address. France has
modernized its national counter-proliferation legal
system, which now criminalizes proliferation activities
and supress the funding of such activities. My country
is also particularly involved in preventing the risk of
the acquisition by terrorists of sensitive nuclear and
radioactive material, including radioactive sources, the
securing of which we would like to see strengthened.
We support the steps taken by the Global Initiative
to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and those of the Group
of Seven Global Partnership against the Spread of
Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction, which we
will head in 2019.
Let me highlight the importance of cooperation,
assistance and interaction in all of our efforts. Because
we are more effective together, we must not deploy
our efforts to combat proliferation in an isolated way.
On cooperation and assistance, I can assure Council
members of the commitment of my delegation, which
is playing the role of coordinating the Working
Group on Assistance with a view to improving the
effectiveness of the assistance mechanism according to
the mentioned guidelines.
France attaches great importance to strengthening
the regional dimension of assistance and to ensuring
better alignment between the needs and the proposed
assistance. The holding of regional events, like those
organized by the African Union in 2016, is a recipe for
success, and we must draw from that experience. We
also welcome actions taken by other stakeholders that
were mentioned. I take note specifically of the European
Union, which, through its dynamic and ongoing
awareness efforts, is helping promote cooperation.
Finally, if we are to be effective, we must also
take stock of our challenges by enhancing synergies
with others that share the same challenges outside

S/PV. 8230

of the United Nations, like the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, the World Customs Organization
or export control regimes and the various bodies
that comprise them. I am specifically thinking of
committees dealing with terrorism. These interactions
are to be encouraged.
Let me state the obvious: at a time when challenges
to our security are greater than ever, there is no
alternative to the non-proliferation regime. France has
never deviated from that position and will continue to
defend it by supporting and fully contributing to the
activities of the 1540 Committee.
Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I would like
to thank Ambassador Llorentty Solíz for his briefing on
the work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) — a landmark
resolution in its day, which has become one of the pillars
of the international non-proliferation architecture.
Given the ongoing and evolving threats posed
by the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
today’s briefing reminds us of the critical importance
of fully implementing resolution 1540 (2004) for the
sake of international peace and security. The shocking
use of chemical weapons in Iraq, Malaysia, the United
Kingdom, as well as the egregious and systematic use
of chemical weapons in Syria, show that the threat
posed by weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) is all
too real today.
Furthermore, the continued proliferation of WMDs
by irresponsible actors increases the likelihood that
those heinous weapons or the capacity and knowledge
to develop them will fall into the hands of non-State
actors who carry out terrorist attacks. Given those
persistent threats, the United States will continue to
prioritize efforts to strengthen our counter-proliferation
measures in line with our national security strategy
and the Nuclear Posture Review. Our efforts are
aimed at ensuring our security and the security of the
international community in order to prevent WMD
proliferation by non-State actors.
The full and universal implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) is integral to achieving that goal. The
United States will continue to provide strong support
to a broad array of international organizations
contributing to non-proliferation and provide extensive
bilateral assistance to States seeking to implement
their obligations under the resolution. The United

18-104537/16

S/PV.8230

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

States has already provided more than $4.5 million in
grants to the 1540 Trust Fund, which helps encourage
States to address gaps in the implementation of their
1540 obligations. We also continue to invest hundreds
of millions of dollars in our partner countries for
cooperative threat reduction and other non-proliferation
and export-control-related assistance programmes
around the world to reduce the threat of WMDs.
We commend that Chair’s plan to hold a regional
conference in Latin America next month. Improving
implementation and exchanging best practices to
strengthen national obligations across Latin America is
very important. As a testament to our commitment to
the region, we have helped fund a grant for the regional
coordinator project of the Inter-American Committee
against Terrorism of the Organization of American
States (OAS), which is now helping OAS members to
develop 1540 national implementation action plans and
will promote the implementation of the resolution.
Turning to the many tasks that lie ahead for the
Committee, it is clear that the Committee must redouble
its efforts to implement its programme of work to
enhance the global implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). While we regret that it took nearly three months
to adopt the programme of work, we are pleased that
we can finally begin moving forward again. Now is the
time for the Committee to address real and evolving
challenges. In particular, the United States believes
the Committee should prioritize four areas in the
coming weeks.
First, the Committee must meet more regularly and
develop a clear strategy for achieving the many elements
of its programme of work. Last year, after holding one
formal Committee meeting, the Chair promised to
convene more meetings and get the Committee back to
work. We look forward to seeing him follow through on
that promise.
Secondly, since the Committee has selected new
experts, it should now turn to initiating a formal process
for appointing a coordinator. That will also help keep
the Committee on track for continued progress. We
look forward to working with the incoming experts,
who are critical to helping the Committee carry out its
very important mandate.
Thirdly, the Committee must also seek to develop
best approaches to enforce appropriate and effective
laws to implement resolution 1540 (2004), including by
developing national control lists.
8/16

12/04/2018

Finally, in 2016, the Council adopted resolution
2325 (2016) and said it would focus on the challenge
of controlling access to transfers of technology and
the evolving nature of the risks of proliferation due to
rapid advances in science, technology and international
commerce. We hope the Committee can take advantage
of a wide array of civil society and industry resources
to examine ways to combat those threats.
In conclusion, the United States recalls that
resolution 1540 (2004), a Chapter VII resolution, is
binding on all Member States. The implementation of
its provisions is not optional for any Member State.
In particular, in today’s context, we see no greater
risk of chemical weapons falling into the hands of
terrorists than a chemical-weapons programme that
is unverified and unaccounted for. For our part, the
United States will continue to fully support the work of
the 1540 Committee to stop the spread of weapons of
mass destruction.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): The delegation of Equatorial Guinea is
highly gratified by the holding of this meeting today.
As such, it conveys its congratulations to the Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), Mr. Sacha Sergio Llorentty
Solíz, Permanent Representative of the Plurinational
Republic of Bolivia. We would like to thank him
for his leadership, dedication and efforts as Chair of
that important Committee. We also thank the entire
Committee and the outgoing Group of Experts for the
work they have accomplished. We once again pledge
the readiness of the delegation of Equatorial Guinea to
work and participate actively in the Committee’s tasks.
We have taken good note of the report of the Chair
of the 1540 Committee on the activities carried out
over the course of 2017. We welcome the Committee’s
progress in the submission of national implementation
action plans by new States, among them Equatorial
Guinea, which submitted its first action plan in 2017 to
the Committee — a significant step towards achieving
this goal. We note that the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea is continuing its work towards the full and
correct implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
I encourage the Chair of the Committee to continue
divulging the implementation measures for resolution
1540 (2004). There are only 13 States left, which means
we are very close to reaching universality on national
action plans. In that regard, we stress the importance
18-10453

12/04/2018

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

S/PV. 8230

of joining forces with the 1540 Committee to that
end. That is why we believe it is urgent to advance
this discussion.

for using of chemical weapons in Syria? Syrians have
suffered seven years of war, while the Second World
War lasted only five years.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is deeply
concerned about the growing threat of terrorism and
the risk of non-State actors acquiring, developing
or employing nuclear, chemical or biological
weapons — or trafficking them. That would bring
about unforeseeable and devastating consequences
for humankind. The threat to global security is real and
very serious. Developed nations that have magnificent
infrastructure and security forces capable of countering
the terrorist threat and preventing non-State actors
from using weapons of mass destruction must bear in
mind that, if they do not help developing States gain
access to the same type of tracking, surveillance and
security infrastructure, especially at border crossings,
those deficiencies could be exploited by terrorists and
other non-State agents to obtain the raw materials
that make it possible for them to manufacture and
proliferate weapons mass destruction. Therefore, not
only is it imperative for all States to spare no effort
in prioritizing the adoption of measures at the national
level pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), but it is also
important for States, such as the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea, to secure other means to enable the correct and
successful implementation of the measures referred to
in the resolution.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea encourages all
parties involved in the conflict and those that have a
greater or lesser influence on the country to think a bit
about those Syrian children who are suffering so much
as if they were our own children and grandchildren, to
think of those Syrian women as if they were our wives
or sisters and to think of those elderly men and women
as if they were our mothers and fathers.

Equatorial Guinea acknowledges the significant
progress that has been made by the international
community in the elimination of chemical weapons. In
that regard, we want to stress the need for the destruction
of all categories of weapons of mass destruction, so that
humankind can live without the fear of the threat posed
by those weapons.
On Tuesday, 10 April, the Security Council once
again showed itself unable to be effective in the
conflict that the Syrian people are experiencing by
not being able to give Syrian children a place to play
without fear of the next bomb, not being able to give
Syrian women an opportunity to go out for a walk
and not being able to give the elderly and the sick an
opportunity to find medicine or go to the hospital (see
S/PV.8228). Is it so difficult for the Council, which is
entrusted with ensuring global peace and security, to
find a solution for all those people who are waiting on
this decision-making organ of the United Nations? Is it
so difficult to reach an agreement on an independent
investigative mechanism to identify those responsible

We must urgently work on a new consensual
draft resolution to establish a new mechanism for
monitoring and attributing responsibilities for the use
of chemical weapons.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I thank Ambassador
Sacha Llorentty Solíz for his briefing. I would also
like to express my delegation’s support for his further
efforts in steering the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
Poland attaches great importance to its
commitments on the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. With full conviction, we support
the implementation of legally binding instruments,
such as the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention and the
Biological Weapons Convention.
Resolution 1540 (2004) constitutes an important
complementary tool in this area, since it addresses
weapons of mass destruction-related threats caused by
non-State actors, which are increasing. Resolution 2325
(2016) calls upon States to take into account the evolving
nature of the risk of proliferation and rapid advances
in science and technology in their implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). Rapid technological advances
in the dual-use domain continue to outpace national
and international regulations. Non-State actors have
become more creative in weaponizing new technologies.
The use of weapons of mass destruction by terrorists is
a dreadful reality.
Let me just mention that the Joint Investigative
Mechanism attributed the use of chemical weapons
also, but not only, to Da’esh. All these developments
prove that resolution 1540 (2004) is not only still
relevant, but the importance of its full implementation
is perhaps greater than ever before.

18-104539/16

S/PV.8230

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

We also believe it is possible to build synergies
between the 1540 (2004) Committee and other relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations,
as well as functional groupings, such as the Global
Partnership against the Spread of Weapons and
Materials of Mass Destruction, the European Union
Chemical Biological Radiological and Nuclear Risk
Mitigation Centres of Excellence Initiative, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the Proliferation Security Initiative. They all have
tools to assist nations in better implementing their
non-proliferation commitments.
We are pleased that the programme of work of
the Committee, adopted earlier today, recognizes the
need for a structured and more regular discussion
based on monthly expert meetings of the Committee.
We hope that such regular meetings will contribute to
the revitalization of the Committee’s work, as well as
to further implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
We also hope that the process of selecting a new
coordinator of the Group of Experts will be finalized
soon, according to the established precedent.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank Ambassador
Sacha Llorentty Solíz, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), for his very informative briefing.
In the face of the rapidly increasing threat of
weapons of mass destruction, the implementation
of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 2325 (2016) is vital.
Especially considering the present threats besetting us,
the work of the 1540 (2004) Committee is more relevant
than ever. Kazakhstan, with its principled position
against the threats of weapons of mass destruction,
has always supported, and will continue to support the
activities of the 1540 Committee.
First, Kazakhstan will continue its tradition of
allocating voluntary contributions to the Trust Fund
for Global and Regional Disarmament Activities in
order to assist the Committee in ensuring States’
implementation of their obligations under resolution
1540 (2004).
Secondly, we congratulate the Committee on the
new composition of the Group of Experts. We wish
the representatives of Peru and Côte d’Ivoire success
in their new appointments as Coordinators of Working
Groups I and III.
10/16

12/04/2018

We should always keep in mind that the risk of
weapons of mass destruction falling into the hands of
non-State actors, together with the rapid growth of new
technologies, can evolve and increase. The Committee
is being proactive and doing a lot to respond to such
threats in a timely manner. In the report, in accordance
with the requests made at our previous meeting, we see
that a great deal of work has been done on outreach
activities, which has increased the number of countries
providing national reports and has increased the
monitoring and technical assistance provided to States
to strengthen their ability to confront the modern threat
of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Thirdly, we must not lose sight of nuclear security.
My President, Nursultan Nazarbayev, during the
opening ceremony of the International Atomic Energy
Agency Low-Enriched Uranium Bank in Kazakhstan
last August, noted the importance of the resumption of
the Nuclear Security Summits, which were conducted
by the United States from 2010 to 2016. We are in
favour of resuming such regular high-level meetings to
discuss topical issues related to the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.
Taking into account the evolving nature of the risks
of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
including the use by non-State actors of rapid advances
in science and technology, we reiterate our initiative
to establish a United Nations register on scientific
developments leading to the creation and advancement
of weapons of mass destruction, which would track
such dangerous discoveries.
As the Council is aware, Kazakhstan has developed
and promotes, with the support of the United Nations
community, the code of conduct for the achievement
of a world free of terrorism. Its implementation
will contribute not only to the goals and work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, but also to the activities
of the 1540 Committee, reflecting the importance and
necessity of protecting critical facilities from the threat
of terrorism. We express our support for the programme
of work of the 1540 Committee for a new period and
hope for its effective implementation. In its work, the
Committee should help ensure that Member States’
national policies and practices are consistent with the
goal of completely eliminating the threat of weapons of
mass destruction.
Finally, I would like to reaffirm Kazakhstan’s firm
commitment to consolidating the world community’s
18-10453

12/04/2018

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

efforts to rid the world of WMDs. This aim must be
achieved through the consistent strengthening and
expansion of the non-proliferation regime, primarily
within the framework of resolution 1540 (2004).
I wish to express the gratitude of my delegation for
the Committee’s excellent work and solid action plan
and to note in particular the able leadership of its Chair,
our colleague Sacha Llorenty Solíz. Our delegation
wishes once again to assure the Committee of our full
support for its work and readiness to actively engage in
its undertakings.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke
in French): The delegation of Côte d’Ivoire would
like to thank Ambassador Sacha Sergio Llorentty
Solíz, Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Bolivia and Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), for his
briefing on the activities of the Committee charged with
following up on the implementation of resolutions on
weapons of mass destruction. The subject at hand today
is particularly important and poignant given the recent
allegations of the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
By adopting unanimously, on 28 April 2004,
resolution 1540 (2004), the Council addressed the
challenge of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, thus making the resolution an important part
of the global security architecture. However, 14 years
later, our world continues to live under the persistent
threat of weapons of mass destruction, which represent
a clear and present challenge to the non-proliferation
regime. This very real and constantly evolving threat is
of concern to the entire international community.

S/PV. 8230

My delegation reaffirms the importance of
international cooperation and coordination to the
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
with a view to putting an end to this genuine threat
to international peace and security. Moreover, it is
important to ensure the effective application of and
strict respect for international legal norms relating to
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
In this regard, strengthening cooperation in the areas
of border controls, the monitoring of financial flows
and Internet networks, and legal assistance is more
necessary than ever before.
The delegation of Côte d’Ivoire would also like to
draw the attention of the Council and the international
community to the issue of the security of the numerous
stockpiles of fissile material that are not covered by
any international regulation and that could be used
to manufacture weapons of mass destruction. The
existence of such stockpiles increases the likelihood of
such substances falling into the hands of terrorist groups.
Here Côte d’Ivoire calls on Member States, with the
help of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons, to meet their international obligations under
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on their Destruction.

Of course, we welcome the significant progress
made in implementing resolution 1540 (2004) and
subsequent resolutions, but we must admit that a
great deal remains to be done given the threat of the
acquisition of weapons of mass destruction by non-State
actors, particularly terrorist organizations.

In this regard, the strengthening of national
capacities, assistance and awareness-raising are
important aspects of the implementation of the various
international legal instruments. My delegation is of the
view that the implementation of the various resolutions
is a long-term goal that requires that all stakeholders
involved, particularly Member States, international
and regional organizations, the private sector and
civil society, be vigilant and actively cooperate. States
must work together in order to establish good practices
that can prevent chemical agents from falling into the
wrong hands.

Côte d’Ivoire remains extremely concerned by
the risk of seeing such non-State actors develop,
acquire, manufacture, possess, transport, transfer or
use nuclear, chemical and biological weapons or their
means of delivery. That is why we strongly support
efforts to prevent the proliferation of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons and their means of delivery,
and to put in place appropriate oversight mechanisms
in order to prevent their trafficking.

The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) plays a key role in
the implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions on non-proliferation — something that
must constantly be stressed. My delegation welcomes
the work done in that respect, which has enabled
several Member States to submit their initial reports.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the improved cooperation
between the 1540 Committee and United Nations

18-1045311/16

S/PV.8230

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

and non-United Nations bodies aimed at addressing
non-proliferation challenges.
In that light, we call on the Committee, based
on its mandate, to step up dialogue with the relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations
so as to share experiences and lessons learned and to
identify areas of synergy that could be leveraged in
order to implement resolution 1540 (2004) to the benefit
of their respective member States.
Côte d’Ivoire also welcomes the second in-depth
review of the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), conducted in 2016 and which gave rise to
important recommendations. We hope that the next
review, planned for 2021, will make possible significant
progress in the area of the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction.
In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the adoption
of the 2018 programme of work by the members of the
Committee, which had been a priority. For its part,
Côte d’Ivoire, in its capacity as a Vice-Chair of the
1540 Committee, remains firmly committed to the
strengthening of the multilateral disarmament and
non-proliferation regimes and is prepared to make a
constructive contribution to achieving the goals of the
Committee, to which it once again reiterates its support.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Ambassador Llorentty Solíz, in
his capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), for his briefing.
Last year, the 1540 Committee conducted
a comprehensive review both of how States had
implemented the resolution over the previous five years
and of every aspect of its own work. Resolution 2325
(2016), which was adopted unanimously, established
a sound foundation for the Committee’s future work.
Recently, the 1540 Committee has done a great
deal to encourage Member States to report on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), conducting
outreach and regional training and stepping up technical
assistance, with positive results. China commends the
efforts of the Chair of the Committee and his team.
As the first Council resolution dedicated to the
issue of non-proliferation, resolution 1540 (2004) is an
important part of the international non-proliferation
regime. Over the years, the resolution and the
Committee’s work have played an important role in
strengthening the international non-proliferation regime
12/16

12/04/2018

and enhancing the capacity of all States to prevent
proliferation. The international non-proliferation
situation continues to be challenging and demands
that we all continue to improve their cooperation and
their synergy.
First, we must build a political consensus and
achieve shared security. All countries should subscribe
to the modern concept of security, according to which
we must work to achieve common, comprehensive,
collaborative and sustainable security, build a security
architecture that is fair and just for all and by all,
create a peaceful and stable international environment
and eradicate the conditions that fuel terrorism and
proliferation activities as soon as possible.
Secondly, we should strengthen State responsibility
and promote pragmatic cooperation. The primary
responsibility for non-proliferation lies with
Governments. Countries should be respected and
supported in developing anti-proliferation policies in
the context of their national realities and improving their
non-proliferation legislation. All parties should intensify
their pragmatic cooperation on non-proliferation, based
on equality and mutual respect, and focus on meeting
developing countries’ needs by providing international
assistance in this area.
Thirdly, we should maintain fair and balanced
approaches and look to reach solutions through
political and diplomatic means. All parties should
work consistently to find political and diplomatic
solutions to urgent non-proliferation-related issues.
Unilateralism, double standards and discriminatory
practices should be rejected so as to safeguard the
authority and effectiveness of the international
non-proliferation regime.
Fourthly, we must comply with the resolution’s
mandate to the letter and conduct the Committee’s work
in an orderly manner. The principle of consensus should
continue to prevail, and the Committee’s Working
Groups should function in a balanced manner, with the
aim of increasing all countries’ capacity to implement
the resolutions and provide a solid foundation for
promoting their full implementation.
China stands firmly against the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery. We have consistently and diligently met
our international non-proliferation obligations and
taken an active part in international and regional
non-proliferation cooperation. We are committed
18-10453

12/04/2018

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

to advocating for a political solution to urgent
non-proliferation-related issues and support the rightful
role of the United Nations in this area. As always, we
stand ready to work with all parties to contribute to
advancing the work of the 1540 Committee, strengthen
the global governance of non-proliferation and maintain
world peace and security.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Llorentty Solíz, Permanent
Representative of Bolivia, in his capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), for his briefing on the Committee’s work. We
thank the Ambassador of Bolivia and his delegation for
their stewardship of this subsidiary body of the Security
Council and for their flexibility and ability to include
differing points of view in their summary documents.
We also thank the entire team of the Committee’s Group
of Experts for its professionalism.
Combating the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs) is among the Russian
Federation’s military and political priorities. As with
all other serious issues, it requires the concerted and
coordinated efforts of all States, without exception. We
are eager to find common ground with our partners so
as to promote the non-proliferation agenda as quickly
as possible, especially since the problems in this area
continue to worsen. Resolution 1540 (2004), which
Russia and the United States were instrumental in
bringing about, rightly occupies a special place in the
global non-proliferation architecture. It was designed
to establish a robust legal and law-enforcement bulwark
for preventing WMDs from falling into the hands of
non-State actors, including terrorists.
The value of resolution 1540 (2004) also lies in the
fact that it is a tool for cooperation rather than coercion
or the extraction of services. The newer resolution, 2325
(2016), adopted as an outcome of the review process for
resolution 1540 (2004), strengthens its non-proliferation
potential, facilitates the exchange of best practices for
its implementation and increases the effectiveness of
the assistance provided to countries that need it while
taking due account of their specific requirements. We
believe that it is States that have the responsibility for
implementing resolution 1540 (2004). International and
regional organizations, industry, business, academia
and scientific circles, as well as other sectors of civil
society, play an important supporting role by assisting
States in implementing specific provisions of this
important Security Council resolution.

S/PV. 8230

The resolution’s institutional framework corresponds
to its mandated tasks. We believe that our approach
to the assessment of the operations of this Security
Council subsidiary body and its Group of Experts
should be a realistic one. Creating additional
bureaucratic structures around 1540 Committee
issues, limiting experts’ contracts and advocating
artificially for radical and unconsidered proposals
can create additional obstacles rather than increasing
the effectiveness of the Committee’s work. We should
therefore be guided by the principle of “first do no
harm”. In the light of the ongoing activity of the Islamic
State and other terrorist groups in Syria that have
mastered chemical-weapon technology and are making
active use of it, the significance of a collective effort to
suppress the heinous problem of chemical terrorism is
only increasing. But it is important to work in concert
while realizing that as the situation in Syria evolves,
terrorists, including those who have had practical
experience in the area of chemical weapons, will try to
go into hiding in third countries.
For our part, we are eager to strengthen the WMD
non-proliferation regime, including through the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We stand
ready to engage constructively with the Chair of the
Committee and our partners.
With regard to the references made today to the
Salisbury incident, I will be brief. We are waiting for
information from the investigation and answers to
the questions that we have asked. I am not wrong in
emphasizing that we are all pretty tired of unproven
statements. The same applies to eastern Ghouta, where
we hope peaceful civilian life will soon be restored.
The experts from the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons are investigating the allegations,
and we hope that they will be permitted to do that.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to begin by
thanking Ambassador Llorentty Solíz for his briefing
and commending him and Bolivia for their efforts in
steering the work of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). They deserve our praise.
Ethiopia welcomes the progress made in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and subsequent
resolutions aimed at preventing the proliferation to
non-State actors of weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery. We note in particular, as the
Chair of the Committee indicated, that the number of
States that have submitted their national reports has

18-1045313/16

S/PV.8230

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

reached 180, which in our view is a clear manifestation
of the political commitment of States Members of the
United Nations to addressing the threat posed by the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, their
means of delivery and related materials.
However, we note with concern that of the
13 Member States that have yet to submit at least a first
national report, 11 are in Africa. We have also noted
with great concern, after a recent informal briefing by
the Committee’s Group of Experts, that Africa remains
far behind other regions both in terms of overall
implementation and of implementation in relation to
the establishment of domestic controls to prevent the
proliferation of these weapons of mass destruction,
particularly with regard to controlling related
materials and implementing measures in the areas of
accounting, securing, physical protection, border and
law enforcement, export and trade-related controls.
It is in that context that I would like to welcome
the upcoming training session for points of contact
for the African region, to be held in Addis Ababa in
cooperation with the African Union. I would also like
to reiterate our previous call for enhanced cooperation
with the African Union in the implementation of the
Common African Defence and Security Policy and
other regional frameworks, such as the African NuclearWeapon-Free Zone. I would further like to encourage
the Committee to strengthen its assistance framework
to Member States, upon their request, with a view to
addressing the implementation gaps, particularly in
the area of domestic control measures, as well as in
adopting and enforcing appropriate and effective laws
that comprehensively address the proliferation risk
caused by non-State actors, including terrorists.
It is important for the Committee to work closely
with the Group of Experts to address the challenges
related to the assistance framework, particularly in the
areas of matchmaking, the availability and conditions
of assistance for all States and the limited number of
responses to requests for assistance. We have noted from
the Chair’s briefing that there is a plan to undertake
country visits later this year with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, and that the Group
of Experts had a meeting with the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force to identify areas of
collaboration. In addition, further collaboration should
be envisaged between the 1540 Committee Group of
Experts and members of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team established pursuant to
14/16

12/04/2018

resolutions 1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015) concerning
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida and
the Taliban and associated individuals and entities.
We are hopeful that this issue will be taken up by the
Committee in the implementation of its programme of
work for 2018.
I would like to conclude by affirming my
delegation’s commitment to working closely with
the Chair and members of the Council to that end. I
would also like to reaffirm Ethiopia’s commitment
to continuing taking all the measures necessary to
prevent weapons of mass destruction from falling into
the hands of non-State actors. The possibility that they
may fall into terrorists’ hands has always worried us.
We will never refrain from doing whatever is necessary
to contribute to the full implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions in this regard.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
thank the Ambassador of Bolivia for his briefing to
the Security Council today and for Bolivia’s continued
efforts as Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). We welcome the important
developments in the 1540 Committee’s work during
2017, which included the appointment of six new
members to the Group of Experts. We are pleased that
three of the new experts have already commenced their
work and that the remaining three will join the Group
in the coming weeks. I would also like to express my
appreciation to Japan and Egypt for their contributions
during their time on the Council as the coordinators of
Working Groups I and III, respectively. We welcome
Peru and Côte d’Ivoire as the new coordinators of those
two Working Groups and look forward to working with
them. They can be assured of our full support.
We hope that the appointment of the Coordinator
for the Group of Experts will also be agreed on soon.
I would also like to take this opportunity to stress the
importance of taking gender balance into account when
appointing coordinators.
Sweden remains strongly committed to strengthening
the multilateral disarmament and non-proliferation
regimes, to which resolution 1540 (2004) is a essential
complement. The threat of the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction to and through non-State actors is
constantly evolving, and the global non-proliferation
framework is under immense pressure. Again and again
in recent years we have witnessed the use of chemical
weapons by both State and non-State actors. In line with
18-10453

12/04/2018

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

the comment by the British Ambassador, this cannot
be allowed to become the new normal. It is imperative
that we hold perpetrators to account and show the world
that the use of these weapons remains unacceptable. We
must recognize the changing nature of the threat, react,
adapt and step up our efforts.
I would like to reiterate once again our regret that
the Council has failed to establish a new attribution
mechanism for the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
We will continue to support efforts that aim to achieve
that objective. Accountability for the use of chemical
weapons in Syria is crucial and must be ensured.
We were pleased that the programme of work could
be adopted this morning. The adoption was essential
for the Committee to remain effective, and Sweden,
as Vice-Chair of the Committee, thanks all Council
members for their flexibility and spirit of compromise.
I would also like to mention the important joint
meeting that took place last year between the 1540
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
Such meetings have proved useful, and we encourage
further exchanges and strengthened cooperation with
other relevant Security Council Committees, including
the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
There remains a need to highlight the risks
associated with intangible transfers of technology
whereby sensitive know-how may be transferred through
research, industry or social media. This is an issue
that we raised repeatedly during the comprehensive
review in 2016. As Vice-Chair of the 1540 Committee,
we are currently considering ways to further those
efforts. We remain committed to contributing to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), including
through the nuclear-security cooperation programme
of the Swedish Radiation Safety Authority and our
engagement in the Group of Seven Global Partnership
Programme, where we currently co-chair the Biological
Security Sub-Working Group.
As we have seen in the past few days, the threat
posed by weapons of mass destruction to international
peace and security is clear and present. It is only by
working together, in full support of the multilateral
institutions that we have put in place, that these threats
can be managed and overcome.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my sincere thanks and
appreciation to Ambassador Llorentty Solíz, Permanent
Representative of Bolivia, for his valuable briefing and

S/PV. 8230

outstanding work as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), particularly
those efforts aimed at preventing non-State actors’
development, acquisition, production, possession,
transfer or use of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)
and their means of delivery. We hope today’s meeting
will convince Member States to step up their efforts
to implement resolution 1540 (2004) as intensively
as possible, so as to achieve full implementation of
the resolution’s provisions and universality for its
very important guidelines, which represent a road
map for Member States to develop national strategies
and legislation designed to prevent the proliferation
of these weapons to non-State actors and promote a
future free of WMDs. We call on the 13 non-reporting
States to submit their first reports as soon as possible.
I would also like to welcome the new members of the
Committee’s Group of Experts. We wish them every
success in their work.
The agreement reached by the members of the
Council on the Committee’s 2018 programme of work,
after more than two months of consultations, is a clear
manifestation of the important role played by the
Committee’s members. It highlights the sectors that
are most urgently in need of attention in the light of
new proliferation risks, as well as the national plans
and regional visits by the Committee and its Group of
Experts. It also addresses the special circumstances
of certain States with regard to the implementation of
measures to combat proliferation and enhance the role
of civil society in combating the proliferation of WMDs.
We are all aiming to improve the performance
of the 1540 Committee and its four working groups
and to operationalize its mechanisms at the national,
regional and international levels, which have become
a fundamental part of international efforts to achieve
non-proliferation. That is extremely important for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
State of Kuwait is deeply concerned about the current
challenges to the WMD-non-proliferation regime. The
Council has already met more than four times this
month to discuss the use of WMDs in more than one
country. The entire international community is aware of
the recent tragedies in Syria, the latest of which centres
on the ongoing uncertainty about the use of such lethal
weapons in Douma last Saturday.
In conclusion, I reiterate that the State of Kuwait
aligns itself with the position of the League of Arab
States on freeing the world from nuclear weapons

18-1045315/16

S/PV.8230

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

and other weapons of mass destruction, beginning in
the Middle East. We are therefore eager to improve
the Committee’s work and performance. The State of
Kuwait recently established a national point of contact
with the Committee in accordance with paragraph
6 of resolution 2325 (2016). We will submit our
second voluntary report soon, in cooperation with
the Committee’s Group of Experts and its relevant
Secretariat departments, the Office for Disarmament
Affairs and the Department of Political Affairs.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would now like
to make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.
We would first like to thank Ambassador Sacha
Llorentty Solíz for his briefing on the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). We would like to commend his work and that
of his team, and to express our strong support for the
full implementation by all States of resolutions 1540
(2004) and 2325 (2016), especially speaking as the new
Coordinator of the Working Group on monitoring and
national implementation.
Peru is committed to all efforts aimed at
achieving general and complete disarmament and the
non-proliferation of nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons and their delivery systems, which constitute a
threat to international peace and security. We reiterate
our deep concern about the threat of terrorism and the
risk of non-State actors acquiring, developing, using or
trafficking such weapons and their delivery systems. We
believe it is essential for the international community
to remain united in order to respond effectively to the
serious challenges facing non-proliferation regimes,
which are the most serious threats to international
peace and security in the world today. It is urgent
that the challenge posed by the Democratic People’s

16/16

12/04/2018

Republic of Korea’s nuclear and ballistic programme
be addressed.
We also believe that it is crucial to preserve the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action on the Iranian nuclear
programme and to strictly monitor its implementation.
We would also like to stress the importance of
reaching compromise in the Council concerning the
unacceptable use of chemical weapons in Syria with a
view to ensuring that the facts are fully investigated
and that responsibility for it can be determined through
an attributive mechanism.
We are also concerned about the possibility that the
misuse of new scientific innovations may lead to illicit
proliferation activities, particularly through illegal
technology transfers and illicit financial transactions.
In that regard, we want to underline the importance of
ensuring that all States implement measures aimed at
fulfilling all their obligations, especially those relating
to internal control and export. We must all adopt effective
national controls in line with resolution 2325 (2016).
Finally, we believe in the importance of the work
of the 1540 Committee, particularly in responding to
the risk that non-State actors, especially terrorists, may
acquire chemical, biological or radiological weapons
or fissile materials. Lastly, we commend the Chair’s
successful efforts to ensure the Committee’s adoption
of a programme of work, which will promote the full
implementation of resolution 2325 (2016) and serve as
the basis for its next comprehensive review.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I invite Council members to informal consultations
to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

18-10453
