United Nations

S/PV.9325

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9325

th meeting
Thursday, 18 May 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Baeriswyl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Switzerland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mrs. Hackman
Mr. Ishikane
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Shaheen
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-14042 (E)
*2314042*

S/PV.9325

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Adedeji
Ebo, Director and Deputy to the High Representative,
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Ebo.
Mr. Ebo: Since the previous briefing to the Security
Council by the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, held in February on the topic of transfers of
military assets to Ukraine (see S/PV.9256), the provision
of military assistance to the armed forces of Ukraine
has continued. Information from Governments about
their transfers of weapon systems and ammunition
is available from open sources. The transfers have
included heavy conventional weapons, including battle
tanks, armoured combat vehicles, combat aircraft
helicopters, large-calibre artillery systems, missile
systems and uncrewed combat aerial vehicles, as
well as remotely operated munitions and small arms
and light weapons. There have been reports of States
transferring, or planning to transfer, weapons such as
uncrewed combat aerial vehicles and ammunition to the
Russian armed forces for use in Ukraine. Media outlets
have also reported on the transfer of major conventional
arms, including artillery rocket systems, to non-State
groups involved in the war in Ukraine.
A large-scale influx of weapons and ammunition
into any situation of armed conflict raises concerns
about peace, security and stability, including as a result
of diversion. Measures to address the risk of diversion
to unauthorized end users and for unauthorized uses
are essential if we are to prevent further instability
and insecurity in Ukraine, the region and beyond.
Such measures include pre-transfer risk assessments,
end-user certification, effective legal and enforcement
2/15

18/05/2023

measures and post-shipment verifications such
as on-site inspections. Diversion prevention also
requires cooperation and information-sharing between
importing, transit and exporting States, as well as
concrete measures such as marking and tracing, effective
accounting practices and the physical safeguarding of
arms and ammunition, along with customs and bordercontrol measures. The United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms (UNROCA) remains a key tool in
that regard. Transparency in armaments can serve as
a confidence-building measure, thereby contributing
to the prevention and reduction of misperceptions and
tensions among Member States. In UNROCA’s 30 years
of operation, 178 Member States have submitted a report
to it at least once. I call on Member States to participate
in the mechanism, because among other things, it helps
to track the influx of weapons into conflict zones.
In order to prevent the diversion of conventional
arms and regulate the international arms trade, States
have also established a number of arms-control treaties
and instruments, which include the Arms Trade Treaty,
the Firearms Protocol and the Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
with its International Tracing Instrument. Moreover,
Member States are in the process of developing a
new global framework for through-life conventional
ammunition management. I call on States to consider
joining the relevant treaties and to implement their
legal obligations and political commitments under the
conventional arms control instruments to which they are
party in order to minimize the risk of diversion of arms
and ammunition.
Beyond addressing arms transfers, all parties to the
conflict have a duty to protect civilians in armed conflict
and to ensure compliance with applicable international
law, including and especially international humanitarian
law. Since 24 February 2022, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has
recorded 23,821 civilian casualties in Ukraine — 8,836
killed and 14,985 injured, with the actual figures likely
to be considerably higher. Most of the civilian deaths and
injuries continue to be caused by the use of explosive
weapons with wide-area effects, including attacks by
heavy artillery, tanks, multiple launch rocket systems
and missiles and air strikes.
After almost 15 months of the Russian Federation’s
military offensive in Ukraine, the suffering, loss,
displacement and destruction continue to form part of
23-14042

18/05/2023

Threats to international peace and security

an unbearable routine. In addition to the thousands of
civilians killed or injured, the destruction of essential
critical infrastructure and services is particularly
alarming. Homes, schools, roads and bridges have been
destroyed and damaged. Attacks on energy infrastructure
have interrupted power, heating, the drinking water
supply and sewage facilities, as well as mobile and
Internet communications. Hospitals and health facilities
have been attacked, resulting in the deaths or injuries
of health-care workers and disruptions to essential
services. Explosive remnants of war have resulted in
widespread land contamination, rendering land unusable
for agriculture and impeding the movement of people.
Under international humanitarian law, combatants
must not direct attacks against civilians or civilian
infrastructure and must take all feasible precautions
in the conduct of military operations to avoid — or at
least minimize — incidental loss of civilian life, injury
to civilians and damage to civilian objects. The attacks
against civilians and civilian infrastructure must stop.
I take this opportunity to call on all Member States
to support and effectively implement the Political
Declaration on Strengthening the Protection of Civilians
from the Humanitarian Consequences Arising from the
Use of Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas, which
was adopted in November 2022. That Declaration is an
important tool for better protecting civilians from the
increasing urbanization of armed conflict.
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, which is a violation
of international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations, is causing massive suffering and devastation for
Ukraine and its people. The world cannot afford for the
war to continue. I appeal to all Member States to make
every effort for peace. The United Nations stands ready
to support all genuine efforts to that end.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Ebo
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Western countries insist that they are not parties
to the conflict but are only helping Ukraine to defend
itself. However, the reality is the polar opposite. A proxy
war is being waged with Russia in Ukraine. Since the last
Council meeting in February on the subject of Western
arms deliveries to Ukraine (see S/PV.9256), not only has
the flow of arms not decreased, but it is increasing.

S/PV.9325

That shows that NATO countries support increased
arms flows. It is clear that they are not interested in a
peaceful settlement to the conflict. The European Union
High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, Josep Borrell Fontelles, added another feather
to his cap. He said that in order to end the war now,
“stop providing military aid to Ukraine and Ukraine
[will] have to surrender in a few days. That is it, the
war is over”.
British Defence Secretary Ben Wallace also spoke
on the matter. He said that the United Kingdom would
continue to provide military aid to Ukraine so that other
Western countries would not be tempted to force the
Kyiv authorities to make concessions in order to achieve
peace. The supply of increasingly powerful weapons
systems, combined with the ongoing transfer of strike
data to Kyiv and the training of the soldiers of the Armed
Forces of Ukraine on its territory, means that those States
are not only parties to the armed conflict with Russia,
according to the 1907 Hague Convention concerning the
Rights and Duties of Neutral Powers in Naval War, but
they are also complicit in the war crimes committed by
the Armed Forces of Ukraine and nationalist battalions.
The aims of the collective West are obvious to
everyone. Western politicians do not try to hide them.
And neither moral principles nor the highest human
values are of any consequence, since they use Ukraine
as a testing site and seek to prolong the conflict to the
last Ukrainian, in an effort to inflict a strategic defeat
on Russia. At the heart of that strategy is a clear desire
to continue to impose their will and so-called rules on
everyone. Exorbitant sums of money are being spent
to pump arms into Ukraine — billions of dollars from
taxpayers’ pockets, which flow into the accounts of the
Western military-industrial complex. Last December,
the United States Congress approved $48 billion in
military assistance to Ukraine, while a new tranche of
$1.2 billion was announced a few days ago. Not long ago,
Mr. Borrell also reported that the assistance provided to
Kyiv by European Union countries and organizations
alone totalled €16 billion. The same Josep Borrell
Fontelles offered to allocate €3.5 billion for additional
financing for the European Peace Facility, the funds of
which are used to pay for military supplies to Ukraine.
It is time to call it what it is and rename it the “European
War Facility”.
The European Commission plans to allocate another
€1.5 billion for the production of ammunition. Germany
also reportedly plans to send the largest amount of so-

23-140423/15

S/PV.9325

Threats to international peace and security

called assistance, worth €2.7 billion, which will include
armoured vehicles, Leopard tanks, anti-aircraft guns,
hundreds of guided missiles, reconnaissance drones and
logistical support vehicles. As noted by NATO Secretary
General Jens Stoltenberg, NATO countries have together
already allocated more than €65 billion to the Armed
Forces of Ukraine. By comparison, $18 billion was
spent on food security between 2021 and 2023. Those
are the real priorities of the collective West. Moreover,
the range of supplies is steadily expanding, going far
beyond defence weaponry. European countries report
that some 600 tanks have already been sent to Ukraine.
Discussions are under way on deliveries of combat
aircraft — fighter jets and bombers. Crews are being
trained in European countries and special forces are
being trained in Germany, according to media reports.
The fact that Ukraine is being used by the West
as a training site and that the West is not concerned
about the fate of its population is well illustrated by
London’s decision to supply depleted uranium shells to
Kyiv. The United Kingdom is well aware of their dire
long-term consequences for the environment and public
health. The Serbs are still reeling from the NATO
bombing in 1999, when 15 tons of depleted uranium
were used. Numerous cases of increased cancer and
other pathologies have been documented. Iraq, where
the Americans have dropped hundreds of thousands of
such shells, is also no stranger to that.
But this time, the British were quick to cover
themselves: James Heappey, the Minister of State for
the Armed Forces of the United Kingdom, was quick
to declare that London has no obligation to monitor
the deployment of the depleted uranium shells or to
eliminate the consequences of their use after the end
of the conflict.
It is with the same cynicism that London is trying to
absolve itself of responsibility for Kyiv’s use of Britishsupplied long-range Storm Shadow missile systems. On
12 and 13 May, combat aircraft of the Armed Forces
of Ukraine launched Storm Shadow missiles and an
American ADM‐160 miniature air‐launched decoy
missile at the Polypak polymer products plant and the
Milam meat processing plant in Luhansk, which started
a fire, destroyed residential buildings and injured
civilians, including 6 children. The United Kingdom
did not stop there. It supplied an additional 400 such
missiles, as well as anti-aircraft missile systems and
drones with a range of more than 200 kilometres.
4/15

18/05/2023

How many of those missiles will hit civilian
targets? After all, attacks by the Kyiv regime on civilian
infrastructure and civilians in Donbas are a daily reality.
Donetsk has lived under constant shelling since 2014,
and now not a day goes by without reports of civilian
casualties. Western countries are well aware of those
practices, but they never mention those cities when they
talk about the protection of civilians or the norms of
international humanitarian law. They have absolutely
no shame about the fact that those attacks are carried
out with weapons supplied by them. We have repeatedly
cited examples of the use of American HIMARS missiles
on civilian targets. Moreover, The Washington Post has
cited evidence from Ukrainian officials that the United
States de facto controls some military operations, and
Kyiv as a rule does not use Washington-provided missile
systems without the confirmation or the provision of
coordinates by the United States military.
In that regard, the hypocrisy of Western countries is
also clear due to their direct violation of their international
agreements and commitments regarding the supply
of such military equipment. We spoke at length about
that during the open debate of the Security Council on
10 April (see S/PV.9301), citing specific examples of the
extremely negative consequences of such violations.
Other countries from various regions of the world have
also called for an end to the uncontrolled proliferation
of weapons.
Recently, independent journalist Seymour Hersh
reported that early in the special military operation,
weapons supplied by Western countries to Ukraine
flooded into Poland, Romania and other border countries
because Ukrainian commanders at various levels were
personally reselling the shipments or dumping them
onto the black market. Even the British Ministry of
Defence recently admitted that not all shipments reach
the conflict zone.
We have repeatedly pointed out that Western
weapons will end up in the hands of organized crime
groups, terrorists and armed groups, not only in Europe,
but also in other regions of the world. Western countries
invariably try to gloss over that uncomfortable topic.
In the same way, they ignore the many crimes of the
Zelenskyy regime. Moreover, the direct confession on
16 May of the Head of the Main Directorate of Intelligence
of the Ministry of Defence of Ukraine, Kyrylo Budanov,
who said that they had already gotten — which means
killed — many people, including public and media
personalities from Russia, also went unnoticed.
23-14042

18/05/2023

Threats to international peace and security

The terrorist nature of the Kyiv regime is clear. That
is also relevant for those in the West who take the time
to listen to the statements of its representatives. Here is
a statement by Mykhailo Podolyak, adviser to the Head
of the Office of the President of Ukraine, who said that
“If they stop sending weapons to Ukraine, the
war would start in other countries. The number
of terrorist attacks in Europe would increase
significantly. In general, people would not be
able to sit quietly eating croissants in restaurants
in Europe.”
But the Western countries knew exactly who they
were bringing to power as a result of the 2014 coup
d’état and who they had carefully nurtured prior to
that in the interests of systematically transforming
Ukraine into an anti-Russia country. The misanthropic
heart of the current Kyiv regime, which worships the
Ukrainian nationalists of the past who committed
heinous crimes against the peaceful Polish, Jewish and
Russian population, was fully demonstrated in the longstanding war it unleashed against the Russian-speaking
population of Donbas. The countries of the West not
only did not prevent that, but their leaders themselves
admit that they blatantly sabotaged the implementation
of the Minsk agreements in order to continue to use
the Kyiv authorities for their own interests. Despite
their already unprecedented level of involvement in the
conflict, they are not abandoning their goals now.
Russia reserves the right to take any measures
necessary to neutralize threats to its security, and the
goals of the special military operation will be met.
Mrs. Hackman (Ghana): I thank Mr. Adedeji Ebo,
Director and Deputy to the High Representative of the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, for
his briefing.
At the outset, let me reaffirm Ghana’s unwavering
commitment to the sovereignty, political independence
and territorial integrity of Ukraine and its inherent right
to self-defence, enshrined in Article 51 of the Charter of
the United Nations. While the use of force has long been
outlawed by customary international law, the framers
of the Charter rightly asserted the rights of States to
individual or collective defence when an armed attack
occurs. That is the legitimate endeavour that has engaged
the resources of Ukraine for close to 16 months now.
We believe strongly that the sovereign rights and
interests of Ukraine can best be assured in the context
of peace and never through a brutal war — one that has

S/PV.9325

now resulted in more than 23,000 civilian casualties and
left cities and towns in ruins. It is only in the context of
relative peace that the compounding dispute between the
two neighbouring countries can be effectively resolved
in accordance with the tenets of international law and in
the spirit of the Charter.
The fact is that arms proliferation, especially in
conflict areas, poses a serious threat to international
peace and security, including the risk of escalation and
the diversion of arms to unintended destinations or
recipients. We in Africa are unfortunately familiar and
still grappling with the consequences of the influx of
arms from other regions into the continent, especially
in the Sahel region, where insurgent and undesirable
elements are being equipped in the perpetuation of their
destabilizing activities.
We therefore strongly reassert the need for
transparency and accountability through effective
tracing and monitoring mechanisms to ensure that
all arms supplied to Ukraine serve their intended
purpose. We urge strict compliance with international
non-proliferation arrangements, including the Arms
Trade Treaty, the United Nations Register of Conventional
Arms, the European Union’s common position on arms
exports and other relevant national regulations. Arms
control measures, especially in the context of the war in
Ukraine, would help to assuage any concerns and provide
assurance on mitigation efforts against post-conflict and
illegal proliferation.
Unfortunately, the real burden carriers for the
wide-ranging missiles and other lethal weapons targeted
at several parts of Ukraine are the country’s men, women
and children, whose only chance of possible escape
are the bunkers, in which we are told they are seeking
refuge for several days and weeks at a time. With the
hostilities still ongoing, we are compelled to underscore
once more the responsibility of the warring parties under
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure
from deliberate harm and destruction. We also stress
the obligation of the parties to act in accordance with
the humanitarian principles of necessity, distinction and
proportionality, not only to prevent further breaches of
international law but also to save innocent lives.
The conscience of the international community
as a collective must be awakened to the colossal risks
associated with the elevated military expenditure
recorded globally and to the fact that the plugs must to
be pulled while we still have control over the situation.

23-140425/15

S/PV.9325

Threats to international peace and security

We are also concerned about the contrast with
development funding in a post-pandemic era where
most, if not all, States are faced with stifling economic
and fiscal challenges. Those shared concerns should
spur our collective peace efforts to help end the war
and reverse the tides of the global three-pronged crisis
of food, energy and fuel that is now upending our shared
ambitions for peace and sustainable development.
We remain profoundly concerned that the military
posturing and further militarization of the conflict
between the Russian Federation and Ukraine is crowding
out the prospects of a diplomatic solution, which is
now overdue. However, we remain confident that the
tools of diplomacy and dialogue offer the best chances
of a comprehensive political settlement, and that is
why we continue to urge international support in that
direction. We further urge the two sides to commit to
a political settlement in their mutual interest and in the
wider interest of the global community. We emphasize
the need for all peace efforts to be carried out with
due regard to international law and the purposes and
values of the Charter of the United Nations in order to
ensure durability.
Lastly, we reiterate the many calls that have been
made to the Russian Federation to respect the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of its neighbouring country and
to end its war of aggression through the immediate
and unconditional withdrawal of its troops from the
internationally recognized borders of Ukraine.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I thank Mr. Ebo, Deputy
to the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for
his briefing.
Let me start by recalling why we are having this
discussion today — a permanent member of the Council
that is violating international law called a meeting to
condemn those who support the victim of their attack. It
is the same country that invaded a member of the United
Nations, a sovereign State; is deliberately targeting
civilians and civilian infrastructure; is importing
missiles, weapons and drones, including by violating
Security Council resolutions; and declared its intention
to transfer tactical nuclear weapons to a neighbouring
country, thus undermining the architecture of nuclear
disarmament. In short, this meeting is yet another
attempt in furtherance of what we have seen since
February last year.
There is only one reality, one truth: Russia is
the aggressor and Ukraine is trying to defend itself.
Ukraine has asked for help, and it is our — and, we
6/15

18/05/2023

think, everyone’s — moral duty to support Ukraine to
defend its freedom and to protect our shared norms and
values against aggression, annexation and atrocities.
The military support that it is receiving complies with
transparency and equality, in accordance with Article
51 of the Charter of the United Nations. We welcome
the commitment of the Ukrainian Government to use
the weapons only within the borders of Ukraine and
appreciate the commitments of national institutions to
properly manage and control them.
In contrast, Russia is transferring illegally arms
from Iran and North Korea, in violation of Security
Council resolutions, specifically Annex B, paragraph
4, of resolution 2231 (2015). Russia is using those
weapons to attack civilians and civilian infrastructure
throughout Ukraine.
This week, the Summit of Heads of State and
Government of the Council of Europe approved the
establishment of a register of damage, which will
document the damages resulting from Russia’s brutal
war against Ukraine. That is an historic decision. It
is one of the first legally binding decisions to hold
Russia accountable for its brutal military aggression,
and it paves the way towards a future international
comprehensive compensation mechanism for the
victims of the aggression.
The accountability process should be part of every
diplomatic solution, aiming at a just and comprehensive
peace settlement. Peace efforts should be fully in
line with the United Nations Charter and the General
Assembly resolution ES-11/6, adopted earlier this year.
Also, the extension of the Black Sea Grain Initiative for
60 days, achieved yesterday, is good news, as part of
the global response for humanitarian purposes. Albania
commends the strong engagement and substantial
mediation role of the United Nations and the Republic
of Türkiye in that important process.
Let me conclude by repeating our call that, if Russia
takes the peace talks seriously, it should start by putting
an immediate end to this war, withdraw its troops and
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine, within its internationally recognized borders.
Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates): We also
thank the Deputy to the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Mr. Ebo, for his informative
briefing, and I welcome Ukraine’s participation in
today’s meeting.
23-14042

18/05/2023

Threats to international peace and security

The development of security and defence capabilities
is integral to the right of self-defence. Engaging in
such activities also comes with certain risks and
responsibilities to mitigate those risks. For instance,
poorly managed weapon stockpiles and supplies can be
diverted to terrorist groups or other malign actors. It
is critical to guard against such risks. We have seen
how illicit weapons transfers to such groups have been
behind the proliferation of violence and numerous
attacks against civilians and undermined the security
and stability of many States. We underline, therefore,
the importance of the appropriate management of
weapons during transfer, storage and deployment.
The United Nations has worked with Member States
to support these efforts and establish international
standards. For example, the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs supports the Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and
its International Tracing Instrument. There are many
other ongoing efforts to establish international norms
with respect to the manufacture, trade and storage of
weapons. We are encouraged by the Organization’s
work in that regard.
In addition to international cooperation and
standards setting, constant monitoring and oversight by
national authorities is critical and requires the utmost
attention. Additional risks may arise in situations
of armed conflict, and it is vital that the relevant
national authorities take all appropriate measures to
mitigate such risks. Enhancing cooperation, including
information exchange and the sharing of best practices,
can help reduce such risks.
Earlier this week we heard a briefing on the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine. It highlighted
that civilians bear the costs of conflict. To address
these impacts, we call upon all parties to engage in
diplomacy and dialogue. We strongly welcome the
agreement to continue the Black Sea Grain Initiative
and commend the work of the United Nations and
Türkiye in that regard. This shows how much more is to
be gained through peace, and we stand ready to support
genuine efforts towards dialogue to bring the war to a
just, sustainable end consistent with the Charter of the
United Nations.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank Mr. Ebo
for his informative briefing.

S/PV.9325

In February 2022, when the Council first met to
discuss the subject (see S/PV.8983), we noted that the
increasing emphasis on arms transfers in our debates
signalled, in fact, a dangerous escalation of the conflict.
That observation remains valid.
The right of States to self-defence is a fundamental
principle of the Charter of the United Nations. However,
it is now more than a year since the beginning of the
conflict, and the necessary willingness to dialogue and
the abandonment of the illusions of military victory are
still not visible. Only a negotiated solution can bring
about lasting peace.
Massive transfers of highly lethal weapons to
the battlefront can further undermine prospects for a
peaceful outcome. The increasing flow of weapons into
the conflict in Ukraine will only fuel more violence and
will not contribute to ending it. The presence of arms
and ammunition in large quantities tends to become a
destabilizing factor in the long run, compromising the
chances of lasting peace in the region and beyond.
Brazil shares concerns about the risks of the
diversion of arms and ammunition. The choices we
presently make must take into account the repercussions
and long-term consequences. A significant worry arises
with regard to the proper accounting of all dispatched
weapons, particularly those that are lightweight, manportable, and untraceable. There is abundant evidence
that the uncontrolled supply of weapons in conflict
areas can benefit criminal and terrorist groups, even
after a ceasefire. It should come as no surprise if, in
the near future, weapons directed to the war in Ukraine
resurface elsewhere in the world and are employed for
malicious purposes.
We must also consider the aftermath of conflicts.
There is no shortage of examples of strong paramilitary
groups and militias retaining possession of weapons
and capabilities originally intended for a State,
leading to unforeseen and harmful consequences. We
must not underestimate the historical precedents of
these capabilities being turned against their original
providers. History demonstrates that when it comes to
the transfer of weapons, the probability of the situation
spiralling out of control is anything but insignificant.
Bearing this in mind, Brazil, as a party to the
Arms Trade Treaty, wishes to recall the importance
of the Treaty as a milestone in efforts to regulate
conventional arms transfers. We urge States parties to
the Treaty to adopt measures to ensure compliance with

23-140427/15

S/PV.9325

Threats to international peace and security

18/05/2023

its provisions and encourage other States to join it or, at
least, consider applying its main guidelines. We believe
that cooperation between Governments is the best way
to regulate and monitor arms transfers.

Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Mr. Adedeji Ebo for his briefing
and welcome the participation of the Ambassador of
Ukraine in this meeting.

Let me conclude by reiterating our call for a cessation
of hostilities and the opening of peace negotiations
based on the principles of the United Nations Charter
and on considering the security concerns of all parties.

The war in Ukraine continues to send millions of
displaced persons and refugees on the road to exodus,
both inside and outside Ukraine. The human toll of this
deadly war among the civilian population was estimated
last February at approximately 8,000 dead and nearly
12,000 wounded. On the military level, the situation of
the forces involved, the concentration and location of the
fighting in certain cities or regions, the announcements
of offensives and counter-offensives on both sides, and
the declarations of additional arms deliveries, are all
data that make us fear a war of attrition, and therefore
more civilian victims.

Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank the Deputy to the
High Representative, Mr. Adedeji Ebo, for his briefing.
Almost 15 months have passed since Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine began. It is unfortunate to
see the losses continuing to mount.
Russia requested today’s meeting to discuss the
issue of growing supplies of lethal weapons to Ukraine.
Any aspect of the war needs to be considered in the
context of the whole: this illegal and unprovoked war
of aggression against Ukraine was initiated by Russia
in the first place. In this larger context, concerns about
potential ramifications of the influx of weapons must
be taken into account, but we must not misjudge the
fundamental cause.
Russia has repeatedly attempted to divert public
attention from its own violations of the United
Nations Charter, but we must not confuse victims
with perpetrators. We underscore Ukraine’s right
to self-defence to defend itself against aggression.
The international community is lending its support
to Ukraine in order to stop Russia’s aggression and
maintain international peace and security. On the
contrary, no nation should support the aggression.
In this context, we also strongly condemn the
transfer of unmanned aerial vehicles from Iran to
Russia. We would support efforts by the United
Nations Secretariat to investigate the potential use of
Iranian drones by Russia in its war against Ukraine, in
accordance with resolution 2231 (2015).
For as long as Russia continues to evade
accountability for its aggression, the international
community will repeat this same condemnation. Japan
reiterates our condemnation of Russia’s aggression
against Ukraine in the strongest terms. Russia must
withdraw all of its troops and military equipment
from Ukraine and respect Ukraine’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity within its
internationally recognized borders.
8/15

Indeed, military leaders are announcing the
deliveries of advanced weaponry, such as cruise missiles,
drones, tanks and other heavy armaments, in the coming
weeks and months. This not only adds to the confusion
caused by the difficulty of tracing all these weapons, but
also increases the risk of their diversion to armed groups,
organized crime networks or mafia networks of all kinds.
We call on all parties to respect treaty obligations
with regard to arms supplies and to implement and
strengthen monitoring, verification and reporting
measures for arms, particularly small arms and light
weapons. We emphasize the particularly destructive
effects of certain weapons that indiscriminately target
populated areas and civilian populations, and we warn
of their humanitarian consequences. Belligerents must
take all necessary precautions to avoid the effects of
cluster munitions and anti-personnel mines on civilian
populations and the natural environment. We would also
remind the parties of their obligations under international
humanitarian law and the resolutions protecting civilians
and civilian infrastructure.
The intense diplomatic activity marked by highlevel visits that has continued in recent weeks and
days provides little information about the possibility of
de-escalation. We remain attentive to mediation offers
that might open the way to a diplomatic and political
solution to the conflict. My country continues to call
on the protagonists to come to the table to consider
ways to end this war and stop the suffering of millions
of innocent civilians. We call on them to rekindle the
momentum that prevailed when the grain agreement and
the agreement on prisoners were concluded, with a view
to reaching a ceasefire.
23-14042

18/05/2023

Threats to international peace and security

The search for peaceful coexistence and shared
prosperity borne out of a peace based on and for the
benefit of people should guide the Security Council
in accordance with the noble aspirations of the United
Nations Charter. We urge all parties to engage in
negotiations for a lasting and mutually acceptable
settlement of the situation.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to express my appreciation for the valuable
information provided by Director Ebo, which
complements the recommendations offered by the
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs at the
10 April and 8 February meetings of Security Council
(see S/PV.9301 and S/PV.9256, respectively). I also
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of Ukraine at today’s meeting.
I reiterate once again Ecuador’s historical
position of rejecting armed violence, militarization
and a focus on armaments. This position has always
been accompanied by our recognition of the right of
peoples to legitimate self-defence, in accordance with
international law. That right is the pillar of peaceful
coexistence among nations and is enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, including in Article 51,
the relevant first part of which I quote.
“Nothing in the present Charter shall impair
the inherent right of individual or collective
self-defence if an armed attack occurs against a
Member of the United Nations, until the Security
Council has taken measures necessary to maintain
international peace and security.”
Ecuador therefore recognizes the right of Member
States to equip themselves with tools for the defence of
their territorial integrity, provided that the equipment,
its transfer and its use do not contravene international
law or international humanitarian law.
We are always concerned about the challenges to
peace and security posed by the large-scale inflow
of arms and ammunition in any situation of armed
conflict, including the risks of diversion, propagation
and escalation. Measures to counter those risks are
key to post-conflict recovery and to regional security
and stability, and even to the prevention of conflicts
on other continents. For that reason, we reiterate the
continuing need to increase the standards of marking,
registration and traceability of weapons and their
ammunition, prioritize the protection of civilians and
the objective of global stability over any other logic

S/PV.9325

with regard to industry, production or distribution.
We deplore the fact that the prolonged invasion of
the territory of Ukraine continues to fuel those risks
amid growing global military spending, which already
exceeded $2 trillion dollars last year.
At last Monday’s meeting (see S/PV.9321) we raised
the issue and today reiterate the urgent need to put an
end to the use of explosives in populated areas. We
deplore the fact that explosive weapons with wide-area
effects have been the cause of 92.5 per cent of civilian
victims in Ukraine.
We also recognize the vital role of some defence
materials and systems, including anti-aircraft systems,
which can contribute to preventing or decreasing
the destruction of infrastructure and the number of
civilian casualties, when used properly. Export control
efforts must therefore focus on the need to guarantee
the protection of civilians and take into account the
obligation to respect the principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution in the use of any
weapon. We once again condemn the violations of the
arms embargoes and sanctions regimes prohibiting
such exports and any transfers aimed at fuelling the
aggression or military occupation.
Finally, we once again insist that the Russian
Federation bring an end to the military occupation and
hostilities against Ukraine and reiterate our deeply held
belief in the validity of the statement by the President of
the Security Council S/PRST/2022/3, of 6 May 2022, by
which the Council recalled that all Member States had
undertaken, under the Charter of the United Nations,
the obligation to settle their international disputes by
peaceful means and expressed strong support for the
efforts of the Secretary-General in the search for a
peaceful solution.
We recognize in particular the efforts of the
Secretary-General, which are reflected in the extension
of the Black Sea Grain Initiative, and other humanitarian
achievements, and we call on the Council to further
support his efforts, so that we may move towards
a peaceful resolution on the basis of the territorial
integrity and political independence of Ukraine.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Ebo for his briefing.
This is the fifth time that Russia has called a
meeting on arms deliveries to Ukraine. Repeating
that exercise ad nauseam will not be enough to bring
about a parallel reality. The end of this war and its

23-140429/15

S/PV.9325

Threats to international peace and security

negative consequences depends exclusively on Russia.
On 24 February 2022, it was Russia that undermined
our collective security with an act of aggression. It
was Russia that decided illegally to use force and to
escalate and commit war crimes. No one else is seeking
to continue the conflict today. If Russia withdraws
its troops from Ukraine, as the International Court of
Justice demanded on 16 March 2022, the chaos will stop.
What is Russia waiting for? Is it waiting for the
supply of arms to Ukraine to stop so that it can win
this war and impose its will? And then what? Would
we then move on to something else, a new aggression?
Russia cannot and must not win this conflict. It flouts
the principles of our Organization. This aggression
must fail because we cannot accept the normalization
of the illegal use of force. We cannot accept a world in
which the sovereignty and security of all people depend
solely on power relations.
For all those reasons, France, along with its partners,
has chosen to support the Ukrainian people in their
right to self-defence, as established in Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations. We will continue to do
so, bilaterally and through the European Union, taking
account Ukraine’s most urgent needs to strengthen its
defence capabilities.
Our military support is strengthening Ukraine. The
invasion was supposed to be over in a matter of days.
It has now been nearly 15 months that Russia has been
held at bay.
Our assistance is enabling Ukraine to defend its
people from Russian strikes. By focusing our efforts on
air defence capabilities, we are helping the Ukrainian
people to cope with the deliberate destruction of
civilian infrastructure by Russia, which is trying
to sow destruction in its wake, by trampling on the
Geneva Conventions, since it cannot make progress on
the front lines.
Finally, that support seeks to rebalance the power
relations to establish the conditions for the resolution
of the conflict. That will allow credible negotiations,
leading to a just and lasting peace, and will guarantee
a peace in accordance with international law and the
Charter of the United Nations.
While we are legally delivering weapons to
Ukraine, Russia is seeking to illegally acquire them to
replenish its dwindling stocks. By purchasing combat
drones from Iran and missiles and ammunition from
North Korea, Russia is violating the resolutions of the
10/15

18/05/2023

Security Council. Some of those weapons are used by
the Wagner Group private militia, whose abuses and
crimes are now well documented.
There is only one possible outcome: a peace in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
that respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine. It is in that spirit that France supports the
Ukrainian peace plan.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank the Deputy to the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs for his briefing.
The Security Council has considered the issue of
weapons supplies to Ukraine many times before, and
China has comprehensively expounded its position on
many occasions.
Today I will stress only three points.
First, the constant feeding of weapons to the
battlefield will lead only to the escalation and
spread of the war and cause more civilian casualties
and displacement, making it harder to start peace
negotiations and make the hope of a ceasefire and a
cessation of the war even more elusive.
Secondly, the constant feeding of weapons to the
battlefield will bring about a huge risk of proliferation.
If diverted to terrorist and armed groups, those weapons
are likely to cause new turmoil in a wider geographical
area and claim more innocent victims.
Thirdly, the constant feeding of weapons to the
battlefield will pose serious challenges to post-war
reconstruction. The painful lessons in Afghanistan, Iraq
and Somalia, among other countries, have repeatedly
taught us that weapons and explosive remnants of war
pose security risks and add to the burdens of postwar reconstruction.
There can be no military solution to the Ukraine
crisis. Dialogue and negotiation are essential to restoring
peace. In the current circumstances, all the parties
should work to promote a political settlement in good
faith and with the greatest possible sense of urgency
to create the conditions that will enable a return to
negotiations, an agreement on a ceasefire and an end to
the war. China has always stood on the side of peace and
dialogue on the Ukraine issue, and we have continued
to actively promote peace talks. We are neither an
instigator of nor a party to the Ukraine crisis, much less
a provider of weapons to any party to the conflict. The
Chinese Government recently sent Li Hui, its Special
23-14042

18/05/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Representative on Eurasian Affairs, to Ukraine, Poland,
France, Germany and Russia to engage with all parties
on finding a political solution to the crisis. We welcome
the fact that six African leaders plan to visit Russia and
Ukraine soon to promote a ceasefire and an end to the
war. As President Xi Jinping has made clear, any effort
that leads to the peaceful resolution of the crisis should
be supported. We call on the international community to
forge synergies to promote peace talks and collectively
play a constructive role in promoting a political settlement
of the crisis in Ukraine.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): We thank
Mr. Adedeji Ebo, Director and Deputy to the High
Representative of the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs, for his briefing. I acknowledge
the presence of the Permanent Representative of
Ukraine at this meeting.
As our delegation stated when this issue was
brought before the Security Council in February (see
S/PV.9256), the trajectory of the conflict between the
Russian Federation and the Ukraine is headed towards
a prolonged war. The regular public announcements
of the delivery and deployment of armaments outside
the umbrella of the United Nations arms-control and
disarmament framework are indicative of further
confrontation and a rejection of de-escalation and
compromise. Mozambique is deeply concerned about
the possibility that this trend could lead to strategic
miscalculation and an irreversible spread of the
conflict, ultimately involving Europe and the activation
of other military defence pacts and alliances. As we
said in February, the massive deployment of arms and
weapons by both sides into an already raging military
confrontation is adding fuel to the fire.
Our considered opinion remains that the prospects
for a peaceful settlement of the conflict, on the one
hand, and the increasing supply of arms, on the other,
are not mutually compatible. We remain steadfast
in our call for seeking a diplomatic off-ramp for the
confrontation, including the rapid re-establishment of
diplomatic channels and the deployment of the good
offices of the Secretary-General. We need to step back
from the abyss of war and from the dangerous logic of
a military solution to the ongoing crisis.
The Council cannot remain deadlocked and hostage
to the mutual distrust resulting from the conflict.
Despite the well-meant claims that equal attention is
being given to all global crisis hotspots, the reality is
that the crisis in Ukraine continues to be a divisive

S/PV.9325

issue that is diverting resources and bandwidth not just
from the Council but from the pressing humanitarian
and security responses needed for the other immediate
challenges facing the international community. As
we stressed on Monday during the debate on the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine (see S/PV.9321), we
strongly believe that the peace initiative put forward by
several States, including members of the Council and
African States, should be given a chance. A political
settlement is the right way to address the crisis, as a
matter of urgency. At the high-level open debate on
silencing the guns in Africa held during Mozambique’s
presidency (see S/PV.9299), President Filipe Nyusi
stated that our experience has taught us that only
dialogue and building trust can break the trend to
violence. We must resolve conflicts through peaceful
diplomacy and not resort to arms.
In conclusion, Mozambique would like to welcome
the agreement reached between Russia, Ukraine and
Türkiye yesterday to extend the Black Sea Grain
Initiative for an additional two months. It is a rare
breakthrough that should be capitalized on in a spirit
of constructive engagement. Mozambique therefore
reiterates its call on all parties to adhere to Article
2 of the Charter of the United Nations and to settle
their disputes “by peaceful means in such a manner
that international peace and security, and justice, are
not endangered.”
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
join others in thanking Mr. Ebo for his briefing.
Four hundred and forty-nine days into the Russian
Federation’s illegal and full-scale war, Russia continues
to attack Ukrainian cities, hospitals and schools — the
country’s civilian infrastructure — killing and injuring
innocent families in their homes or forcing them to
flee, with 8 million people now displaced as a result
of Russia’s attacks. Last night, for the ninth time this
month, Russia rained down another barrage of missiles
on Ukrainian cities in blatant disregard for human life.
Russia is deploying more and more powerful weapons.
It is sourcing weapons for Putin’s illegal war from States
such as Iran and the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, in blatant violation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions. The United Kingdom calls on other
States not to provide Russia with military assistance.
We have repeatedly urged Russia to end the war,
respect Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity,
cease attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure
and withdraw its troops from Ukraine. Ukraine did not

23-1404211/15

S/PV.9325

Threats to international peace and security

want or provoke this war. The Ukrainian people want
peace, but they face a choice between annihilation and
taking up arms in self-defence. They have done so in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. We
therefore support Ukraine in defending its sovereignty
and territorial integrity in line with the Charter. We
share its goal of securing peace in line with the Charter.
As my Prime Minister has made clear, we will continue
to respond to Ukraine’s requests for the means to defend
itself against Russia’s aggression.
Last week we announced the provision of Storm
Shadow missiles to Ukraine. We have also provided
a range of air defence systems, including advanced
medium-range air-to-air missiles. Those defensive
weapons can defeat Russian cruise missiles to help
Ukraine defend its skies and its people from Russia’s
indiscriminate attacks. The Russian representative
also mentioned depleted uranium. The British army
has used depleted uranium in its armour-piercing
shells for decades. It is a standard component and has
nothing to do with nuclear weapons or capabilities.
Russia knows that, but it is deliberately trying to
spread disinformation. I therefore want there to be no
doubt that we are providing all our military support to
Ukraine in accordance with international law and with
robust measures in place to prevent any illicit transfers.
The cost of this war is felt around the world. Its
impact on food and commodity prices is severe. We
welcome the continuation of the Black Sea Grain
Initiative and call on Russia not to hold up the movement
of ships under that deal as a pressure tactic. As States
Members of the United Nations, we want to focus on
other priorities, on which the world desperately needs
us to work together, such as delivery of the Sustainable
Development Goals. Instead, Russia’s war has made
those Goals harder to reach.
In conclusion, I listened carefully to the Russian
delegation. It is trying to persuade the world not to
provide defensive support to Ukraine. The reason for
that is blindingly obvious. Russia wants to overrun the
Ukrainian military, as it has tried and failed to do since
February 2022. Why? Because it wants to conquer a
sovereign country and annex its territory. That is why
the missiles are still falling on Kyiv. Russia can end
the war at any time by withdrawing its troops. Until
then, we will help Ukraine defend its sovereignty and
territorial integrity and uphold the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
12/15

18/05/2023

Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Ebo for his detailed briefing.
We gather again just weeks after discussing the
same topic, and unfortunately little has changed. We
are here again listening to Russia’s allegations that arms
shipments from the United States and other countries
providing support for Ukraine and its self-defence
are the grave threat in the Ukraine conflict, and not
Russia’s invasion of its sovereign neighbour. It is a really
interesting — and I might add twisted — narrative it
chooses. It is very much alone in that position. Members
of the Council and the General Assembly, as well as
the Secretary-General have all repeatedly made clear
that Russia’s invasion of Ukraine is a violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and Ukraine’s territorial
integrity. The United States has staunchly supported
Ukraine’s right to defend itself against Russia’s brutal,
unprovoked war of aggression. We, along with 50 other
States, will continue to do so.
The provision of weapons for Ukraine’s territorial
defence is not extending or exacerbating the conflict.
Rather, those arms help repel Russia’s invasion of its
neighbour and prevent an even further invasion of
Ukraine’s sovereign territory. Those arms shipments
help prevent Russia from further brutalizing Ukrainian
civilians, forcing them from their homes and driving
up energy and food costs across Europe and around the
world. Arms shipments by the United States and other
friends of Ukraine are not the cause of the continuation
of Russia’s needless war. If Russia had any genuine
desire for de-escalation, it would simply withdraw its
troops and end its invasion. Instead, underscoring its
own hypocrisy, Russia brings topics such as this one
to the Security Council and blames others for the death
and destruction that its aggression has caused and is
continuing to cause in Ukraine.
Russia is cynical enough to call for this discussion
while it continues to relentlessly rain down missiles
and drone strikes on cities and critical infrastructure,
killing civilians, all in the service of the Kremlin’s
bloody land grab in blatant violation of the United
Nations Charter. We know that both Russia and Iran
violated resolution 2231 (2015) when Iran transferred
drones to Russia. Russia has used those drones to attack
Ukraine’s critical infrastructure and kill Ukrainian
civilians. We know that in November 2022, the Wagner
Group, a vicious mercenary organization working
in coordination with the Kremlin, imported infantry
rockets and missiles from the Democratic People’s
23-14042

18/05/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Republic of Korea, in violation of the United Nations
arms embargo on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. Moreover, senior Russian officials in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea have been
involved in additional discussions, aimed at Russia
providing the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
with food and commercial aircraft in exchange for
more than two dozen different kinds of weapons and
munitions, in what would be further violations of
multiple resolutions of the Council. And just last week,
the owner of the Wagner Group openly called for the
transfer of more shells and munitions into Ukraine for
his troops to continue Russia’s illegal invasion. And
yet, Russia wants to talk about support for Ukraine’s
self-defence as the problem. Once again, Russia seeks
to instrumentalize the Council as yet another platform
for its ongoing disinformation campaign. We must not
and will not let it.
The United States and others will not end our support
for Ukraine in the exercise of its right of self-defence.
Doing so would only allow Russia’s unconscionable
killing and injuring of civilians to continue unchecked.
Accepting Russia’s brazen attempts to redraw borders
by force would tear up the rulebook that has made all of
us more secure and would have dangerous repercussions
around the world. Instead, we will continue to provide
our support, while working with Ukraine to maintain
the highest safeguards to ensure that the weapons we
provide are not diverted into unintended hands. We
take the risks of diversion seriously. Last year, our
Administration unveiled a strategy to help Ukraine and
partners in the region to counter the threats posed by the
potential diversion of weapons in Eastern Europe. We
have stressed accountability from the very beginning
of the conflict and have processes in place to counter
illicit diversion.
Ukraine has been a transparent, willing partner
in those processes throughout. By helping Ukraine
and neighbouring States account for and safeguard
arms and ammunition during their transfer, storage
and deployment, strengthening border management
and security in Ukraine and neighbouring States, and
building the capacity of relevant Government agencies
to deter, detect and interdict the illicit trafficking
of certain weapons, we are taking concrete steps to
address the threats posed by such potential diversion.
By supporting Ukraine and its self-defence, we
are upholding the United Nations Charter. Through its
heinous actions in Ukraine, Russia is trying to drive a

S/PV.9325

stake through the heart of the Charter. In the Council
and at every opportunity, we will continue to state the
obvious. Russia can end its war of aggression at any
time. Russia can end its reliance on its ineffectual
attempts to distract us. Russia can simply remove its
troops from Ukraine’s territory and stop its relentless
bombardment of Ukraine’s cities, people and civilian
infrastructure. That is what we need to remain focused
on. Until that happens, the United States will continue
to support Ukraine for as long as it takes.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank the Deputy to the
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Mr. Ebo,
for his briefing and acknowledge the participation
of the Permanent Representative of Ukraine in our
meeting today.
Today’s meeting was requested by the Russian
Federation to condemn the increasing supply of weapons
to Ukraine. We must remind ourselves that it was Russia
that launched a full-scale invasion against a sovereign,
independent United Nations Member State. Ukraine
has a legitimate right to self-defence, enshrined in
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations. Today’s
briefing is another attempt by Russia to distract the
world from its abhorrent actions in Ukraine by implying
that the urgently needed and legitimate support for
Ukraine’s self-defence against an unprovoked war of
aggression is a threat to peace and security. Russia
created the circumstances in which Ukraine is forced
to defend itself. Russia began the war and could end it
at any time by ceasing its aggression and withdrawing
Russian troops and military equipment from Ukraine’s
internationally recognized borders.
We are deeply concerned about recent reports
that Russia is seeking to acquire weapons from the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea for use in its
war of aggression against Ukraine. Any such deal
would violate multiple Security Council resolutions
and undermine the authority and integrity of the
Security Council itself. We call on all States to refrain
from transferring any arms to Russia, in the light of its
ongoing illegal war of aggression.
The result of Russia’s aggression against Ukraine
is affecting nearly 18 million people, not only in
Ukraine but all over the world. In doing so, it has
wilfully violated the rules-based international order.
It has caused unimaginable suffering to the Ukrainian
population. The human rights monitoring mission in
Ukraine has concluded that Russia’s strikes targeting
critical energy and civilian infrastructure not only are

23-1404213/15

S/PV.9325

Threats to international peace and security

a violation of international humanitarian law and a
war crime, but also infringed on the human rights to
security, health, work, education, social support for
persons with disabilities and freedom of religion or
belief. Women and girls are at heightened risk of sexual
and gender-based violence, both in Ukraine and while
fleeing to safer areas and across borders.
The position of Malta, which I have consistently
expressed during our tenure in the Security Council,
is principled and clear. Ukraine’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity must be upheld.
We cannot but note, once again, that Russia’s invasion
is a violation of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law.
The situation of children bears highlighting.
The reported widespread transfer and deportation of
Ukrainian children not only violates international
humanitarian law, but also constitutes a war crime. In
addition, the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on Ukraine has found that the citizenship
and family placement measures Russia has instituted
for Ukrainian children are a violation of their right to
identity. We call on Russia to immediately cease these
unlawful policies and to facilitate children’s return to
Ukraine. We reiterate our full support for mechanisms
seeking to hold perpetrators of these unlawful acts
to account.
Malta reaffirms its commitment to continue
providing humanitarian support to Ukraine and
safeguard its population from indiscriminate attack
in line with the United Nations Charter. The people
of Ukraine and millions around the world continue
to suffer from the continuation of this unjustified and
unprovoked war. In conclusion, we therefore stress once
again the overwhelming necessity for a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in Ukraine. Malta also welcomes
the extension of the Black Sea Grain Initiative, which
remains paramount in ensuring global food security.
We hope that that agreement continues to provide
reliable agricultural exports and alleviate the pressure
on global food markets.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Switzerland.
I thank Mr. Ebo, Director and Deputy to the
High Representative of the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs, for his briefing.
14/15

18/05/2023

As Member States of the United Nations, we are
all committed to the fundamental principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations. These include
respect for the sovereign equality and territorial
integrity of States, in particular the prohibition of the
use of force and territorial expansion by force. With
Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine, these
fundamental principles of the multilateral order have
been flagrantly violated. Like all States, Ukraine has
the right to ensure its security and defend its territorial
integrity. We do not accept the responsibility for this
war and its consequences being diverted.
The civilian population has been paying far too high
a price and suffering the consequences of this military
aggression for more than a year. Thousands of people
have been killed or wounded, and more than 8 million
people had to flee Ukraine. Vital infrastructure,
hospitals, schools and homes have been destroyed, the
most recent examples of this having occurred only a
few days ago. The parties must respect international
humanitarian law, in particular the principles of
distinction, proportionality and precaution. The civilian
population and civilian property must be protected.
Moreover, worldwide food and energy insecurity has
increased. In this regard, we welcome the continuation
of the Black Sea Grain Initiative and encourage further
discussions in order to achieve its improvement,
development and extension.
Switzerland deplores the disastrous consequences
of the war and condemns the military aggression against
Ukraine in the strongest possible terms. I reiterate here
the firm call upon Russia to de-escalate the situation,
cease all combat operations and withdraw its troops
from the whole of Ukrainian territory without delay,
a call that has been made repeatedly and confirmed by
the International Court of Justice. This would not only
put an end to the suffering of the civilian population,
but would also allow international support for Ukraine
to focus more on its reconstruction needs instead of
its defence. Every day that the military aggression
continues is one day too many. It is urgent to hold
those responsible accountable and to bring about a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in accordance
with international law. Until then, Switzerland will
continue to provide humanitarian aid, to work for justice,
to welcome refugees and to support the reconstruction
process in Ukraine. We stand in solidarity with Ukraine
and its people.
23-14042

18/05/2023

Threats to international peace and security

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I recognize the
representative of Putin’s regime in the permanent seat
of the Soviet Union.
When addressing the crimes of that regime, it
important to remember that they derive from the
genocidal practices of Putin’s predecessors in the
Kremlin. It is exactly today that we commemorate the
victims of one of the most horrendous crimes of Stalin’s
regime: the attempt to exterminate the Crimean Tatar
people through mass deportation from their native
land, which started on 18 May 1944. The evil returned
in 2014, with the attempted annexation of Crimea. It
has changed its symbols but not its essence. If we do not
stop the crimes of Putin’s regime, soon there will be no
free dates in the calendar to commemorate the victims
of all the crimes committed by Moscow.
I thank Mr. Ebo, Director and Deputy to the
High Representative, for his briefing that exposed the
baseless nature of the Russian allegations. I am also
grateful to those members of the Security Council who
have called a spade a spade today in relation to the
Russian aggression.
Indeed, when addressing this issue, it is enough
to return to basics: to begin with Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations, which envisages the
inherent right of individual or collective self-defence
if an armed attack occurs against a Member State
of the United Nations until the Security Council has
taken measures necessary to maintain international
peace and security; to continue with General Assembly
resolution 3314 (XXIX), of 14 December 1974, which
defines aggression as the use of armed force by a State
against the sovereignty, territorial integrity or political
independence of another State, or in any other manner
inconsistent with the Charter; to continue further with
General Assembly resolution ES-11/1, of 2 March 2022,
which deplores in the strongest terms the aggression
by the Russian Federation against Ukraine in violation
of Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter, as well as
subsequent emergency session resolutions reiterating
that provision; and to note the order of the International

S/PV.9325

Court of Justice of 16 March 2022, which indicates
as a provisional measure that the Russian Federation
shall immediately suspend the military operations that
it commenced on 24 February 2022 in the territory
of Ukraine.
Ukraine will continue to exercise its right of selfdefence in strict accordance with Article 51 of the
Charter. We will continue to fight until every Ukrainian
citizen and every parcel of our sovereign land are
liberated and Russia suffers military defeat in Ukraine.
We will continue to forge international solidarity until
all Russian war criminals are held accountable.
A formula for comprehensive, just and lasting
peace already exists, and its main element, which
follows on from General Assembly resolution ES-11/6
of 23 February 2023, is consistency with the Charter,
including the principles of the sovereign equality and
territorial integrity of States. If Russia is interested
in surviving, it should cling to that resolution as to a
lifebuoy and follow the path to peace that it charts. It
is time for the Russian hordes to withdraw from the
occupied territories of Ukraine without any further
delay and not in cars stolen from the local Ukrainian
population. Hundreds of thousands of illegal Russian
migrants should get out of Crimea and go back to
Russia, where they came from. The Russist criminal
bunker geezer still has two options: either to surrender
or to repeat what happened in another bunker on
30 April 1945.
(spoke in Russian)
I must address the representatives of the criminal
Putin regime with the words of their Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs, a certain Ryabkov. The time has
come for you to fulfil the instruction of your boss, who
in January last year, in his particularly low-life style,
had the gall to say something that it is high time for you
to do yourself: “pack your bags and go, back across the
1991 borders”.
(spoke in English)
Get your junk and sling your hook. Get back across
the 1991 borders. Take to your heels before we drop you
to your knees.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

23-1404215/15
