S

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3305
5 November 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Friday, 5 November 1993, at 11.30 a.m.

President:

(Cape Verde)

Brazil
China
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America
Venezuela

Mr. SARDENBERG
Mr. LI Zhaoxing
Mr. OLHAYE
Mr. LADSOUS
Mr. ERDÖS
Mr. MARUYAMA
Mr. BENJELLOUN-TOUIMI
Mr. KEATING
Mr. MARKER
Mr. VORONTSOV
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO

Members:

Mr. JESUS

Sir David HANNAY
Mrs. ALBRIGHT
Mr. BIVERO

________________________________________________________________________________
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.
93-87092 (E)

S/PV.3305
2

The meeting was called to order at 12.25 p.m.

ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE SITUATION IN MOZAMBIQUE
REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ON THE UNITED NATIONS OPERATION IN
MOZAMBIQUE (S/26666 and Add.1)
The PRESIDENT:

I should like to inform the Council that I have

received a letter from the representative of Mozambique in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Afonso (Mozambique) took a place at
the Council table.

S/PV.3305
3

The PRESIDENT:

The Security Council will now begin the consideration

of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Operation in Mozambique; that report is contained in
documents S/26666 and S/26666/Add.1.

Members of the Council also have before

them document S/26694, which contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in
the course of the Council’s prior consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of members to the following technical
changes to be made in the text of the draft resolution (S/26694) in its
provisional form.
First, the order of the first and second preambular paragraphs should be
reversed.
Secondly, in paragraph 12, the word "operative" before the words "paragraph
13" should be deleted.
Thirdly, in paragraph 15, the words "Trust Fund set up" should read "Trust
Fund to be set up".
The first speaker is the representative of Mozambique, on whom I now call.
Mr. AFONSO (Mozambique):

I should like to begin my remarks by

extending my delegation’s warmest congratulations to you, Sir, upon your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.

My delegation is fully

cognizant of your outstanding diplomatic skills and wishes to pay a special
tribute to you for the high distinction with which you have served your country
and our continent during these two years of intense work in the Council.

We are

therefore confident that the Council will benefit from your experience in
international relations and will be able to celebrate a successful outcome of
its deliberations.

Let me also place on record my appreciation of the excellent

manner in which your predecessor, Ambassador Sardenberg of Brazil, presided over
the deliberations of the Security Council last month.

I am particularly

grateful for the cooperation he extended to me and my delegation, as well as for
the leadership he displayed during the consultations leading to the adoption of
Security Council resolution 879 (1993) last Friday.
I should also like to take this opportunity to thank all members of the
Council for the excellent cooperation they have given me and my delegation since

S/PV.3305
4

(Mr. Afonso, Mozambique)
the establishment of the United Nations Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ).

I

look forward to continue working with members of the Council throughout this
year and next year.
I wish once again to commend the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his continued commitment to peace in my country.
His historic visit to Mozambique recently and the results achieved thereupon
bear testimony to that commitment.
enjoyed his visit.

I should like to tell him again that we

As the Secretary-General witnessed himself, for the

Government, the people and indeed all Mozambican political forces, his stay in
Mozambique further raised our spirits and enabled us to find a new dynamism and
optimism in our peace process.
At this juncture, I wish to commend the Secretary-General for his very
illustrative report in document S/26666 of 1 November 1993, which provides an
important assessment of the progress made in the implementation of the General
Peace Agreement for Mozambique, especially the recent developments since the
last meeting of the Security Council on this issue.
Twelve months have elapsed since the adoption by the Council of resolution
782 (1992) of 13 October 1992, which, inter alia, approved the appointment by
the Secretary-General of an interim Special Representative and the dispatch of a
team of up to 25 military observers to Mozambique.

The adoption of that

resolution marked the dawning of a new era in the efforts towards the
establishment of a lasting peace in Mozambique.
The establishment by the Council on 16 December 1992 of the United Nations
Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ) laid down the legal foundations for a continued
follow-up of the peace process in Mozambique by the Security Council.

Since

then, this body has devoted a number of meetings to the evolution of the peace
process in my country and has adopted a number of important resolutions in that
regard.

Therefore, we believe there could be no better time than today to make

an overall assessment of the progress made so far in the search for peace and of
the activities of the United Nations Operation in Mozambique.
Clearly, some progress has been made since the inception of ONUMOZ.
Overall, the objectives of the General Peace Agreement have been preserved,
particularly the maintenance of the cease-fire.

Notwithstanding that, as will

be recalled, each stage of the implementation of the provisions of the Rome
Agreement has been faced with unforeseen difficulties.
There were times when we were concerned over the delays in the deployment
of the United Nations contingent to speed up the process.

Nevertheless, soon

S/PV.3305
5

(Mr. Afonso, Mozambique)
after this first major issue was resolved, other obstacles - artificial and
ever-mounting ones - came into play during the implementation process.
The deployment of the United Nations peace-keeping forces is having a
positive impact on the country as a whole.

The United Nations presence has been

instrumental in encouraging a gradual but steady return of refugees and
displaced persons, the normalization of life throughout the country, the
re-establishment of a productive base in the rural areas and the revitalization
of the economy.
In this connection, I wish to avail myself of this opportunity to place on
record once again my Government’s high regard for the positive role played by
the United Nations Office for Humanitarian Assistance Coordination in assisting
my Government to address vital issues pertaining to the humanitarian-relief
programme in Mozambique.
As will be recalled, time and again my Government and the international
community have voiced their deep disappointment over the continuing delays in
the process of separation, concentration and demobilization of armed forces.
Moreover, the training of the new army did not proceed in accordance with the
timetable set out in the General Peace Agreement.

Of course, RENAMO was not

prepared to send its forces on time.
On the other hand, the National Commission for Administration and the
National Police Affairs Commission could not be established owing to the failure
by RENAMO to appoint its representatives.

S/PV.3305
6

(Mr. Afonso, Mozambique)
Furthermore, the Government has had to provide answers to systematic
demands by RENAMO, whose fulfilment was made a vital condition of RENAMO’s
abiding by the provisions of the General Peace Agreement.

These demands

related, among other things, to the installations and the means of securing
RENAMO’s accommodation, transportation and communications facilities.

As may be

noted, we have truly been talking of a package of preconditions that for so long
put the Rome Agreement in serious jeopardy.
Despite serious shortages of resources resulting from a long-lasting
conflict, my Government did all it could to give peace a chance.

We provided

RENAMO and, wherever possible, the other political parties with all we could
afford.
The Security Council will recall that, following the concerted efforts that
were begun after the signing of the Rome Agreement, Mr. Dhlakama, the RENAMO
leader, finally agreed to go to Maputo,

where he had several meetings with

President Chissano between 23 August and 3 September 1993.

This series of

meetings resulted in agreements in two of the areas most critical to
implementation of the General Peace Agreement.

On the issue of territorial

administration, it was agreed that a post of adviser to each of Mozambique’s 10
provincial governors should be created.
to nominate three of its members for

For this purpose, RENAMO was requested

each province to assist the provincial

governors with regard to all important issues pertaining to territorial
administration.

My Government regards this agreement as a step forward in the

efforts to preserve and maintain the unity of the country.
In so far as police affairs are concerned, it was also agreed, inter alia,
to request the United Nations to send a police contingent to monitor all police
activities, as well as to provide technical support to the National Police
Affairs Commission, which was established under the General Peace Agreement.

In

this connection, my Government has already made a formal request to the
Secretary-General to send a police contingent, in accordance with the agreement
that I have just mentioned.

We are pleased to note that the draft resolution

before the Council authorizes the Secretary-General to proceed with the
selection and deployment of 128 United Nations police observers.
The Mozambican Government made all these concessions in an attempt to
remove the existing hurdles to the peace process.

We did so because we believed

that there should be no reason whatsoever to jeopardize the lives of millions of
our citizens any longer, following nearly 30 years of devastating wars.

The

S/PV.3305
7

(Mr. Afonso, Mozambique)
Government had done its best to accommodate the interests of other parties,
especially RENAMO, while making clear its unwillingness to undertake commitments
that would ultimately lead to reopening of the negotiation of the Rome
Agreement.
On the other hand, while this agreement was being achieved, the
negotiations within the multi-party consultative conference, which is
responsible for the preparation of electoral law, were virtually deadlocked, and
no agreement could be reached on the composition of the Electoral Commission.
Owing to this state of affairs, a sense of urgency was stimulated by the
Security Council in its resolution 863 (1993) of 13 September 1993.

For that

reason, my Government welcomed the adoption of that resolution, truly believing
in the need to ensure strict observance, in letter and in spirit, of the Rome
Agreement.

Moreover, the resolution made clear the unacceptability of attempts

to attach conditions or to gain more time or further concessions, attempts which
are contrary to the peace process in Mozambique and

which have so far impeded

full implementation of the General Peace Agreement.
It was against this background that the Secretary-General paid an official
visit to Mozambique from 17 to 20 October 1993.

This visit to our country gave

the Secretary-General a unique opportunity to establish high-level contacts with
the Government, RENAMO and other political parties in Mozambique and to take a
fresh look at the activities of the United Nations Operation in Mozambique.
The Secretary-General’s visit was timely and useful.

As a result of his

extensive talks with the Government, RENAMO and other political parties, a major
breakthrough in the Mozambican peace process was achieved.

Thanks to the

political will shown by the parties, it was finally possible to achieve
far-reaching, positive agreements on all major issues pertaining to full
implementation of the General Peace Agreement.
As is clearly outlined in the Secretary-General’s report, agreement has
been reached on the composition of the Electoral Commission.

As I emphasized

earlier, the lack of progress on the issue of the composition of this important
Commission brought all the negotiations within the multi-party consultative
conference to a standstill.

The understanding that has been reached should make

possible the early and successful completion of the electoral law, which will be
the cornerstone for the next year’s general elections.
The Electoral Commission will be composed of 10 members of the Government,
seven members of RENAMO and three people from the other political parties and
will have an independent Chairman.

Moreover, the Government, RENAMO and other

S/PV.3305
8

(Mr. Afonso, Mozambique)
political parties are considering the creation of an electoral tribunal to make
decisions about, inter alia, matters arising from the electoral process in cases
of disagreement in the Electoral Commission.
composed of five judges -

The electoral tribunal will be

three international judges of recognized technical

expertise, neutrality and effectiveness, and two Mozambican judges of the same
standing.

This composition underscores the high importance we attach to the

credibility of the institutions being set up to certify the legality and the
validity of the whole electoral process and its outcome.

For these reasons, we

shall request the Secretary-General to consult with the Security Council on how
best they might assist in the selection and nomination of the international
judges.
At the current stage, technical experts of all political parties are
finalizing the details of the electoral law.

The whole process, including the

adoption of the electoral law by the Assembly of the Republic, is due to be
concluded by the end of November 1993.

However, at this time we are extremely

disturbed at the fact that, in the course of the negotiations - following the
Secretary-General’s departure from Maputo - RENAMO has once again resorted to
its traditional pattern of raising new issues extraneous to the process, thus
creating a stumbling-block to approval of the electoral law.

Clearly, this is

contrary to the spirit of the commitments entered into during the SecretaryGeneral’s visit to Mozambique.

The international community must send a strong

message to RENAMO, making it clear these tactics will no longer be accepted.
With respect to the issue of demobilization of armed forces, a new
timetable outlining the various phases of demobilization has already been
approved by both parties.

The demobilization of paramilitary forces will begin

with the movement of the first troops to the assembly areas.

In accordance with

the new timetable, demobilization will begin in January 1994 and will be
completed by May of the same year.

Considerable progress has also been made

with regard to the approval of assembly areas.

Out of a total of 49 such areas

envisaged in the General Peace Agreement, 36 have already been approved.

The

new Mozambican Defence Forces (FADM) are scheduled to be fully operational by
September 1994, one month prior to the holding of the general elections.
As the Council is aware, the formation of the new army is vital to the
future of the country as well as to the smooth implementation of the Rome
Agreement.

It is therefore one of the most important priorities on our agenda.

However, it is neither easy nor cheap, especially under Mozambique’s present
economic and financial conditions.

Without firm international support it will

S/PV.3305
9

(Mr. Afonso, Mozambique)
be very difficult, if not impossible, for our country, alone, to cope with all
the expenses resulting from the demobilization of the armed forces, training,
rehabilitation of military installations, uniforms, engineering and
communications equipment, and other items needed for the new army.

The

Mozambican Government is fully aware of all the financial constraints we face
worldwide, but we believe that, with good will, it could be possible to help our
people in financing the end of war and the restoration of peace and tranquillity
so vital for all Mozambicans.

A peaceful, stable and prosperous Mozambique is

vital, not only to the Mozambicans themselves, but also to the entire southern
African region.
The agreement on the Commissions whose functioning had not been possible to
date - namely, the National Commission for Administration, the Commission for
Information (COMINFO) and the National Police Affairs Commission (COMPOL) constitutes another important step forward.

It was further decided that pending

the deployment of the United Nations police contingent, COMPOL will set up its
own subcommittees to undertake temporarily the tasks reserved for the United
Nations police contingent.

What is necessary now, as correctly indicated in the

draft resolution (S/26694), is to make these Commissions functional.

While

welcoming the proposed deployment by the Secretary-General of 128 police
officers, we wish to express our full sympathy and understanding with regard to
the financial implications that will certainly ensue from the deployment of this
contingent.

The current United Nations financial situation, which the

Secretary-General brought to our attention during his visit in Maputo, calls for
good management and utilization of existing resources, both material and human.
The lack of progress on the composition and chairmanship of these
Commissions has had a very negative impact on the overall implementation of the
General Peace Agreement.
delays.

We believe that we can now proceed without any further

We must move forward and turn the aspirations of our people into

reality.
Having made these comments, I wish to say that I strongly believe that the
Secretary-General’s visit was a remarkable step towards peace and a step towards
the full implementation of the General Peace Agreement for Mozambique.

We

therefore hope that with political good will and determination by all parties,
including RENAMO, there will be sufficient and ample time to prepare for, and to
hold, general elections no later than October 1994, as expressed by this body.
This is the wish of the entire Mozambican people; it is the wish of our
Government; and it is also the wish of the international community.

S/PV.3305
10

(Mr. Afonso, Mozambique)
We are of the view that, at this stage, our primary responsibility is to
ensure a continued mandate for ONUMOZ to undertake its tasks.
is a pressing need for ongoing vigilance.

Secondly, there

For this purpose, we call upon the

Security Council to hold responsible all those who might once again wish to
subvert the momentum created by the understandings achieved during the
Secretary-General’s visit to Mozambique.

It is high time for the Security

Council to ensure that procrastination will no longer be tolerated; rather that
it will be firmly denounced, without any ambiguity, by the international
community.
My Government calls for continued international support in our search for
peace, because peace is vital to the people of Mozambique and ultimately to the
entire southern African region. In this regard, we welcome the draft resolution
before us today.

In our view, the draft resolution addresses in detail and with

clarity all that must be done in order to move forward in the implementation of
the provisions of the General Peace Agreement.

We regard the implementation of

this draft resolution as vital to the achievement of lasting peace and
tranquillity in our country.

We therefore strongly support its adoption by the

Council.
The PRESIDENT:

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to

proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.

Unless I hear any

objection, I shall put the draft resolution (S/26694) to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council who wish to make
statements before the voting.
Mr. SARDENBERG (Brazil):

Mr. President, I wish to congratulate you

warmly on your accession to the office of President of the Security Council for
the month of November.

Your well-known leadership qualities and your recognized

legal and political experience guarantee that the work of the Council will be
guided in a highly proficient manner.

The delegation of Brazil is particularly

pleased that you, as representative of Cape Verde, will be presiding over our
deliberations, as our two countries share a common culture and a common
language, upon which we have built strong ties of friendship.

You know that you

can count on the cooperation of the Brazilian delegation.
May I also express my gratitude for the kind words you and other
representatives have addressed to me.

S/PV.3305
11

(Mr. Sardenberg, Brazil)
For some time now, the Security Council has been expressing its
satisfaction at the continuation of the peace process in Mozambique, a member of
the

Portuguese-speaking community of nations, along with your country and mine.

The Council has also on various occasions expressed its lingering concern over
the delays and difficulties found in the implementation of measures called for
in the General Peace Agreement.
The report now submitted by the Secretary-General, for which we are
grateful, reflects a new momentum that has been generated for the peace process
in Mozambique and provides information on a number of important agreements that
have been achieved on outstanding matters between the Government of Mozambique
and RENAMO.

We are particularly encouraged by the fact that agreement was

reached on the revised timetable for the implementation of the General Peace
Agreement.

We commend the Secretary-General and his Special Representative,

Mr. Aldo Ajello, for their efforts, which have facilitated those agreements.

In

particular, the Secretary-General’s visit to Maputo was certainly instrumental
in promoting such agreements and in providing a new impetus to the peace
process.
We also note with satisfaction the continued commitment of the Government
of Mozambique, under the leadership of President Joaquim Chissano, to the cause
of peace and national reconciliation.
The United Nations Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ) has been playing a
fundamental role in strengthening trust between the Government and RENAMO and in
promoting the conditions for carrying forward the peace process.

The renewal of

the ONUMOZ mandate for an additional six-month period is thus an important
contribution by the United Nations to the success of the endeavours for peace in
Mozambique.

Brazil is committed to support the continuation of a strong United

Nations presence in Mozambique.

In that connection, we note the observation

made by the Secretary-General in his report that the security situation in some
areas is still precarious and that there is an increased demand for air
transport for ONUMOZ personnel.
The draft resolution before us provides for a review every three months of
the situation concerning the implementation of the mandate of ONUMOZ.

Our main

concern in those reviews will be the need for ensuring its continued and
effective discharge of all its functions in support of the peace process.

The

need to achieve cost savings is of course also an element to be considered, in
this as in all other operations carried out by the United Nations.

S/PV.3305
12

(Mr. Sardenberg, Brazil)
The Secretary-General also indicates his intention to submit shortly a
separate report on the establishment of an ONUMOZ police contingent.

We look

forward to receiving his recommendations in this regard and we stand ready to
work with other Council members to act promptly on the matter.

We agree with

the need to proceed, meanwhile, with the deployment of the small contingent of
128 police observers provided for in the original mandate of ONUMOZ.
It would be hard to over-emphasize the importance of strict and timely
compliance with the requirements concerning the military aspects of the General
Peace Agreement, especially the assembly and demobilization of troops, along
with the process of creating the new Mozambican Defence Forces.

The draft

resolution rightly places strong emphasis on these points.
It is very important, at present, that it be clearly understood that the
Council is and will continue to be attentive to the crucial question of troop
assembly and demobilization, and that it will continue to insist on these
points.
The revised timetable is tight, and it must be complied with without any
equivocation or dragging of feet, so as to allow the successful holding of
democratic elections in October 1994.

As indicated in the draft resolution, no

further issues that could put in jeopardy the timely implementation of the
General Peace Agreement should be raised at this point.
doubt about what is to be done.

There can be no more

All that is necessary now is that it be done,

and that it be done without any further delay.
We are confident that this will indeed be the case and that the efforts for
peace now being deployed by the Mozambican people will bear fruit.

For our

part, we reiterate our commitment to continue to work in the Security Council
and elsewhere to support peace, development and prosperity for Mozambique.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Brazil for his kind

words addressed to me.
Mr. OLHAYE (Djibouti):

We wish to congratulate you most warmly, Sir,

on assuming the presidency of the Council for this month.

We have no doubt that

your qualities and professionalism will guide us meticulously through the
crowded programme of work ahead of us.
We would also like to express our deep gratitude to your predecessor,
Ambassador Sardenberg, for the exemplary manner in which he conducted the
Council’s work last month.

S/PV.3305
13

(Mr. Olhaye, Djibouti)
The draft resolution on Mozambique sums up very well the positive feelings
and guarded optimism of the international community regarding the progress made
to date on resolving the conflict there.

We also vigorously applaud the

Secretary-General for his excellent report on the current situation, following
his personal intervention in the negotiation process between President Chissano
and Mr. Dhlakama, which, together with the efforts of his Special
Representative, Mr. Ajello, appears to have been the spark needed to move the
talks to a self-sustaining and conclusive level.
For various reasons, key provisions of the General Peace Agreement signed
in Rome by the two sides exactly one year ago have not been implemented.

The

potential for these delays to rekindle suspicions or harden attitudes has been a
constant strain on all concerned.

We must, therefore, congratulate each side on

not seizing upon these delays as a pretext for reneging on the basic spirit of
the agreement.
My delegation is pleased that progress towards elections next year has been
given a substantial boost with the completion of the National Elections
Commission.

Now that a definite date has been set for the holding of elections -

namely, October 1994 - the measures necessary to meet this date, such as the
need to revise and approve the electoral law for final adoption by the National
Assembly, will have a sense of urgency.

In this vein, we are also pleased that,

as a result of the Secretary-General’s visit, three essential commissions, for
Administration, Police Affairs and Information, whose activities are key to the
implementation of the Peace Agreement, but which have been inoperative to date,
now have chairmen and are expected to begin work immediately.
The combined effect of these steps, as well as others related to the
formation of a unified defence force and police, the conversion of RENAMO to a
political party, the approval of a timetable for the peace process by both
parties, and the general effectiveness of the Cease-fire Commission in remaining
on top of the surprisingly limited number of cease-fire violations, has been to
provide a renewed impetus to the whole process of returning Mozambique to the
status of a fully functioning nation.
We continue to be concerned, however, with the whole humanitarian
assistance programme, given the sheer magnitude of the calamity.

A total of

some 1.5 million refugees resulted from the conflict in Mozambique, and the job
of reintegrating them into society, along with that of integrating the troops of
the combatants, is formidable.

To this we must add the 4 million to 5 million

S/PV.3305
14

(Mr. Olhaye, Djibouti)
internally displaced persons who must be returned to their home areas as well.
Related to this problem is that of de-mining the country, where there are an
estimated 2 million mines.

Training, time and funds will be required.

But

until sufficient inroads are made, mines will remain an impediment to movement
of people, reintegration, development and food production.

The Secretary-

General’s special attention to this matter is therefore to be commended.
Over all, we note that progress to date has permitted a refocus of the
assistance programme from emergency relief to problems more related to a return
to normality.

The commitment of the international community to the needs of

Mozambique is quite encouraging, as manifested by the more than 90 per cent of
pledges assembled against the overall target of $560 million for the year to May
1994.

Given the recent breakthroughs, the concerns of the donors have been

addressed, particularly with regard to key delays, and that should now open the
way to completion of the funding.
Hopefully, if everything proceeds as planned, Mozambique will assume the
status of a United Nations success story in Africa, like that of Cambodia in
Asia, and will, moreover, be an example of what can be accomplished by leaders
of good will supported by the international community.

My delegation therefore

unreservedly supports this draft resolution.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Djibouti for the kind

words he addressed to me.
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish):

In the

draft resolution before us the Security Council expresses its satisfaction that
the dynamic of progress which began this summer between President Chissano and
Mr. Dhlakama has been consolidated, in what we hope is a definitive manner
following the recent visit of the Secretary-General to Mozambique.

What was

until recently the main obstacle to decisive progress in the peace process,
seriously threatening to delay the elections scheduled for October 1994, has now
been overcome.

S/PV.3305
15

(Mr. Yáñez Barnuevo, Spain)
We welcome the fact that the President of Mozambique and the President of
RENAMO have accepted the revised time-table for the full implementation of the
General Peace Agreement; they are to initiate a series of measures that the
parties must fulfil during the next few months, and that the Council will follow
with close attention.
My delegation wishes to congratulate the Secretary-General for the
excellent work carried out during his visit to Maputo, where he so ably conveyed
the serious concern of the international community at the delays in the process
and also the need to successfully carry out their obligations under the
Council’s resolutions.
We must also welcome the exemplary fashion in which the United Nations
Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ) is carrying out its work under the able
guidance of the Secretary-General’s Special Representative, Mr. Ajello.
The report of the Secretary-General defines the agreements reached in
Maputo on the process of assembling and demobilizing troops, creating the new
Mozambican Defence Forces, establishing the National Commission for
Administration, the National Police Affairs Commission and the National
Commission for Information, and preparing for the elections in October 1994.
The resolution the Council is about to adopt emphasizes the importance of the
parties’ fulfilling these agreements, in accordance with a revised and clearly
defined time-table.
In this connection, we cannot fail to note with concern the information
brought to us today by the representative of Mozambique and concerning certain
attitudes displayed by RENAMO since the Secretary-General’s visit to Maputo.

We

believe that the authorization given the Secretary-General by the Security
Council to select and promptly deploy 128 United Nations police observers, who
had already been approved under resolution 797 (1992) of 16 December 1992,
presupposes that all parties should feel some degree of confidence, as must the
Mozambican population, and that this will help smooth the way towards national
reconciliation and help the parties take the welcome step of doing everything
necessary to put their signed agreements into practice.
I cannot fail to mention my country’s constant concern about the
humanitarian situation in Mozambique and the suffering of a population that has
been laid waste by a conflict that has gone on far too long.

The steps forward

that have been taken in this area, as described in the Secretary-General’s
report, are significant.

We appeal to both parties to continue this positive

S/PV.3305
16

(Mr. Yáñez Barnuevo, Spain)
trend of opening up channels of communication between the areas they each
control, as this is enabling the United Nations and the humanitarian assistance
organizations to assess the Mozambican people’s most acute needs more
accurately, so that they can provide the necessary assistance.
The fact that refugees and displaced persons are being repatriated and
resettled are promising signs that demonstrate the population’s desire to
rebuild their lives in an atmosphere of peace, reconciliation and development.
Enabling them to do so does require continuing and generous assistance from the
international community.
The Security Council is preparing to extend the mandate of ONUMOZ for six
months, to be reviewed after 90 days on the basis of a report by the SecretaryGeneral on the progress made by the parties in implementing the General Peace
Agreement and in meeting the revised time-table for holding elections in
October 1994.

Spain believes that this extension emphasizes the confidence that

the international community has placed in the willingness of both parties, the
Government and RENAMO, to fulfil their undertakings, and highlights the
international community’s resolve from now on not to accept at all readily any
delays in the process, nor to see itself disappointed in supporting peace and
democracy in Mozambique.
It is our strongest desire that the peace process in Mozambique, guided by
the United Nations, should come to a successful conclusion and so become an
example for all Africa.
The PRESIDENT:

I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained

in document S/26694.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Brazil, Cape Verde, China, Djibouti, France, Hungary,
Japan, Morocco, New Zealand, Pakistan, Russian Federation,
Spain, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Venezuela

The PRESIDENT:

There were 15 votes in favour.

The draft resolution

has been adopted unanimously as resolution 882 (1993).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who wish to make
statements following the voting.
Mr. MARUYAMA (Japan):

Japan welcomes the agreements reached between

the President of Mozambique, Mr. Joaquim Chissano, and the President of RENAMO,
Mr. Alfonso Dhlakama, on a number of issues which had brought the peace process
in Mozambique to a standstill.

These agreements were the result of the

S/PV.3305
17

(Mr. Maruyama, Japan)
initiative taken by the Secretary-General during his visit to Mozambique and of
the ongoing and dedicated efforts of his Special Representative,
Mr. Aldo Ajello.

Japan expresses its sincere appreciation for their

contributions to the process.
As a country that participates in the United Nations Operation in
Mozambique (ONUMOZ), Japan has followed the situation in Mozambique very
closely.

Although we have often felt frustrated by the lack of progress, recent

developments have renewed our hope that peace will be restored in Mozambique.
We are particularly pleased that the parties have agreed to the revised
time-table for the implementation of the General Peace Agreement, a step which
the Security Council had strongly urged with its resolution 863 (1993).

Now it

is important that the Government and RENAMO work in good faith to act on their
agreements:

they should start the process of assembling their troops this

month, and demobilizing them in January 1994.

Further, they should approve the

electoral law no later than the end of this month so as to ensure that elections
will in fact be held as soon as possible, and by October 1994 at the very
latest.
The Secretary-General stated in his report that:
"the United Nations can only facilitate the peace process and that it
cannot promote and establish peace without the cooperation of the
parties."

(S/26666, para. 46)

This means that both parties must exercise the political will and determination
to translate their agreements into concrete actions.
At the same time, Japan believes it is important that the international
community support the efforts of the people of Mozambique to restore peace and
democracy in their country.

By adopting the resolution, the Security Council

has demonstrated its commitment to providing that support.

My own delegation

strongly believes that the presence of ONUMOZ will be necessary until the
elections are held and peace is firmly established in Mozambique.
Indeed, I should like to close my remarks by assuring the people of
Mozambique that they have the continued support and good will of the
international community as they strive to achieve a durable peace in their
country.

We all look forward to the day when they can devote their efforts to

building a stable, prosperous, and democratic society.
Mr. LI Zhaoxing (China) (interpretation from Chinese):

With the

joint efforts of the Secretary-General and the two sides in Mozambique, the
peace process in Mozambique has made gratifying progress which has resulted in

S/PV.3305
18

(Mr. Li Zhaoxing, China)
agreements on the establishment of the National Elections Commission, the
Commission for Information and the National Police Affairs Commission, and on
the time-table for the assembly and demobilization of troops reached not long
ago by the two sides, thus making an important contribution to peace and
security in Mozambique and southern Africa and opening up new vistas for
economic revitalization in Mozambique. The Chinese delegation is very pleased
with all these developments.
The Chinese delegation maintains that whether the peace process in
Mozambique will be completed successfully and whether Mozambique can genuinely
enjoy lasting peace depends, in the final analysis, on the people of Mozambique
themselves, and that outside efforts can only help promote the process.

At

present, the peace process in Mozambique has entered a crucial stage, and the
two sides should therefore, in accordance with their commitments and in full
cooperation with the United Nations Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ), adopt
practical measures to strictly follow the new time-table so as to ensure the
holding of the general election as scheduled in October 1994.
We hope that the two sides in Mozambique will seize the opportunity and
comprehensively implement the general peace agreement and the relevant Security
Council resolutions so as to create conditions for the early realization of
national reconciliation.

Consequently, the Chinese delegation supports the

Secretary-General’s recommendation on extending the mandate of ONUMOZ and has
voted in favour of the resolution adopted just now.
Mr. MARKER (Pakistan):

Let me at the outset congratulate you, Sir,

on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the current
month.

We are confident that under your experienced and able guidance the

Council will function smoothly and effectively.
I should also like to place on record my delegation’s appreciation for the
skill and sagacity with which His Excellency Ambassador Ronaldo Mota Sardenberg,
Permanent Representative of Brazil, conducted the affairs of the Council during
the month of October.
From all accounts, the latest developments in Mozambique are encouraging.
If all the Mozambican parties involved continue to show the commitment and the
spirit of accommodation recently visible, Mozambique could well turn out to be
the next United Nations success story.

S/PV.3305
19

(Mr. Marker, Pakistan)
My delegation would wish to pay a special and warm tribute to the
Secretary-General, whose recent dynamic presence in Mozambique has motivated the
agreements and the understandings that have made possible our meeting here
today.
We are particularly gratified at the many agreements reached between
President Chissano and Mr. Dhlakama during the Secretary-General’s recent visit
to Maputo.

Now that the issue of composition of the National Elections

Commission has been settled, we hope that this Commission will function
effectively towards the goal of general elections in Mozambique in October 1994.
We also hope that the consensus principle under which the Commission is supposed
to function will not impede its work.
Another welcome development has been the agreement between the Government
of Mozambique and RENAMO to begin the movement of their troops to assembly areas
during this month and to start the demobilization in January 1994.
It is vital that the time-table agreed between the Government of
Mozambique and RENAMO is adhered to strictly.
finish by the end of May 1994.
June 1994.

The demobilization process should

The voter registration should be finalized by

Training of the new Mozambican Defence Forces should be completed by

September 1994, and the electoral campaign should wind up in time for national
elections to be held by the end of October.
The United Nations can only assist the people of Mozambique and, at best,
supplement their efforts.

The basic responsibility for restoring normalcy and a

democratic order there rests essentially with the people and the leaders of that
country.

It has to be realized that the international community may not be in a

position to expend human and material resources indefinitely if the people of
Mozambique themselves do not make a substantive contribution towards the process
of peace and rehabilitation.
The PRESIDENT:

I wish to thank the representative of Pakistan for

the kind words addressed to me.
Mr. LADSOUS (France) (interpretation from French):

My delegation

welcomes the recent positive developments that have taken place, thanks to the
visit of the Secretary-General to Maputo, in the implementation of the peace
process in Mozambique.

France therefore was pleased to vote in favour of this

resolution, which extends the mandate of the United Nations Operation in
Mozambique (ONUMOZ) for a six-month period, it being understood that progress in
the peace process will be subject to periodic review.

S/PV.3305
20

(Mr. Ladsous, France)
France, which had expressed its concern at the delays in the full
implementation of the Rome Accord, welcomes the agreements concluded by the
parties, especially those regarding the process of assembly and demobilization
of troops and the proper functioning of the Joint Commissions, especially the
National Elections Commission.

My delegation calls upon the parties to continue

to show wisdom and restraint, to comply strictly with the revised time-table and
to cooperate with ONUMOZ for the proper functioning of the electoral process.
My delegation emphasizes in this respect that it is imperative that these
elections be held as planned in October 1994, at the latest, and that no further
delay in these conditions will be tolerated.
My delegation once again pays tribute to the action of ONUMOZ under the
authority of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ajello.
We would recall that the United Nations cannot, however, replace the parties,
and that the success of the peace process depends above all on them.
The PRESIDENT:

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the

representative of Cape Verde.
My Government has been following the peace process in Mozambique with keen
interest.
After years of suffering and hardship, the people of Mozambique, to whom
we are linked by special ties of close friendship and history, have a unique
opportunity to change the course of events in order to reach harmony and
political stability in the country, rebuild their shattered lives and enjoy, in
peace and freedom, the many resources of their bountiful land.
The peace process under way offers them this unique opportunity.

The

political parties and their leaders are expected to play a historic role, and
they bear a special responsibility in this regard.
The General Peace Agreement is the centre of this process.

Its timely and

scrupulous implementation will finally bring peace and stability to Mozambique.
We are pleased to note the progress made, especially recently, in
connection with aspects related to the General Peace Agreement.

In this regard,

my Government attaches the utmost importance to the recently agreed new timetable for the implementation of the General Peace Agreement.
The success of the ongoing peace process and the holding of the longawaited elections in October of next year depend on the ability of both parties
to abide by and comply with this timetable.

S/PV.3305
21

(The President)
My Government therefore urges them to do everything in their power to continue
to honour promptly their agreements and arrangements, thus meeting the historic
challenge of bringing peace, stability and prosperity to their country.
To do otherwise would unnecessarily and dangerously prolong the agony of
the Mozambican people, who for too long have endured the excruciating pain that
goes with the loss of loved ones killed in the war, for too long suffered the
hardship caused by a destroyed economy and shattered lives, and for too long
legitimately longed for peace.
We are particularly encouraged by the positive developments in the peace
process in Mozambique, and especially by the dialogue between President Chissano
and the leader of RENAMO, Mr. Dhlakama, as noted in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/26666).

We encourage the parties to maintain this momentum for the

sake of lasting peace and continued prosperity in their country.
We appeal to all of those who are in a position to do so to provide the
financial assistance needed to facilitate the implementation of the peace
process and to improve the humanitarian situation in Mozambique.
We congratulate the Secretary-General for his personal efforts in
contributing to the achievement of important arrangements during his recent
visit to Mozambique and pay tribute to his Special Representative, Mr. Ajello,
for the good work and dynamism he has brought to his functions.

Our recognition

also goes to all the women and men serving in the United Nations Operation in
Mozambique for their assistance in the Mozambique peace process.
I now resume my functions as President of the Security Council.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has this concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.
