UNITEDNAl-ZONS

py

TWENTY-EIGHTH

13 ?y

YEAR
st

MEETING: 17 SEPTEMBER 1973
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 174 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , ,
Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , .
Adoption of the agenda . . . , . , . . , , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . .
Complaint by Cuba:
(al Letter dated 13 September 1973 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Cuba to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/10995)
(bl Letter dated 12 September 1973 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Cuba to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/10993) . . . . . . . , , , , . . . . . . . , . . . , . , , , .

1

S/PV.1741

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
fjgures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Suppbnents of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIRST MEETING
Held in New Ysrk in Monday, 17 September 1973, at 4 p.m.
President: Mr. Lazar MOJSOV (Yugoslavia).

cordance with the usual practice, to invite the representative of Cuba to participate in the discussion,
without
the right to vote.

Present: The representatives of the fallowing States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia,

At the invitation of‘ the President,Mr. R. Alarcdn (Cuba)
took a place at the Counciltable.
3. The PRESIDENT: A letter dated 15 Septemberhasalso
been addressedto the President of the Council by the
acting representativeof Chile. It relatesto the substance
of
the question and appearsas document S/10997. In that
letter it is requestedthat Chile be invited to participatein
the Council’s discussion,in accordancewith the relevant
provisions of the Charter. If I hear no objection, I propose
also to invite the representativeof Chile to participate in
the discussion,without the right to vote.

Provisionalagenda (S/Agenda/l741)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

2. Complaint by Cuba:
(a] Letter dated 13 September 1973 from the ChargC
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Cuba to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/ 10995)
(6) Letter dated 12 September 1973 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Cuba to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/10993)

At the invitation of the President,Mr. R. Baza’n(Chile)
took a place at the Council table.
4. The PRESIDENT: In addition, I shouldlike to inform
the membersof the Council that I have receiveda letter
from the representative of the People’sDemocraticRepublic of Yemen, in which he asks to be invited to
participate in the discussionof the questionbefore the
Council, If I hear no objection, therefore, I shalltake it that
the Council agrees to invite the representativeof the
People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen to participate,
without the right to vote, in the discussionof the item
included in our agenda.

The meeting was called to order at 4.40 p.m.
Expression

of thanks to the retiring President

1. The PRESIDENT:
Before proceeding to today’s
business, I should like, on behalf of the Council, to express
our appreciation to Ambassador John Scali of the United
States for his services as President of the Council for the
lnonth of August.

5. In view of the limited number of placesaround the
Council table, I shall invite the representativeof the
People’sDemocratic Republic of Yemen to take a placeat
the side of the Council chamber, it beingunderstoodthat
he will be calledto take a placeat the Counciltablewhen it
ishis turn to addressthe Council.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Cuba:
(a) Letter dated 13 September 1973 from the Charg6
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Cuba to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Coun.cil (S/10995)
(in) Letter dated 12 September 1973 from the ChargC
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Cuba to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (s/10993)

At the invitation of the F’resident, Mr. A. S. Ashtal
(Democratic Yemen) took the place reservedfor him at the
sideof the Councilchamber.

2. The PRESIDENT: In the letter dated 13 September
contained in document S/10995, which has just been
included in the agenda,a formal requestis madethat Cuba
be invited to participate in the cdnsideration of the
question now before the Council. Accordingly, if there is
no objection, I propose that the Council agree, in ac1

6. The PRESIDENT: The Security Councilwill now begin
its consideration of the item on the agenda.Thefirst name
on the list of speakersis that of the representativeof Cuba,
on whom I now call.
7. Mr. ALARCON (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish):
Mr. President, first of all, may I expressmy thanksto you
and to those membersof the Security Council that were
good enough to accedeto our request to call thismeeting.

i

8. It is a matter of gratification to the Cuban delegation to
participate in the deliberations of the Security Council
under the presidency of Ambassador Lazar Mojsov, the
Permanent Representative
of Yugoslavia, with whose
people and Government my own enjoy close ties of
friendship and co-operation. I should like to express the
hope, that, under your guidance, the Council will be able to
adopt the decisions that are dictated by the very grave
situation that we are to examine.

13. It is for that reason that the events that are taking
place in Chile have aroused all mankind and have had
repercussions all over the world. My delegation comes to
the Council to denounce them. The Council would be
remissin its most elementary duty were it to sit coinplacently with its arms folded when confronted by event:
that represent a grave threat to peace and security and
directly affect the principles and purposeson which this
Organization rests.

9. The problem that gave rise to this debate affects all
sovereign States because it touches directly on respect for
and the validity of the purposes and cardinal principles of
the Charter and of international law. The events that we
will have to analyse constitute a brutal affront to the
foundations of international juridical order and the most
elementary norms of civilized coexistence; they stand as a
challenge to the aspirations of all peoples that struggle for
their full emancipation and that saw in the Popular Unity
Government of Chile and in its heroic President, Comrade
Salvador Allende, the fulfilment of their deepest hopes and
the embodiment of their highest desires for liberation.

14. On 11 September,while the Fascistmilitary coupwas
taking place, members of the Chilean armed forces,
numbering several hundreds, surrounded the building
housing the Cuban Embassayat Santiago and started to
shoot at it. At 3.30 pm. on the sameday, Admiral Carvajal,
speaking on behalf of the militia, called the Cuban
Ambassadorand threatened to launch a vigorousattackon
the Embassy.Later, General Benavides, alsospeakingon
behalf of that gangof mutineers,repeatedthe samethreats.
Still later, CommanderPedro Domic reiterated the threats,
pointing out that the army had concentrated heavy
weapons that could annihilate all the Cuban staff in tile
Embassy.Throughout the night of 11 September,shots
were periodically fired at the Cubanmission,and thiswent
on until dawn on the 12th. As a result of that continuous
attack againstour building, a memberof the mission’s
staff,
Luis Farias, was seriously injured. On 12 September,at
4 a.m., the Cuban Ambassador,Mario Garcia Inchriustegui,
and Counsellor Luis Ferniindez Ofia stood at the doorway
of the Embassy,with the prior agreementof the Chilean
officers who surroundedthe building. At that moment,in a
cowardly and treacherousfashion, our colleagueswereshol
at with machine-gunsand AmbassadorGarcia Inchaustegui
was seriously injured. At that time it becameclear,from
the intention to assassinate
the Ambassadorof Cuba,that
the criminal and repugnant face of the ChileanFascists
was
being shown. The honour and respect for law that the
rebellious officials had so often crowed about finally
appearedand they were seenin their true colours: thoseof
common murderers and butchers draggedfrom the seamy
scum of those brothels the CIA [Central Intelligence
Agency] andthe Pentagon.

10. Between 5 and 9 September, in Algiers, the Fourth
Conference of Non-Aligned Countries took place. More
than 70 heads of State or Government were present.
President Allende was unable to participate in that meeting
because of the difficulties that had been created for him by
the machinations of imperialism and Chilean reaction. The
first agreement reached by the Conference, at the opening
meeting, was to send a message of sympathy and support to
the constitutional President of Chile. Later, the heads of
State, in the Political Declaration adopted by the Conference, stated the following with regard to Chile:
“The Conference hails the Government and the people
of Chile, who in their struggle to consolidate their
independence and build a new society are facing the
combined aggression of reaction and imperialism. It
expresses its solidarity with Chile in its efforts to achieve
the economic and social transformations already started,
to avoid civil war and preserve its national unity.”

15. Only the indignant intervention by the whole diplo.
matjc corps and international pressure-and I includethe
efforts made by Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim,for
wlijch I expressour thanks to him-succeededin savingths
lives of the Cubanofficials who had been kidnappedby the
gangof murderersthat has,for the moment, taken overthe
ChileanGovernment.

11. At Algiers, all the non-aligned countries, which constitute the majority of the members of the international
community, spoke with one voice, clearly demonstrating
that the peoples of Africa, Asia and Latin America had
warm sympathy for the devoted struggle of the Popular
Unity Government against its powerful enemies, But three
days later another voice thundered forth. It did not express
ideas. It spewed shots and fire on an unarmed people. That
was the answer of imperialism and of its wretched lackeys
to the conscience of mankind which spoke out at Algiers.

16. The ferocity of the militia that had risenin rebellion
was not confined to that criminal attack againstthe Cuban
Embassy.The Ambassadorof Mexico was alsoa victimOf
affronts and attacks by the soldiery. The cmzbinerosWXI~
so far as to prohibit him from leaving his residence
by
holding their machine-gunsagainsthis chest.

12. The planes that bombed Moneda Palace were not
firing on the Chilean people and its socialist Government
alone; their murderous loads were directed at the hearts of
al1 peoples which struggle for their national emancipation.
The crime was committed at Santiago but the intentions of
its perpetrators were directed against all the peoples of the
so-called third world. The savagery unleashed against the
Chilean people is only a symbol of the designs of
imperialism against all peoples which try to free themselves
and build an independent future.

17. At the same time, during the afternoon of 1f
September,planesof the ChileanAir Force andunitsof the
ChileanNavy bombardedthe Cuban ship PloyaLurgawhile
it wassailingin international waters, causingseriousdamage
to the ship. Earlier, the boatswain of a Cuban shipwas
taken, attacked and mistreated with both words aad
2

deeds-only because he was a Cuban, a national of our
country who felt hatred for the rebellious hordes of the
port of Valparaiso.

all States. The siege, the ‘armed attack and the effort to take
over our Embassy at Santiago and the aborted assassination
of our Ambassador show the most gross violation of the
Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations,1 and more
specifically of its articles 22, 29, 30, 44 and 45 (u). The
bombing and the shooting carried out in international
waters against the merchant ship Pkzya Larga revealed the
authors as vulgar pirates and outlaws under international
law. The detaining of Cuban doctors, scholarship holders of
the World Health Organization, and the physical harassment
and threats to which they were subjected are not only
flagrant transgressions of human rights, but also show a
shameless lack of respect by the Chilean military hierarchy
for their intc:rnational commitments and particularly for
those agreements that they signed with the United Nations.

18. Furthermore, on the morning of 11 September, the
Cuban doctors Roland0 Puenteferro and Gonzalo Cur&
LBpez, who happened to be in Chile, participating in a
programme organized by the World Health Organization
and the Pan-American Health Office, were arbitrarily
arrested. They were held in the barracks of the Tacna
regiment, where they were kept until the afternoon of
Wednesday, 12 September. Those military barracks still
hold more than 1,000 political prisoners, including many
women, old people and foreigners resident in Chile, who are
being subjected to the most barbarous and cruel torture. On
returning to their homes, the two Cuban professionals had
to be hospitalized. I have before me the medical certificates
with the diagnoses. They read: “Gonzalo Cur& Lbpez.
Diagnosis: Politraumatism, bruises and serious wounds over
the abdomen and both lower limbs. Roland0 Puenteferro.
Diagnosis: Politraumatism; contusion with hematoma in the
left frontal region; contusion with hematoma in the left
malar region; equimosis in the right lumbar region; some
wounds on various parts of the body.” I must point out
that, according to the doctors’ statements, the prisoners
who are held in the Tacna barracks are generally treated
even more savagely. Dozens of them have been murdered in
cold blood. Those who may survive, including women and
the aged, will never forget the hours spent at the mercy of
these animals wearing military uniforms.

22. The ferocious repression unleashed against the Chilean
people and against thousands of foreign residents shows
that the military regime that emerged from the Fascist coup
of 11 September is nothing but a regime that stands beyond
the pale of international law and civilization. It is a
malignant cancer whose mere existence is a threat and an
insult to all civiiized peoples. It is for this reason that it is
the duty of the international community to condemn the
fascist rCgime which is temporarily established in Chile and
express its firm solidarity with the Chilean people who are
still struggling against the bestial attacks of the military
forces. The workers and the progressive Chilean organizations that combat fascism are fighting on behalf of all
peoples. They are unfurling the banner of human dignity,
and their struggle calls for mass support by all independent
and progressive States.

19. Gentlemen, while you are deliberating and while this
august body is considering our complaint, the Fascist orgy
continues full speed ahead on the martyred Chilean soil. We
do not hear the cries of the tortured women, but it is good
for you to know that, at this very moment, the executioners are not resting. Here we do not see the thousands of
murdered workers, but let us not forget that the killing
continues. You do not hear the rattle of machine guns, but
you are not unaware that even today the criminal hunt is
still going on-the prey being the workers and the students
who resist the Fascist frenzy. Thousands of Brazilian,
Bolivian, Paraguayan and other exiles have been detained
and expelled en masse towards sure death. Many of them
have already been executed in the National Stadium at
Santiago.

23. The Revolutionary Government of Cuba calls upon all
States and all progressive forces to express their solidarity
with the Chilean people and to insist upon the immediate
cessation of the terror unleashed against that people,
particularly against the working class of Chile. World public
opinion must be mobilized to stop the ferocious repression
unleashed against the people, the workers and the leaders
and fighters for popular unity. We are called upon to act in
this way also by the most elementary humanitarian reasons.
24. It is not possible to analyse the problem before the
Council nor to assess its grave implications for the cause of
international peace and security unless we consider it
within the context of the political realities that condition
it. The rise to power in Chile of the fascist military group
that spreads death and terror among a defenceless population is only the culmination of the aggressive and
interventionist
policies of North American imperialism
against the Popular Unity Government, The anti-Chilean
conspiracy did not begin fast week. It began at the very
moment when the Chilean people elected Salvador Allende
constitutional President and supported the programme of
revolutionary transformation that he advocated. The background is well known. Who is unaware of the scandalous
activities of ITT fInternational Telephone and Telegraph
Corporation], Kennecott, Anaconda and the other powerful monopolistic corporations? How can we forget the
policy of trade and financial bloclcade imposed on Chile by
the North American Government ever since the moment of

20. My Government is most deeply concerned over the
fate of a number of Cuban citizens who are still on Chilean
soil. Tley went to Chile to fulfil bilateral agreements signed
with the legitimate authorities of that country or as
participants
in activities of organizations planned by the
United Nations system. The Revolutionary Government of
Cuba is doing everything necessary, through the Embassy of
Sweden, to ensure their return to their homeland. However,
we wish to declare that our compatriots are in serious
danger. We can expect anything1 from the horde of
murderers and bandits that has temporarily taken over the
Chilean Government.
21, The aggressive acts committed bjl the Chilean armed
forces constitute grave violations of the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and flout
the international norms governing naviiation recognized by

1 United

3

Nations,

Treaty

Se&s,

vol. 500,

p. 95.

the people’s victory, or the conspiracy indulged in openly
by the Yankee diplomats at Santiago?
25. In the light of this background, it is not difficult to see
where the main responsibility lies and to see the hand of
North American imperialism in the events that have taken
place in Chile. Despite the denials of the Yankee authorities, today it is easy to understand that the trail of blood
shedin Chile leads directly to the dark densof the CIA and
the Pentagonand that the fuse that unleashedFascistterror
against the Chilean peoplewas detonated from Washington.
We can already read in North American pressreports details
regarding the participation of the United States in the
Fascist coup. Have we not read in a number 3f influential
North American newspapers that the IJnitzd States
Embassy had known ahead of time of the plans for this
coup? Was it not the Pentagon that admitted that it had
warned the warships that were lurking in Chileanwaters24
hours before the military uprising? Wasit not the first act
of the military junta to sendtwo emissaries
to Washington
to inform their mastersand to receive up-to-date instructions? How elsecan we explain the hasty comingand going
of the Yankee Ambassador between Santiagoand WAington and his meetingswith Mr. Kissingeron the eveof the
reactionary uprising? It is true that Mr. NathanielP. Davis,
Yankee Ambassador at Santiago, has had a long and
checkered career as an agent provomteur and conspirator
against Socialist Governments. It wasnot by chancethat he
began his career as an officer in the Office of Strategic
Services, the precursor of the CIA; nor was it by chance
that he was in the Office of Soviet affairs in the State
Department, or that he cultivated the friendshipof Howard
Hunt and Charles Colson, notorious conspirators in the
Watergate scandal.
26. My Government formally accusesthe Government of
the United States of America of being an accompliceand
mainly responsible for the crime committed against the
Chilean people. If the Fascist militia has bloody hands
becauseof the thousandsof workers and studentsthat were
murdered, Mr. Nixon and his collaborators in the North
American Government are guilty of having instigated and
masterminded the monstrous affront to the independence
and sovereignty of the people of Chile. The sameguilt for
the samecrimes must be attached to the political parties
and groups of the Chileanright that participated directly in
the loathsome effort to wreck the achievementsof the
Chilean workers. Among those forces we must stressthe
so-called Christian Democracy, which has now becomea
shameful and satanic instrument of fascism,The so-called
Christian Democracy will go down in the history of Chile
with the ignominious blemish of having been directly
responsiblefor and guilty of the creation of conditionsthat
led to the Fascist coup and to the death of President
Allende.
27. The victim of the most barbarous and cowardly
aggression, when the Moneda Presidential Palace was
attacked with land forces and savagebombing by the
Fascist aviation, Allende fought and fell with great heroism.
His death stands as a symbol of the maulingthat he hadto
withstand in his Popular Unity Government from the day
of his election. For three years, Allendc tried to carry out
the mandate entrusted to him by the people despite
4

harassment,blockade, diplomatic, trade and financial pres.
sures,sabotage,conspiracy and campaignsby the hostile
press.North American imperialism with its puppetsand
procurers belonging to the Chilean reaction harassedand
attacked the constitutional Government for three years,in
order to stop the workers of that country from buildinga
socialistsociety in accordancewith their free choice.
28. The attack againstPresident Allende, his family, hjs
Palaceand his private residencecannot be defined by any
rational or human means. It is only conceivablein
degeneratebeastssuch asthose that shattered the Chilean
constitutional legality on 11 September. They not only
bombed the PresidentialPalaceand causedthe heroic death
of comradeAllende but also bombed, attacked, assaulted
and sacked his private home. The cruelty of theseoniformed monsterswent so far as to take the body of the
President away from his family and give it anonyalozbs
burial and to humiliate and harass his widow and1~s
children. Sefiora Hortensia Bussi de Allende, in interviews
publishedin Mexico and BuenosAires, referred in dramatic
tones to the situation she had to face in thesebitter
moments, and she revealed to the world the extremesof
evil to wlch these Fascist gangsters could sink, h{y
delegation endorsesthe appeal made by Allende’swidow,
that the United Nations act with determination to putan
end to the ferocious massacreunleashedagainstthe people
of Chjle aad to express the closest solidarity wit11thi
fighterswho are continuing the heroic resistance.
29. Salvador Allende has died in order to contiltui
fighting. An untiring fighter, he will continue with hi:
comrades in the revolutionary battle. His examplewili
standfor ever for the copper, nitrate and coal workersand
for all the workers for whose interests he gave his life;fo[
the needy populations of the ghettos, to which he offcrcda
future of justice and dignity; and for the revolutionaries
of
the whole world, who will turn his sacrificeinto a powerful
instrument of struggle and of final victory, As the Prime
Minister of the Revolutionary Government of Cuba,Con.
manderFidel Castro, put it:
“For
the heroic way in which he gave up hislife
defending the cause of the people, President Salvador
Allende has earned a place of honour among thegrnr
martyrs of the revolutionary cause of Latin Americaand
hisnamewill live in the mindsof all revolutionaries.”

30. The establishmentof a Fascist rCgimein Chileisa
serioussetback for the working classesand the people
of
Chileaswell asthe peoplesof Latin America as a wflofeand
for all thosewho are strugglingto shakeoff Yankeecontrol
and consolidate their national emancipation. The Inip
rialists and the vassal oligarchies should not, ~OWCW,
become drunk with the illusion that this setbackwill stop
the inexorable march of the Chilean people and or aiith:
Latin American peoplesto their total national andso;i?l
liberation. The strugglewill continue at the level anilunder
the conditions imposedon us by an enemy which isable
f~
reach the lowest depths of infamy. Nothing will stop01
shakethe revolutionary will of the Latin Americanpcopki
ln the light of the painful spectacleof the transitory F~xbt
victory in Chile, before the beloved imageof its marl@
President and of the thousandsof vilely murderedIlhilan

colleagues, there come to our minds the memorable words
spoken by the Liberator SimGn Bolivar in 1913, when the
liberating armies were also experiencing serious setbacks
and difficulties in their struggle against colonialism:

refuses any foreign interference. The barefaced intervention
undertaken with impunity by Cuba in Chile has made the
Cuban representative think that other foreign interferences
might have taken place or that foreign efforts might have
been made in the liberating movement that swept the entire
Chilean people. This is an insuIt’ to the Chilean people, a
people with a lengthy tradition of pride that has never been
denied or challenged. We repudiated the intervention of
Cuba in Chile-I shall refer to it later in detail-and
therefore we could not accept any foreign interference. The
movement that has set up a new Government in Chile is
nothing but the purest expression of Chilean patriotism
that did not and will never accept foreign interference.

“These victims will be avenged; these hangmen will be
exterminated. Our revenge will equal the Spanish ferocity. Our goodness has reached its end, and since our
oppressors
force US to a mortal combat they will
disappear from America and our land will be purged of
the monsters that infest it. Our hatred will be implacable
and our war shall be to the death,”
/At this point, the proceedings were interrupted by
shouts from the public gallery.]

37. I shall read my statement, which is confined to the
agenda of the Security Council and to the two letters that
the Cuban delegation has submitted to the Council.

31. The PRESIDENT: I should like to draw the attention
of the visitors to the fact that this is not a public hall; this is
a meeting of the Security Council, which should proceed in
on orderly and serious manner. I should like to warn them
to be orderly because, unless order is maintained, I shall be
obliged to ask the guards to remove those who again cause
any disorder.

38. I find it unduly burdensome for the members of the
Council to have to waste time witb the irrelevant complaint
concocted by the representative of Cuba. To present that
complaint in ominous and alarmist tones has been in vain,
and the violent language of the representative of Cuba has
been to no avail. That the arguments put forward are
without foundation is obvious to all, and no one will be
unaware that the facts that have been mentioned are
matters of the past that never threatened international
peace and security. Therefore, the Council has been
constrained to listen to a chain of half-truths and distortions, some of which it should not have to deal with while
others are completely outside its specific competence.

32. I call on the representative of India on a point of
order.
33. Mr. SEN (Jndia): It is quite obvious that many of the
demonstrators
here have been organized. I fully support
your ruling, Mr. President, The Security Council should
conduct its affairs in peace and decorum. What has just
happened is extraordinary. This is the first time, to my
knowledge,
that such demonstrations have taken place in
the Council chamber. I cannot help feeling that the
organizers
who have brought these demonstrators here
could have a little more sensitivity for our work. It is also
worth
noting that if such demonstrations continue in
future, the Secretary-General and his organization would be
well advised to find out how they are organized and take
the necessaary steps. Apart from the warning you have
given, Mr. President, I thought I would make this appeal in
order that we may continue our work in peace and
decorum.
34. The PRESIDENT:
Chile.

39. I shall first of all refer to the documents submitted by
Cuba which raised the complaint.
40. In the first letter of 12 September, the Acting Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Cuba mentioned two incidents which
purportedly took place on 11 and 12 September in Chile
and were allegedly violations of the Principles and Purposes
of the Charter and other international instruments. Those
incidents concern the vessel P@z Largu and the Cuban
Embassy at Santiago.
41. There can be no doubt that, according to the Minister
himself, those events were not a threat to international
peace and security, because he did not cite any of the
Articles of the Charter which define such matters as fall
within the purview of the Security Council, nor did he ask
for a meeting of this body. What he wanted at that moment
was that the facts be put before the permanent missions at
Headquarters, as was done.

I now call on the representative of

3.5. Mr. BAZAN (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish)/:
Mr. President, first of all I should like to express my
appreciation
both to you and to the members of the
Council for having invited the representative of Chile to
participate in this debate.

42. The view of the Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cuba was the right view, because when he signed that letter
it was already too late to ask the Security Council to
investigate such incidents. By midday on that 12 September, the harassment of the ship P@a Largu had been
abandoned and, at Santiago, agreements were taking shape
on the way in which Cuba diplomats were to be evacuated
from Chile. Without any effort a satisfactory agreement was
arrived at according to which the Cuban diplomats would,
of course, be given the protection that Chile has always
given foreign diplomats. Pursuant to that agreement, the
Ambassador of Cuba and all his staff lef! Chile on the night

36. I have sufficient respect for the Security Council not
to resort to insult or violence in the explanation of my case.
I do not believe that one needs verbal violence to defend
one’s right when that right is well grounded. I understand
that the representative of Cuba cannot follow the same
norm of conduct as I, since he is imbued with contempt
and fear which I do not feel. He cannot be satisfied with
the fact that the Cuban efforts to make of Chile a second
Cuba, thus violating all the norms which the Vienna
Convention
on Diplomatic Relations has imposed on
diplomats,
have failed because of the will of a people which
5

of 12 September, safe and sound, and the mission building
was left in the hands of the Swedish Government.

efforts made by the imagination of the Cuban represen.
tative to try to blow up the situation.

43. Everybody might have felt at that moment that
everything was over. And yet the next day, on 13
September, suddenly passions flared in Cuba. Now it was
no longer possible to invent presumed attacks against
Cuban diplomats in Santiago; they could no longer say that
their lives were in danger because there was not a single
solitary one left in Chile. The property of the Embassy was
in very good hands, Nor was there any possibility of
hostilities breaking out between the two countries. But at
that very moment the Government of Cuba decided to do
what it had refrained from doing before, namely, to turn to
the Security Council to ask for an urgent meeting.

48. Thus, on the basis of initially false affirmations,
corrected and amplified 24 hours later by the imagination
of the Cuban representative, this clumsy farce of convening
the Security Council was created; it was intended merely to
allow him to indulge in demagoguery of a political nature.
49. But what did happen was very different, and I shal1
now recount the facts.
50. I shall deal first of all with the ship Pluya Large. This
Cuban ship arrived at the port of Valparaiso on 2.5 August
with 10,500 tons of sugar consigned to the Sugar Refinery
Company of VWa de1 Mar, and previously paid for by an
open letter of credit. On 10 September, having unloaded
2,500 tons, the Playa Larga was ordered to leave the dock
where it was unloading, in order to give preference to the
unloading of another ship. The %~)a Lgr;~ was told to
drop anchor within the Bay of Valparaiso until an
unloading place could be found on the dock. On 11
September, at 12.30, the mooring place was changed and
the ship was told by the pilot that went aboard that the
unloading would continue later and that therefore the ship
could not as yet sail. At 4.30 p.m. that same day, an officer
of the maritime force of Valparaiso went to the Playa Large
in order to check the cargo still in its hold and repeated the
order of the maritime authorities not to set sail. Despite the
repeated order not to sail, at approximately 6 p.m., it was
noted that the PZaya Larga was weighing anchor and setting
sail very speedily towards the west. It left, disobeying an
order that had been given, and therefore it left without the
papers of the maritime authority called for by the Chilean
navigation laws, and without the pilot called for in the
respective regulation. It left, and, even more serious, it did
so carrying 8,000 tons of sugar and machinery belonging to
the Chilean firm I mentioned earlier that had bought the
sugar.

44. Had any new events taken place? No. Physically it
was impossible for them to do so. In the letter that the
ChargB d’affaircs of Cuba addressed to the President of the
Security Council on 13 December, he therefore had to
invoke the same facts that had been mentioned earlier, by
his Acting Foreign Minister, arguing now, when they were
things of the past, that they had become serious threats to
international peace and security under the terms of Articles
34, 35 and 39 of the Charter. Obviously, when taking this
step, the delegation of Cuba knew full well that the events
described in the letter of 12 September were inadequate to
warrant convening a Council meeting. And so, in the letter
of the next day, they turned to the very comfortable
artifice of magnifying them and portraying them in more
dramatic colours.
45. Referring to the ship, Phyu Lnrga, the first letter said
that the Chilean Navy had “harassed” it. The second letter
goes further and says that it was harassed and that shells
were fired at it.
46. Referring to the incident of the Embassy, the first
letter says that on 11 September, the armed forces of Chile
fired shots at the premises, and adds: “Since then, sporadic
firing , . . has continued, resulting in the wounding of the
Cuban diplomat Luis Farias”. The second letter exaggerates
the situation. lt says:

51. The escape of the Playa Larga was creating an
extremely critical situation for the Chilean people, because
there were no sugar reserves in the country. Thus there was
even further reason for stopping that ship from sailing. It
was called by international radio a number of times and
ordered to return. It did not obey. It was warned that
measures would be taken, and the Chilean navy and air
force were notified. A helicopter located the ship and fired
HK shots at the bridge, which could not have damaged the
ship itself. But the ship continued under way. A destroyer
reached it later and used its guns against it indirectly, in
order to force it to return. Again the ship disobeyed. But
since it would have had to be shelled in order to make it
obey, the commander of the destroyer that was following it
consulted the naval authorities, who decided to give up the
chase.

“Throughout
the night of 11 September, and continuing into the morning of 12 September, sporadic shots
were fired against the Cuban mission, as a result of which
Luis Farias, a member of our mission, was gravely
wounded in the chest, while at 4 a.m., when Mr. Mario
Garcia Inchdustegui, the Cuban Ambassador, and Luis
Fernindez
OAa, a Counsellor of the mission, were
standing in the doorway of the mission, units surrounding
the mission began firing bursts, while at the same time,
machine-guns were fired from neighbouring buildings.”
47. As if this artificial inflating and over-dramatization of
the situation were insufficient, today the representative of
Cuba has added further events that are even more serious,
events that were not mentioned in either of the two letters
that were sent to the Council, such as the alleged wounding
of the Ambassador of Cuba. Had this truly been the case,
surely it would have been the first item mentioned in the
Cuban letters. So I am quite correct in presuming that when
it is mentioned at this hour, it is the result of the frenzied

52. The Cuban libel is limited to saying that the ship was
attacked and harassed in international waters. If that is true
at all, it is only a half-truth. But that fragment of the whole
has allowed the Cuban representative to say that there was
a violation of the freedom of navigation. However, if we see
the picture as a whole, we realize that that conclusion is
false. Because the ship had left a Chilean port, escaped from
6

-

that port disobeying the orders of the port authorities,
stolen away with Chilean goods, and therefore violated the
laws of Chile within Chilean territorial waters, as well as
interior waters, the Chilean authorities had a perfect right
to pursue the ship even in international waters in order to
ensure full respect for Chilean jurisdiction. That is the right
of hot pursuit recognized by all civilized nations.

large extent, they were responsiblefor the underminingof
national activities and the disintegrationof our institutions.
It wasa known fact that they were urgingthe radicalization
of the Government to the maximum.They knewthey were
helping to divide the Chileansinto two groupsseparated
by
irreconcilable hatred. It was a known fact that they were
arming paramilitary groups that would ultimately replace
the armedforces, which would inevitably leadto civil war
and by violence oppressthe majority of the country.

53. I shall now speak of the events of 11 September
pertaining to the Cuban Embassy at Santiago.
54. That Embassy was surrounded during the existence of
the Allende Government by very strong uniformed police
forces and particularly political police. On 11 September,
early in the morning, the Embassy was no longer guarded.
The new authorities had to make sure immediately that it
was protected, because popular indignation against the
Cuban diplomats was such that the mission might be
attacked.
55. The indignation was justified, because the Cuban
Embassy had systematically and brazenly violated all the
obligations imposed by the Vienna Convention on diplomats, and particularly because it had barefacedly interfered
in domestic Chilean affairs. Cuban diplomats, who numbered more than a hundred and enjoyed the co-operation of
more than 1,000 agitators illegally, in the country, exercised an increasing and harmful influence on the Government of President Allende. Protected by diplomatic status,
advisers, experts and Cuban agitators inspiredmany of the
measures adopted by the Government. They trained the
political police, they carried their methods into public
education, they contributed to the organizationof guerillas,
and helped to plan a programmeof sabotageandterrorism.

58. I have evidence of what I have saidin the form of
photographs showinghow somediplomaticrepresentatives
from Cuba were training the Chileanpopulationin the use
of weapons.I should like the membersof the Council to
take note of this photograph.The Cubandiplomatshown
in this photograph is Juan Carretero Ibrifiez, who wasthe
co-ordinator of the operations of Che Guevarain Bolivia.
He was an accredited counsellorof the CubanEmbassy.
Werehe is, in a military uniform, training a womanto usea
machine-gun.I submit this photograph so that it may be
availableto the membersof the Council,
59. I have further proof regardingthe gun shipments
that
were flown to Chile in Cuban planes.Here I have a
document that speaksof 13 cratesof weapons,and which
even includes the numbers of the pistols, rifles and
submachine-guns
which were sent in. I am alsosubmitting
this document for the Council to seehow my chargesare
true.
60. I alsohave here a photograph of rocket launchers,of
Soviet and Czechoslovakmanufacture,that were brought
by Cuban planes to Chile. Here is a photograph of the
weapon that CommanderCastrogaveto Allende and with
which he sadly took his life. And I have photographsof
other weapons. I make these documentsavailableto the
Council and reservemy right to submitfurther documents
which I stiI1 have in my possession
wheneverit may be
necessary.

56. But, even worse, diplomatic freedom was usedby
Cuba surreptitiously to bring into Chile an enormous
number of weapons, many of them more modern and
powerful than those used by the Chilean army. Those
weapons were stockpiled in the Cuban Embassyat Santiago, which was turned into a veritable fortress. Its outer
61. But through all these illicit activities, the Cuban
door was armoured with sheetsof steel,and a casement
was
diplomats
were helping to create a climatethat mobilized
built next to it. In the rear of the property, wheretherewas
the Chilean population to make one supremeeffort to
already a large house with a sub-basement,
a complex of
survive, It wasthis that led to the overthrow andthe suicide
buildings was set up, and the technical servicesof the
of
PresidentAllende.
municipality were never allowed to inspect them; even I
was not allowed to seethem when, as LegalAdviser to the
62. It was foreseeablethat this mountingindignationon
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, I wascalled upon to report on
the part of the Chileanpopulation would be unleashedon
whether it was appropriate for the Embassyto refuse to
11 Septemberagainstthe Cuban Embassysinceit wasthe
fulfil the general ordinance governing construction. Trucks
laden with sealed crates entered and left the Embassy base of all the operationsand a visiblesymbol of Cuban
constantly, making it obvious to the entire neighbourhood interference; and it was for that reasonthat a military
patrol was sent to the Embassyto protect it. Thosewho
that that Embassywasservingasa centre of distribution for
occupiedthe Embassymistook the meaningof that military
those weapons and arms, The neighbourhoodwas duly
alarmed. On 7 August, the municipality of Providencia patrol. They received it with insults againstthe Chilean
Army. They shouted offensive remarks regardingthe
unanimously adopted an agreement declaring that the
commune consideredundesirablethe presenceof the Cuban prevailing situation. We can imagine the tone and the
volume of the insultsandthe words spokenfrom the Cuban
Embassy and urged it to withdraw and moveelsewhere.On
9 August, the Chamber of Deputies adopted a resolution Embassyagainstthe Chileansoldiersby merelylisteningto
the tone and the violence of the representativeof Cuba
denouncing Cuban interference in the political affairs of
here. Those diplomats, those pseudo-diplomats,
who were
ChiIe, as an “intolerable assault” against the dignity of
there
obviously
used
even
coarser
and
more
vulgar
language.
Chile.
As I said,the peoplein the Embassymistookthe meaning
of that military patrol and insulted it. They shouted
57. Public opinion could not hold the Cubandiplomatsto
offensive remarks and went SO far as repeatedly to fire
be neutral observersof our world. It wasknown that, to a
7

against the soldiers that were there specifically to protect
them. Obviously, in the legitimate exercise of the right of
self-defence, their shots were answered.

Embassy.Now, if the armedfbrccs of Chile had started the
firing, there would be no reasonableexplanation for the
Admiral’s having made that threat. He who threatens
announcessomethinghe proposesto do, but not something
he has already done. It is obvious that he wh.o has struck
the first blow doesnot threaten. Then it is also obviousthat
if Admiral Carvajal threatened that he would attack the
Embassy, it was because.the Chilean forces had not
attacked before.

63. But this was not the only attack made from the Cuban
Embassy. Next to the western fence of that mission are the
tanks of drinking water that supply Santiago. On 11
September those reservoirs had to be protected to ensure
that vital service for the public, and the soldierswho went
to fulfil that mission were fired on from the wall that
separatedthose reservoirs from the Cuban Embassy.Again,
thoseshotshad to be answered.

68. The Cuban letters, in the text that I quoted before,
state that Admiral Carvajal called the Cuban Ambassador
“alleging that shots had been fired from the Cuban
Ernbassyat the forces surroundingit”. That is very curious.
Why did the Cuban representative drop that sentence? He
mentioned the telephone conversation, but skipped this
phrase.Why? There is a reason for that silence. There isa
reasonfor that omission.

64. Therefore, there is a basic contradiction between the
Cuban version and the Chilean version of the incident
regardingthe Embassyand I shall now prove to the Council
that the Chileanis the true one.
65. When military authorities were informed of the attack
on our soldiers,the Chief of Staff of the National Defence,
Vice-Admiral Carvajal, decided immediately to communicate with the Ambassador of Cuba and did so by
telephone. This is recognized in both Cubanletters, that of
12 and that of 13 September. It hasalsobeen admitted by
the representative of Cuba in the dissertation we heard
today, although he very carefully omitted a basicaspectof
what the Cuban letters do say. The terms in which those
two letters describe that telephone conversation are identical, and therefore the delegation of Cuba has twice given
us the sameproof. Undeniably, one is forced to conclude
that the attack was launched from the Embassyof Cuba
and answeredby the Chilean forces.

69. Those letters inform us that, of the two gentlemen
who were speakingon the telephone, only ant. told the
other that he had been fired upon, and he was Admiral
Carvajal. The Cuban Ambassador made no complaint
whatsoever.He had not goneto any authority to allegethat
his Embassyhad been attacked. Now he had the Chief of
Staff of the National Defence of Chile on the phone and
againhe did not say that his Embassyhad been attacked. is
it therefore conceivable that, if the Chilean forces had in
fact been the aggressors,he would not have said this
immediately to the Chief of Staff?
70. Furthermore, there is somethingeven more conclusive
in the Cuban account of this part of the telephone
conversation. According to the oft-mentioned letters,
Admiral Carvajal began by confronting the Cuban Ambassador with the fact that shots had been fired against a
Chilean patrol from the Cuban Embassy. This is a most
seriousstatement, coming from a high military authority to
the representativeof a foreign country. Had it been filse, it
would have been rejected out of hand. But the Cuban
Ambassadordid not deny it. Therefore frorn his silencewe
can gather that he tacitly admitted that the people in his
Embassyhad beenthe first to fire.

66. Let us first of all inquire from whence this telephone
call came. It was not the Ambassadorof Cuba who made
the telephone call. If his Embassyhad been attacked he
could, and he should, immediately have telephoned the
Ministry of National Defence and complained. Had he
received no answer,he could then have goneto the Dean of
the Diplomatic Corps, who would have had the ear of any
of the authorities. It was not the Ambassadorwho made
the phone call, and there is a specific reasonfor that too.
He himself was seenshooting from one of the windows of
the Embassy.Therefore he was very well aware of the fact
that the firing had not been started by the Chileansoldiers.
So what could he have lodged a complaint about?

71. The commentsI have madewill, I am sure, allow the
membersof the Security Council to cast an eye over the
events denounced, sift the truth and realize that thoSe
denunciationscan be rejected.

67. On the other hand, Admiral Carvajal could immediately call the Ambassadorand reproach him with the fact
that the Cubans had started the attack, becausehe had
nothing with which to reproach himself. I saidthat the two
Cuban letters admitted this fact. After shamelesslystating
that, on 11 September, the Chileanforces had fired against
the Embassy,these letters add:

72. With regardto the shipPlaya Larga, that casehad been
submitted in fragmentary fashion by the Cuban delegation.
We are now in possession
of all the background facts. They
lead to the inevitable conclusion that Chile did not violate
the right of freedom of navigation. What Chile did was use
the right of hot pursuit againsta ship that had been in a
Chilean port, subject to Chileanjurisdiction and, mocking
the Chilean law of navigation, violating the orders received
from the port authorities and abscond,ingwith Chilean
goods,had weighedanchor and setsail.

“hours later, at 3.30 p.m., Admiral Carvajal, allegingthat
shots had been fired from the Cuban Embassy at the
forcessurroundingit . . .‘I,
This is the crucial part that the representative of Cuba
overlooked, I repeat: “called the Cuban Ambassador,
threatening to launch a vigorous attack on the Embassy.”
At the end of the phrase quoted it says the Admiral
Carvajal threatened to launch a vigorous attack on the

73. The right of hot pursuit exercised by Chile, as I am
sureis well known to the membersof the Security Council,
comesfrom article 23 of the Convention on the high seas*
-2 Ibid.,

8

vol. 450, p. 82.

and applies when the authority of the coastal State has
good reason to believe that a ship has violated the lsws and
regulations of that State. In the present case, not only had
we good reason to believe that such a violation had been
committed by the Playa Lurga, but we were and are
absolutely sure that was the case. Furthermore, within the
very cargo of the ship is the best proof of the violation
committed. There are 8,000 tons of sugar and a quantity of
equipment that belonged to a Chilean firm. Therefore it is
obvious that this question of the Playu Larga is a matter
that falls within the domestic jurisdiction of the State of
Chile. It is the Chilean authority alone that must ensure
obedience to its laws and judge those who violate them.
Neither the Security Council nor any other organ of the
United Nations can take up a matter of that nature. This is
expressly
prohibited by Article 2, paragraph 7, of the
Charter, which says: “Nothing contained in the present
Charter shall authorize the United Nations to intervene in
matters which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any state”. I trust that this provision will be
respected by the Council.

Cuba. That is why-and I am going to repeat certain views
that I expressed at the beginning of my statement-at first,
Cuba did not ask for a meeting of the Council. It did not
ask for an investigation of anything. It merely asked that its
Iibel be circulated to membersof the permanentmissions.
That is why, when it finally decidedto call for a meetingof
the Council, despite all the facts, it placed under a
magnifying glass those events that it had previously
mentioned and it freely drew on its imaginationto make
them even more serious.Then, aswe saw,what had beena
mere wound became a seriouswound. Today the Cuban
representative called it a very seriouswound. What had
been simply referred to as a harassmentbecamea harassment with sheil-fire and, thus, what had previously been
referred to assporadic shotsbecameburstsof machine-gun
fire.
76. On this farcical and imaginative story rests the
accusation that is distracting the attention of the Security
Council. There cannot be, behindsucha request,any desire
to strengtheninternational peaceand security, which Chile
will
never threaten. There is another end in view. The
Council is to be used as a sounding-box for political
propaganda,to revive animosities,to divide snd polarizethe
StatesMembers into positions that areincreasinglyantagonistic-in other words, to usethe Councilprecisely to create
those conditions that will in fact endangerinternational
peace and security, which the Council is called upon to
maintain. Since we in Chile know that th.eCouncil will not
become a party to this farce, we trust that it will reject the
Cubancomplaint in all its parts,

74. With regard to the Cuban Embassy incident, the proof
given in the two letters from the delegation of that country
to the United Nations is sufficient to lead one to the
conclusion that, of the two different versions mentioned
here, the Chilean is the true one.. Therefore, with the best
grounds it can be stated that it was from the Cuban
Embassy in Santiago that the first shots were fired on 11
Septembersand that the Chilean soldiers only fired back in
exercise of their right of self-defence. Therefore it is Cuba
and not ChiIe that violated the Purposes and Principles of
the Charter and other capital tenets of international law.
This incident Lies outside the purview of the Security
Council. Article 34 of the Charter calls upon the Council to
investigate any dispute or any situation which, if continued,
would be likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security. Therefore two conditions have
to be fulfil.led at the same time for the Council to be
allowed to carry out an investigation. The situation or
dispute complained about must first of all be present and,
secondly, it must threaten or endanger the maintenance of
international
peace and security. In the incident that
occurred around the Cuban Embassy at Santiago neither of
those two conditions is fulfilled. It is an event of the past.
It is a matter that is over, that is finished. It has not
continued and it could not possibly continue, because, as I
said before, in Chile today there is not a single Cuban
diplomat, and the Cuban Embassy has been left in the care
of the Swedish Government. Furthermore, that incident in
no way threatened the maintenance of international peace
and security. It did not represent that danger when it
occurred, when feelings were high and when the Chilean
soldiers were facing the Cuban sharp-shooters. Therefore, it
could hardly now, after having taken place, still endanger
international
peace and security. Furthermore, this is
proved by the passage of days when calm had been
re-established
and when conditions had been set up that
made it physically and materially impossible for a recurrence of such a confrontation.

77. ,Mr. PEREZ de CUELLAR (Peru)(interpremrionfrom
Spanish): Mr. President, may I first of all expressthe
pleasureof my delegation at seeingyou presideover the
Security Council, not only becauseyou representa country
with which Peruenjoys suchcloserelations,but becausewe
are convinced that your experienceand skill qualify you
exceptionally well to direct our work. I could alsonot fail
to mention the appreciation of my delegationto Ambassador Scali for the wise, impartial and efficient way in
which he presided over the Council during the month of
August.
78. It would be redundant to stresshere the interestand
concern with which the people and Government of Peru
have followed the events that have recently taken placein
Chile, a country that is an immediateneighbourof my own,
and with which we share closeand permanentties. But I
must emphasizethe fact that that interestand that concern
have been based, and will so remain, upon the most
rigorous respect for the principle of non-intervention in
domestic affairs, in keeping with the juridical tradition of
Latin America and, more specifically,with the principlesof
the Charter of the United Nations. The Presidentof the
Republic, General Velasco Alvarado, after expressinghis
feelings over the tragic death of the President of Chile,
SaIvadorAllende, madethis point very clear.He said:
“We do not interfere in the domesticaffairs of any
State, nor will we allow any type of foreign intervention
in problemswhose solution is the concernof Peruvians.”

75. That the incident around its Embassy in Santiago gave
insufficient
grounds for a Security Council meeting to be
caled was known and is known well by the delegation of

79. We have taken careful note of the letters from the
representative of Cuba of 12 and 13 September/S/?O993
9

and S/IOUUSJ and of the letter from the representative of
Chile of 1.5 September/S/10997/,
regarding the attacks, on
the one hand, that have been suffered by Cuban diplomats
accredited to Chile and, on the other hand, by the Cuban
merchant vessel Pluya Larga. We have also very carefully
listened to the statements just made by the representatives
of Chile and Cuba.
80. It is with a sense of true satisfaction and relief that we
have noted that all the Cuban diplomats have now, without
further hindrance, left Chilean territory, and that the ship,
P&a Larga, has already left the coast of Chile. I must,
however, state that if both attacks were to be confirmed,
my delegation would profoundly regret them, since that
wouId mean that practices that have been universally
enshrined because of their benefits as part of peaceful
coexistence among nations had been violated.

be serious in talking of a handful of Cuban Embassy staff
attacking the Chilean army? Something has even been said
here about an attack by the Cuban army. Perhaps that was
a slip of the tongue: we did not understand what was meant
by Cuban army. As far as we know there is no part of the
Cuban army in Chile.
86. If we review the events which recently took place in
connexion with the attack on the Embassy of the Republic
of Cuba, we shall have no hesitation in reaching the
conclusion stated by the representative of Cuba in his
speech, namely, that the military junta’s acts which he
described were a gross violation of the elementary norms of
international law.
87. The facts are that the Cuban Embassy was besieged
and fired upon by armed detachments of insurgents despite,
and in violation of, the elementary norms, customs and
practice of international law and international relations.
Moreover, the siege and the firing continued for more than
24 hours on 11 and 12 September. During the firing, a
member of the Embassy’s diplomatic staff, Mr. Luis Farias,
was wounded. The unrestrained soldiers even opened fire
on the Cuban Ambassador, Mr. Mario Garcia Inchiustegui,
who was wounded in the arm, and also on.a Counsellor of
the Embassy, Mr. Luis Fern;indez Oiia. The Cuban diplomats were ordered to leave Chile immediately; they were
not even granted the usual period of time required in
accordance with the norms of international law for completing their business, making preparations to leave and
authorizing another embassy to defend Cuba’s interests.

81. I must also state that my delegation has no further
information on the matter, and that we believe this fact will
not make it easy for the Council to pronounce itself. We do
trust that this meeting will clarify matters and ensure the
preservation of principles of international law to which we
all attribute SO much importance and usefulness.
82. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translation from Russian):
Before making a
statement on the substance of the matter before us I should
like, Mr. President, to congratulate you heartily on your
assumption of the distinguished and responsible post of
President of the Security Council.

88. No one can deny that such hostile acts by the Chilean
militarists against a foreign embassy representing a country
entertaining diplomatic relations with Chile constitute an
act of armed attack and international high-handedness
unprecedented in modern diplomatic practice. Moreover, as
we have heard, the attack was carried out by units of the
regular army. Of course, this flagrantly illegal and cynical
act cannot be equated with any other cases in which foreign
embassies or individual diplomats have been attacked by
irresponsible individuals or groups of terrorists. This is quite
another matter. This is an attack by a regular army on the
Embassy of a sovereign State. It is an inadmissible and
glaring violation of the principles and purposes of the
United Nations and of universally recognized norms of
international law, as contained, first and foremost, in the
1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations.

83. The Council has met today to consider an important
political question which is directly related to the maintenance of peace and security, namely the question of
hostile acts committed against the Embassy of the Republic
of Cuba at Santiago by the military junta which has
overthrown the legally elected Government.
84. Members of the Council have just heard a highly
important and convincing statement by the representative
of the Republic of Cuba, Ambassador Alarc6n. In his
statement, hc cited many persuasive facts concerning
hostile and terrorist acts-acts
intolerable under intkrnational law-committed
by armed insurgents under the
direction of the military junta, against the Embassy of
Cuba, against its staff and against Cuban citizens in Chile,
and also concerning a simultaneous attack, in international
waters, by Chilean military aircraft and warships, on the
peaceful Cuban merchant vessel Playa Larga.

89. I should like to recall that article 22 of that
Convention-which,
I may point out, has been ratified by
Chile-states that “the premises of the mission shall be
inviolable” and that “the agents of the receiving State may
not enter them, except with the consent of the head of the
mission”. Article 22 also provides that “the receiving State
is under a special duty to take all appropriate steps to
protect the premises of the mission against any intrusion or
damage and to prevent any disturbance of the peace of the
mission or impairment of its dignity”. Furthermore, article
29 of the Convention lays down the inviolability of the
person of a diplomatic agent. It contains a provision to the
effect that:

85. The explanations we have heard here and the totally
lame attempts to justify the attacks on the Embassy and on
a peaceable vessel in international waters, arc quite unconvincing and unsubstantiated. Accumulating slanderous and
unsubstantiated statements hostile to the Republic of Cuba
cannot conceal the perfectly obvious fact that an attack
took place on the Embassy of a sovereign State-the
Republic of Cuba-and that a peaceable merchant vessel in
international waters was attacked and fired upon. However
that might be justified, under whatever far-fetched pretexts
the Security Council’s attention might be distracted from
those facts, they speak fuIly for themselves. Some of the
reasoning used here has been simply laughable. Can anyone

“The person of a diplomatic agent shall be inviolable.
He shall not be liable to any form of arrest or detention.
10

The receiving State shall treat him with due respect and
shall take all appropriate steps to prevent any attack on
his person, freedom or dignity.”

diplomatic staff had been subjected to force or attacked.
There have also been well-known cases in which certain
countries, under the pretext of ensuring the security of
their embassies and their citizens-and even in cases where
such a threat did not in fact exist-sent their troops on to
the territory of other States.

90. The Chilean military junta’s gross violations of these
provisions of the Vienna Convention are quite blatant.
They are all the more pernicious, regrettable and inadmissible at the present time when, as a result of the constant
efforts of all progressive and peace-loving forces, led by the
community of socialist countries, the trend towards general
ddtente in relations between States is constantly increasing.
The non-aligned countries are also making a considerable
contribution
to these efforts towards detente. I have no
doubt that the decisions of the recent Conference of Heads
of State or. Government of Non-Aligned Countries at
Algiers will have a significant positive effect on further
detente in the world and its extension to all regions and all
aspects of international life. An important contribution to
the noble cause of the non-aligned movement was made
by the Popular Unity Government of Chile, headed by
President Salvador Allende, a courageous fighter for the
Chilean revolution, democracy and peace and an inflexible
fighter for the independcncc of the peoples of Latin
America.

95. The Republic of Cuba, which is a Member of the
United Nations, is in the present case acting strictly in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. It has
appealed to the Security Council and expects the Council
to adopt suitable measures. That is the conduct of a
peace-loving State which is guided by the Charter and
which opposes high-handedness in international relations.
96. The hostile act against the Cuban Embassy and its
staff is a reflection and a logical continuation of the bloody
terror perpetrated by the forces of Chilean reaction in their
country after overthrowing the Government headed by
Salvador Allende, who had been elected President of the
Republic in accordance with the Constitution and as a
result of the free expression of the will of the people.
97. The Soviet people’s feelings of profound and friendly
solidarity with the people of Chile in their hour of
difficulty were expressed, in the name of all Soviet people,
in a statement concerning the military coup in Chile issued
on 13 September 1973 by the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union. The statement
stressed that the overthrow of the Government of Salvador
Allende had been the culminating point of the subversive
activities of the forces of Chilean reaction, supported by
external imperialist forces. It also said:

9 1. The provocative, impudent and intrinsically aggressive
actions of the Chilean junta against the Cuban Embassy and
the severing of diplomatic relations with Cuba run counter
to those positive trends in international relations. Those
acts conflict with the interests of the peoples of all Latin
American
countries and, primarily, the people of Chile
itself. They constitute a direct challenge by the forces of
reaction and regression to the forces of democracy, and also
to the progress achieved in international relations.

“The Central Committee of the Communist Party of
the Soviet Union strongly condemns the actions of the
reactionary forces in Chile, their flouting of democratic
institutions and constitutional norms, their sinister plans
to suppress progressive parties and organizations. . . .

92. The delegation of the USSR fully supports Cuba’s
appeal to the Security Council on this matter, and believes
that the Council should strongly condemn the hostile acts
of the Chilean armed forces against the Cuban Embassy and
its staff, as a gross violation of accepted norms of
international law and a direct violation of the spirit and the
letter of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations.
The Council should also adopt appropriate statements of
principle to prevent such illegal hostile acts from occurring
in international relations in the future.

“The Central Committee of the Communist Party of
the Soviet Union expresses its firm conviction that no
repression or terror can break the will of the people or
block the path of economic and social progress.”
98. With regard to the Soviet Union and its relations with
the countries of Latin America, the delegation of the USSR
in the Security Council feels it essential to stress in
particular that those relations are based on the strict
observance of the principles of equality of rights, mutual
respect, sovereignty and non-interference in internal affairs.

93. The Soviet delegation hopes that the delegations of
other countries which are members of the Security Council
and which have in the past expressed their concern for the
safety of diplomatic missions and their staff, will adopt a
similar position in this case.

99. Mr. BOYD (Panama) (interpret&ion from Spanish):
Mr. President, I should like to be among the first to express
to you the satisfaction of my delegation at seeing you
preside over the work of the Council for the month of
September. The respect and admiration that we have for
you in the United Nations is very great because of the
valuable contribution that you have made in its various
organs. We Latin Americans also wish to acknowledge in
particular the special interest that you have always taken in
matters concerning us.

94. Attempts have been made here to cast doubt on the
regularity
of considering Cuba’s complaint regarding the
attack on its Embassy and other acts committed by Chilean
armed forces. However, the attack on a foreign embassy
being considered by the Council and the firing by armed
forces on a merchant vessel in international waters constitute an extremely serious incident in the context of the
modern system and practice of international relations. It is
well known to all that, in the past, such actions have been
regarded as cusus belli and have led to military conflicts,
troop landings, the dispatching of gunboats and even the
initiation
of hostilities by the State whose embassy or

100. Panama, from the very outset, agreed when the
Charge d’affaires of Cuba, Mr. TeXlo Acosta, requested
11

our delegation’s support for the calling of an urgent
meeting of the Security Council in order to examine the
‘%erious acts committed by the Armed Forces of Chile
c[S/1U99.5/ against Cuban diplomats and a Cuban ship
during the armed strife that culminated in the overthrow of
President Salvador Allende. Cuba contents that “the situation created by such acts constitutes a serious threat to
international peace and security” /ibid..].
101. The events submitted by the Cuban delegation are
the following:
(a/ On the afternoon of 11 September the premises of
the Cuban Embassy at Santiago, Chile, was fired upon, as a
result of which Mr. Luis Farias, a diplomatic official of that
Embassy, was seriously wounded;
(b) On that same day, the Cuban merchant vessel Pluya
Larga was attacked on the high seas by the Chilean Air
Force and Navy and considerable damage was inflicted;
(c) When the chief of the mission, Ambassador Mario
Garcia Inch&tegui,
was standing with other officials at the
door of the Embassy, bursts of fire were directed at them,
fortunately harming nobody.

“The tragic death of President Salvador Allende has
deeply moved me. Allende offered me a cordial friendsllip
and my people will always acknowledge and express
appreciation for the support that he gave to our claim
over the Panama Canal Zone.
“Allende was an idealist and a great patriot and hehas
died valiantly. He devoted his life to the service of Chile
and all L.atin America. He loved his people and was ever
consistent in his social and democratic principles.”
106. Mr. Allende fought for what he believed to be the
best for his people and he died a.hero, giving an example of
dignity to those cowardly outsiders who, when in difficult
situations,flee from their country and continue elsewhere
to enjoy the good life.
107. The National Assembly of Representativesof the
Republic of Panamapronounced itself on the dramaof
Chile in the form of a resolution which stressedour
solidarity “with the Chilean patriots that preferred death
rather than to lower the flag of the anti-colonialist and
anti-imperialiststruggle”.
108. The Estrella de Panmti, the oldest national news.
paper, in its editorial of 14 September, expressedthe
following feelings:

102. After the denunciation by Cuba, the new Government of Chile broke diplomatic relations with Cuba and, on
12 September, requested the Ambassador and the entire
diplomatic mission of Cuba to leave Santiago immediately;
all members of the diplomatic mission of Cuba left Chile by
air on 13 September and arrived at Havana on the same
day.

“It is to be hoped that the great civic reservesof the
Chilean nation will overcome this period of crisisand
confusionand that from the deep sorrowsthat follow on
national discord, there wiI1 emergethe new purposesand
motives for the reconstruction of a nation without
hatred, drawing inspiration from the heritage of its
founding fathers and heroesand more firmIy convinced
of its democratic missionand its struggle for economic
and socialliberation.”

103. Even though the imminent danger has disappeared, in
view of the circumstances and the information before us,
Panama condemns the attack on the Cuban Embassy in
Chile and considers it an act that violates the precepts set
forth in the 1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations. Likewise, Panama condemns the attack on the
merchant vessel Plu~m Large, since we consider that that act
also violates the norms of international law which are
recognized by all States.

309. We trust that the military junta that governsChile
will respect the fundamental principles of co-existence
contained in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
the principlesof territorial asylum and the rulesgoverning
political refugees,and that it will seekformulas for nations1
unity that will give rebirth to the faith of the peoplein
their institutions and thus avoid the tragedy of a civil war.

104. Because of the fraternal relations that have linked
Panama with Chile, we are sincerely moved by the events
that have taken place in the sister nation. But from this
high tribune we shall not speak of what has occurred in
Chile, since we are strong advocates of the principle of
non-intervention in the internal political affairs of other
States. As we do not aIlow intruders to interfere in matters
that fall within the purview of the Panamanians, we also
cannot interfere in the domestic problems of other countries, however close the ties that link us.

110. We expressour most fervent hopes that, as soonas
possible,the noble Chilean people will be able to leave
behindthis period of sorrow and suffering.
111. Mr. HUANG Hua (China)(translation jirorrz Cltimw$
Before commenting on the question now under considention by the Security Council, I should like to take this
opportunity to expressprofound condolencesfor the death
of PresidentSalvador Allende. Wehave learned of hisdeath
with deepsorrow and indignation. He died a martyr athis
post. When he was alive, the great President Allende made
positive efforts for the stnlggle of the Chilean peopleto
safeguardnational independenceand State sovereigntyand
for the promotion of the friendship between the Chinese
and Chilean peoples and the cause of unity of the
third.world countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America
againstimperialism.His lofty aspiration5will live for everi0
people’s minds. We believe that the heroic death of

105. We are deeply moved by the death of President
Allende, a man who always identified himself with the
aspirations of the Panamanian people for effective sovereignty over the Panama Canal Zone and a man whom I had
the honour to meet in this chamber last year. General Omar
Torrijos, the -head of the Government of Panama, in a
message that was published in the world press, lamented the
tragic death of the Chilean President as follows:
“Allende immolated himself for the social liberation of
his country and of al1 Latin America.
12

--

President Salvador Allende will arouse the Chilean people
to draw a lesson from the recent tragic event and continue
to march ahead. The path may be winding but the
prospects of the world are surely bright.

disseminated from Chile by those chosen agencies must
certainly have been to the taste and .the convenience of the
military clique in Chile a.nd therefore greatly biased.
118. It is In the light of thjs situation that my delegation
cannot doubt the sincerity of the Cuban charges and can
only strongly denounce these grave acts of lawlessness.

112. The Chinese delegation has listened carefully to [he
speeches made by the representative of Cuba and some
other countries. It can be seen from the statements that
have been made to the effect that, during the military coup
d’6tat in Chile, the Cuban Embassy in Chile and a Cuban
merchant vessel were subjected to gross attacks by the COL~P
d’b-tat forces of Chile. These acts committed by the conp
d’6tat forces of Chile are obviously in violation of international practice. The Chinese delegation cannot but
express concern and. regret at the occurrence of the above
incident.

119. Seen from a different perspective, the latest developments in Chile raise a number of serious questions regarding
the iudependence, sovereignty and welfare of those developing countries which follow an anti-imperialist and
anti-capitalist policy. In the era of the United Nations,
where outright colonialism and foreign occupation are
condemnable and utterly unacceptable, the role of neocolonialism and economic aggression has assumed farreaching dimensions. The Economic and Social Council and
the General Assembly have repeatedly acknowledged that
the natura) resources of any one State can only be disposed
of by that State and in its best interests. Yet, the
multinational corporations and international cartels, which
are the pawns of neo-colonialism, are extending their
tentacles to the developing countries in a mission of
economic plunder and political interference.

113. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
114. Mr. .ASI-ITAL (Democratic Yemen): Mr. President, it
is indeed a pleasure to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. With your vast experience, your wisdom and skill,
you will certainly guide the deliberations of this august
body with great efficiency. In your capacity as the
Ambassador of Socialist Yugoslavia, a founding member of
the non-aligned movement and a country with which the
People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen enjoys the best of
cordial relations, I should like to welcome you and to
pledge my delegation’s co-operation under your leadership.

120. In his address to the General Assembly on 4 December 1972, the democratically elected President of Chile, the
late Salvador Allende, said:
“We not only are enduring a financial blockade, but
also are the victims of downright aggression. Two
companies belonging to the hard core of the great
transnational enterprises, namely, the International Telephone and Telegraph Corporation [Iv/
and the Kennecott Copper Corporation . . . proposed to manage our
political life.

115. Before I comment on the item under consideration,
allow me. Sir, to thank the members of the Council for
giving me this opportunity to address the Council.

“A gigantic corporation . . . the ITT launched a sinister
plan to prevent me from acceding to the Presidency just
as soon as the people’s triumph in the September 1970
elections became known.

116. The Security Council has before it a letter from the
Revolutionary
Government of Cuba to the effect that the
military authorities in Chile violated norms of international
law, particularly the 1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, by threatening to launch a vigorous attack
on the Cuban Embassy in Chile and by firing shots at the
premises of the Cuban Embassy resulting in the wounding
of a Cuban diplomat, Luis Farias. The Chilean Navy and
Air Force also violated international rules of navigation by
shooting at the Cuban merchant vessel Playa Larga while it
was sailing in international waters.

“Between September and November of that year in my
country terrorist activities took place which were planned
outside our frontiers in collusion with internal Fascist
groups. . . .
I..
“In July 19’72 the world was shocked to learn the
details of a new plan of action which the ITT itself
presented to the IJnited States Government, a plan aimed
at overthrowing my Government within a period of six
months. . , . The objectives of the plan included strangling
the country’s economy, diplomatic sabotage, sowing
panic among the population and fomenting social disorder so that the Governtnent would, it was hoped, lose
control of the situation and the armed forces would be
impelled to break the democratic system and impose a
dictatorship.

117. My delegation has had time to examine the reply of
the representative of Chile, who rejected the Cuban charges
as being false. It may be convenient for him to refute the
authenticity
of the Cuban charges, in view of the predominance of reports by certain biased news media-and for
very well known reasons, One of the first tasks performed
by the military junta in Chile, after murdering President
Ailende, was to strangle and murder the democratic process
which he had upheld with dignity and honour. All news
media-and
especially those which were anti-Fascist and
anti-imperialist-were
virtually silenced by the uproar of
bullets and bombs. Censorship was imposed on all news
agencies except the Associated Press and, to a lesser extent,
the United Press In-ternational. Whatever news has been

“ ..
“Before the conscience of the world I accuse the ITT of
attempting to bring about civil war in my country, the
13

greatest possible source of disintegration of a country.
That is what we call imperialist intervention”3

Central Intelligence Agency co-operated with ITT in
planning this economic sabotage.”

121. The ITT plan did not materialize in exactly six
months, but in the early hours of 12 September the
prophetic words of Salvador Allende came true. The United
States-made bullets replaced the Chilean ballots, and the
very promoters of capitalist democracy and their multinational corporations received the news with great and deep
relief. One senior official in the United States State
Department said: “We will have to work with the generals
and it makes no sense to issue some moral statements about
democracy.”

The involvement of the CIA in the economicdisruption of
Chile only servesto show the intimate relationship and
identical interests of both the giant corporations and tlte
Statesfrom which they operate.
125. What is at stake now is the safety of about 10,000
political refugeeswho fled from the dictatorial rtgimesof
their respective countries and who found in Marxist Chilea
safe haven. Reports have it that the military junta in
Santiago will forcibly deport them to their respective
countries. The Council is askedto intervene on their behalf
and to see to it that their human rights are absolutely
upheld in accordancewith international law and morality.

122. Whatever the case may be, small countries like my
own must learn an unforgettable lesson from the Chilean
experience. In anticipation of such a catastrophe, my
Government has already rid our country of the reactionary
and fascist generals whose interests are in total contradiction with the interests of our heroic masses.

126. It is pertinent to reiterate here the resolution of the
Fourth Conference of Non-Aligned Countriesin supportof
the struggle of the Chilean people to safeguardtheir
independence.Article 56 of the Political Declaration of
that Conferencesaid:

123. In his statement to a United Nations panel on the
role of multinational corporations, Professor Osvaldo
Sunkel said the.other day:

“The Conference hails the Government and peopleof
Chile, who in their struggleto consolidatetheir independence and build a new society are facing the combined
aggressionof reaction and imperialism. It expresses
its
solidarity with Chile in its efforts to achievethe economic
and social transformations already started, to avoid civil
war and preserveits national unity.”

“The Chilean experiment has ended with a catastrophic
collapse of its economic and political systems-and the
dramatic personal sacrifice of its leader, and many of his
followers. The conclusion for us here seems to be that it
is not possible to try to restructure relations of dependence between under-developed countries and the transnational capitalist system in a peaceful way.”

127. My Government adheresto this article and fully
supports the heroic people of Chile in its struggleagainst
the combined aggressionof reaction and imperialism.1%
alsohail the Popular Unity Government of Chileand itslate
President Allendc and pledgeour support for the Chilean
people in its efforts to consolidatetheir independenceand
build a new society.

My delegation can only concur with Professor Sunkel’s
conclusion and add that this Council has a responsibility to
examine the disruptive role of multinational corporations in
Chile and elsewhere.
124. It should be noted that multinational corporations
do not operate in a vacuum. They are encouraged,
subsidized sometimes and defended by imperiaIist States,
which should also be held responsible for the economic and
political disruption of the developing countries such as the
one that took place in Chile. About the disruptive role.of
those corporations, Jack Anderson wrote in 732e Washington Post of 28 March 1972:

128. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativeof the
United States in exerciseof his right of reply.
129. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): Mr, Presi.
dent, I wish first of all to thank you and those of my
colleagueswho have been kind enough to addresscomplimentsto me personally.

“ITT directs its intelligence operations,security system
and foreign service. It dealswith foreign Governmentsat
the highest levels-often through former political leaders,
cabinet ministersand intelligenceofficers.”
In the samearticle entitled “ITT Hope of Ousting Allende
Remote”, Jack Anderson wrote:
“ITT hoped for military intervention in 1970 to block
Allende’s election. We have publishedconfidential memos
which reveal that the giant conglomeratewaspreparedto
spendmillions of dollars promoting economiccollapsein
Chile to force a military coup. The memosshowthat the
3 Official Records of the General Assembly. Twenty-severlth
Session, Plenary Meetings, 2096thmeeting,paras.36, 31, 38, 40

130. I fully agreewith you andwith our Indian colleague,
in your pleas for order in this Chamber. I deplore bad
mannersand commend the Security Council for its prompt
action whenever it seeksto restoreorder. I hopeno further
disturbanceswill occur to trouble our deliberations.
131. I cannot fail to note, however, that our hIdian
colleagueis somewhat selectivein expressinghis concern
for the dignity of Security Council proceedings.During the
meetingsof this Council elsewhere,a few monthsago,I did
not hear him expresssimilar sentimentswhen our deliberations were repeatedly interrupted by demonstrationsfront
the public gallery. In this matter consistency is more
becomingthan selectivejudgement.
132. Using offensive rhetoric, the Cuban representative
has attempted to outdo, with his usual intemperate

and45.

14

invective, the repressive actions of the undemocratic and
repressive r&gime that he represents. Let us examine just a
few of the words that he has used: “Animals wearing
military
uniforms”,
“Fascists”,
“common murderers”,
“pirates”,
“outlaws”,
“seamy scum”. I submit that this is
language perhaps more familiar in some climates than it is
in the dignity of this Chamber. In a way I feel I ought to be
able to give more credence to his words. Certainly the
representative of Cuba qualifies as an expert on terror and
an expert on violent repression of the popular will. There
are none present who will fail to recall his master’s
flaunting, in 1959, the massacres at the wall and the mass
imprisonments.
133. I shall not presume to reply to those parts of the
Cuban representative’s speech which were directed against
others. I shall refrain from doing so even though the bulk of
his speech was in violation of his solemn undertaking,
transmitted
to us through the President of the Security
Council, to speak only on the issue he falsely used as a
pretext for perverting the Council to partisan propaganda
purposes.

139. Mr. SEN (India): I do not know whether one may
exercise one’s right of reply on points of order. I raised a
point of order in support of you, Sir, and forcefully lent
my delegation’s support to your ruling. Nor is it my
intention to give a lesson on manners to the public or to
anybody else. I was concerned only with the proper
conduct of the Council’s affairs, of which you are custodian
first and foremost and in which we support you. Consistency is to be judged not merely by a logical process but
also on the basis of what is tolerable and what is not. We
are all human beings. When there were disturbances in
Panama and elsewhere, the President ruled against them and
we supported him. In my statement I said that never to my
knowledge had such a demonstration taken place in the
Security Council. I leave it to those who lose sight of
degrees of tolerance to judge the matter for themselves.
140. The PRESlDENT: I call upon the representative of
Cuba, who wishes to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
141. Mr.
ALARCON
(Cuba) (interpretation
from
Spanish): I do not intend to tax the patience of the
members of the Council at such a late hour, but I should
like to say that we shall ask to be allowed to exercise our
right of reply at the next meeting. However, regarding the
statement of the representative of the United States, I
should like very briefly to say that my delegation has
previously had occasion to refer to that Philistine spirit that
is concerned over words spoken in Council meetings,
forgetting that the world and peoples are more concerned
over facts and that all those expressions he describes as
invective and insulting could still not suffice to describe the
situation. I recall what my Foreign Minister told this same
Ambassador in Panama-that many years ago the Bible had
taught us that that which was spoken in darkness would
one day be proclaimed from the rooftops.

134. I will denounce his savage attacks on my Covernmerit. He has honoured us with lie after lie. I consider it a
badge of honour to be a target of lies from that source.
135. My delegation has been second to none in seeking
international action for the protection of diplomats. My
delegation has been second to none in supporting the rule
of law in international affairs. My delegation came to this
tabIe f&y prepared to seek positive action in these areas if
such action were required of the Security Council. I deeply
regret that the Cuban letters to the Council have proved as
false as the Cuban representative’s oral presentations.
136, Finally, I only wish he could be more inventive or
interesting
in his ancient litany of accusations. Surely,
somewhere in Cuba, there must be a new speech writer he
can turn to. Again he resurrects the hoary old accusation
that, of course, the CIA, the United States or some secret
American mastermind is at the root of all this. It is playing
the same old record with the same old result: “the CIA, the
CIA , . .“. Next it will be blamed for creating the traffic
problem in New York, arranging the results of football
games, or, even worse for his Government, having secretly
written
the Bible.

142. The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative of
Panama, who wishes to speak in exercise of his right of
reply.
143. Mr. BOYD (Panama) (interpretation from Spanish):
If the representative of the United States of America was
referring to the meetings in Panama when he hinted that, at
meetings of the Council in other places, orderly behaviour
had not been observed, I must inform him that a number of
correspondents of foreign newspapers covering the meetings
in Panama attested to the fact that they were held and
presided over in perfect order, and that there was never
heard from the public gallery any expression against the
right enjoyed by the representative of the United States to
make known his views.

137. Lastly-and
perhaps he has not noticed this-there is
a new spirit of peace and accommodation, of friendship and
agreement blowing throughout the world today. I suggest
that he examine whether one of its main sources is
Washington
or Havana. Even he might recognize the truth
of this historic development.
138.
India,

The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
who wishes to speak in exercise of his right of reply.

The meetirzg rose at 7 p. m.

15

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may
be obtained
your
bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES NATIONS

Las publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
depositaires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
a : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK

JIOAYUHNTb

HBAAHUIZ

OPI’AHH

3A4HH

Litho

in United

Nations,

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

et les agences
ou adressez-vous

OD’bE,!WHEHHMX

HAII.UFf

ITs~anna
0pratrmaqm.i
06’he~meHHhlx
HaquR
MOWNO Kynwrb
a
EC~I~X w arewrcwaax
BO mex paRorrax
nnpa.
HaaoAuTe
cnpaaxw
B&UlSM KHWX<HOM hmra3swe
unu “HulHTe
no anpecy:
Oprnnnsauwa
HaqnR,
Certqnrr
no npogaxe
E13AaHUfi,
H~m-~fop~
Hnll XCeHesa.
COMO

UNIES

NACIONES

KHH)KHbIX

M&P&-

06 H~~~HIUTX
ObWAHHeHHblX

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas estin
buidoras
en todns partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

New

in other

York

Price:

$U.S.

2.00 (or equivalent

currencies)

B
