Reeolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

against the independent African States adjoining
Southern Rhodesia;
13. Further drmt•s the attention of the Security
Council to the explosive situation in Southern Rhodesia
which threatens international peace and security, and
decides to transmit to the Council the records and resolutions of the twentieth session of the General Assemblv
on this question;
•
14. Decides to keep the question of Southern Rhodesia under urgent and continuing review.
1368th plenary meeting.
5 NovPmbfr 1965.

2023 (XX). Question of Aden
The General Assembly,
Having considered the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
J ndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Aden, 4 which includes in
addition to Aden, the Eastern and Western Aden
Protectorates as well as the J slands of Perim. Knria
Muria, Kamaran and other off-shore islands,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 and 1949 (XVJTI) of 11 December 1963, and
the resolutions adopted by the Special Committee on
9 April 1964,5 11 May 1964 6 and 17 May 1965, 7
Having heard the statements of the petitioners,
Having taken note of the declarations of the reprt>sentative of the administering Power,
Deeply concerned at the critical and explosive situation which is threatening peace and security in the
area, arising from the policies pursurd hy the administering Power in the Territory,
1. Approves the chapters of thr reports of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on thr Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territory of Adrn :incl endorses the concl11sions
and recommendations of the Sub-Committee on Aden;
2. Endorses the resolutions adopted by the Special
Committee on 9 April 1964. 11 May 1964 and 17 May
1965;
3. Deplores the refusal of the administering Power
to implement the resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Special Committee;
4. Further deplores the attempts of the administering
Power to set up an unrepresentative regime in the
Territory, with a view to granting it independence
contrary to General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV)
and 1949 (XVIII), and appeals to all States not to
recognize any independence whirh is not based on the
wishes of the people of thr Territory freely expressed
through elections held under universal adult suffrage ;
5. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Territory to self-determination and to freedom from
colonial rule and recognizes the legitimacy of their
efforts to achieve the rights laid down in the Charter
4 Ibid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
( A/5800/Rev.1 ), chapter VI; ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes,
addendum to agenda item 23 (A/6000/Rev.1), chapter VI.
5 Ibid., Nineteenth Session. Annexes, annex No. 8 (part n
(A/5800/Rev.1), chapter VI. para. 166.
6 Ibid., para. 202.
7 Ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes addendum to agenda
item 23 (A/6000/Rev.l), c-bapter VI, 'para. 300.

55

of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
6. Consid<;rs that the maintenance of the military
bases in the Territory constitutes a major obstacle to
the liberation of the people of the Territory from
colonial domination and is prejudicial to the peace
and security of the region, and that the immediate and
,nmplete removal of these bases is therefore essential;
7. Notes with deep concern that military operations
;1ga inst the people of the Territory are sti11 being
carrird out by the ;1dministering Power;
8. Urges the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern J re land immediately to:
(a) Abolish the state of emergency;
( h) Repe:il all laws restricting public freedom;
( c) Cease all repressive actions against the people
of the Territory. in particular military oprrations;
( d) Release all political detainees and allow the
return of those people who have heen exiled or forhidden to reside in the Trrritory hec;i11se of political
aC'tivities;
9. Reaffirms paragraphs 6 to 11 of resolution 1949
1 XVTTJ) and urges the :idministrring Power to implc:ment them immediately;
10. A ppcals to all Member States to render all possible assistan,e to the people of the Territory in their
l'fforts to attain freedom and independence;
11. Draws the attention of the Security Council to
the dangerous situation prevailing in the area as a result
of British military action against the peoplr of the
Territory;
12. Requests the 1.foited Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. the specialized agencies and the
internationc1 I relief organizations to offer all possible
:issistance to the people who are suffering as :i result
nf the milit;-iry operations in the Trrritory:
13. R eqHPsfs the Secret:irv-General to take such
action :is he may deem expcd1ent to ens1tre the implemrntation of the present resolution. and to rrport
thereon to the Spccial Committee;
14. Requests the Special Committee to rxamine
again the situation in the Territory and to report
ther~on to the Grneral A!-sembly at its twenty-first
sess10n;
15. Dccidrs to maintain this item on its agenda.
1368th plenary meeting,
5 November 1965.

2024 (XX). Question of Southern Rhodesia
ThP General Assembly,

r onsidering the explosive situation created in Southern Rhodesia following the unilateral declaration of
independence,
·
Noting the measures taken by the Government of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
lreland,
1. Condemns the unilateral declaration of independence made bv the racialist minority in Southern
Rhodesia;
•
2. Invites the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland to implement immediately the relevant
resolu~ions adopt~cl hy the General Assembly and the
Sernnty Council m order to put an end to the rebellion
by the 11nlawfnl authorities in Southern Rhodesia;

56

General AHembly-Twentieth Se&Sion

3. Recommends the Security Council to consider
this situation as a matter of urgency.
1375th plenary meeting,
11 November 1965.

2063 (XX). Question of Basutoland, B~huanaland and Swaziland
The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territories of Basutoland, I3echuanaland and
Swaziland, 8
Having examined further the report submitted by
the Secretary-Gencral9 pursuant to the request made
by the Special Committee in its resolution of 2 November 1964,10
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling further its resolutions 1654 (XVI) of
27 November 1961, 1817 (XVII) of 18 December
1962 and 1954 ( XVIII) of 11 December 1963,
Noting the resolutions adopted by the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization
of African Unity at its first regular session in July
1964, and the Declaration adopted by the Second Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries in October 1%411 to the effect that
the United Nations should guarantee the territorial
integrity of Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland
and should take measures for their speedy accession
to independence and for the subsequent safeguarding
of their sovereignty,
Noting with deep concern the economic and social
situation prevailing in the three Territories and their
imperative and urgent need for United Nations
assistance,
Having regard to the grave threat to the territorial
integrity and economic stability of these Territories
constituted by the policies of the present regime in the
Republic of South Africa,
Regretting that the administering Power of these
Territories has not taken effective and complete steps
to implement General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV),
1817 (XVII) and 1954 (XVIII),
1. Approves the chapters of the reports of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territories of Basutoland, Bechuanaland
and Swaziland, and endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained therein;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland to freedom
and independence;
8 /bid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.l), chapter VIII; ibid., Twentieth Session Annexes, addendum to agenda item 23 (A/fiOOO/Rev.l) chapter

VII.

9 Jbid.,

'

Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 23, document A/5958.
10 Ibid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.l), chapter VIII, para. 365.
11 See A/5763.

3. Once again invites the administering Power to
take urgent steps to implement fully General Assembly
resolutions 1514 (XV), 1817 (XVII) and 1954
(XVIII) in conformity with the freely expressed
wishes of the peoples of the three Territories;
4. Renews its request that the administering Power
should take immediate steps to return to the indigenous
inhabitants all the land taken from them, whatever
the form of or pretext for such alienation;
5. Requests the Special Committee to consider, in
co-operation with the Secretary-General, what measures
are necessary for securing the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of liasntoland, neclmanaland and Swaziland, ;md to report to the General As:,embly at its
twenty-first session;
6. Expresses its satisfaction to the Secretary-General
for his efforts and endorses the recotrnnendations contained in his report ;
7. Decides to establish a Fund for the Economic
Development of Basntoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland, to be made up of voluntary contributions and
to be administered by the Secretary-General in close
consultation with the Governments of the three Territories and with the co-operation and assistance of the
Special Fund, the Technical Assistance Board, the
Economic Commission for Africa and the specialized
agencies concerned;
8. Considers that the efforts to provide economic,
financial and technical assistance, through United
Nations programmes of technical co-operation and the
specialized agencies, should continue in order to remedv
the deplorable economic and social situation of the thre~
Territories;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to appoint resident representatives in the three Territories, as recommended in paragraph 22 of his report, and to report
to the General Assembly at its twenty-first session on
the. operation of the Fund established under paragraph 7
above.
1398th plenary meeting,
16 December 1965.

2064 (XX). Question of the Cook Islands
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960,
Recalling its resolution 2005 (XIX) of 18 February
1965, authorizing the Secretary-General to appoint a
United Nations representative to supervise the elections
to be held in the Cook Islands under New Zealand
administration and to observe the proceedings concerning the Constitution in the newly elected Legislative Assembly,
Having examined the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Cook Islands, 12 including the statements made
in the Special Committee by the Premier of the Cook
Islands,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Representative for the Supervision of the Elections in
12 Official Rtcord.s of the General Assembly Nineteenth
Session, Anne_x~s, annex. No. 8 _(part I) (AiSSOO/Rev.l).
chapter ?{V; ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, addendum to
agen<la item 23 (A/6000/Rev.l), chapter VIII.
