Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

United Nations participation in the preparation and
supervision of the referendum on the future status of
the Territory-and to submit a report thereon to the
Special Committee;
4. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
examination of the question and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session.
2028th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.

2867 (XXVI). Question of Antigua, Dominica,
Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia
and St. Vincent
The General Assembly,
H aving considered the question of Antigua, Dominica,
Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia and
St. Vincent,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
containing the programme of action for the fu11 implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling further its previous resolutions relating to
the question, in particular resolution 2710 (XXV) of
14 December 1970,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 22
l. T akes note of the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Antigua, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts-NevisAnguilla, St. Lucia and St. Vincent;
2. Requests the Special Committee to give full consideration to this question in accordance with the provisions of the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly, in particular resolution 2593 (XXIV) of
16 December 1969, and to report thereon to the
Assembly at its twenty-seventh session.
2028th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.

2868 (XXVI). Question of Niue and the Tokelau
Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Niue and the
Tokelau Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples,23
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
22 !bid.,

Twenty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/8423/
Rev.1), chap. XXII.
28 Jbid., chaps. IV and XV.

103

Having heard the statement of the representative of
the administering Power, 24
Taking into account the conclusions and recommendations of the Special Committee regarding developments in Niue and the Tokelau Islands,
Noting the recent constitutional developments in Niue
which have been embodied in the Niue Amendment
Act, enacted in 1971 by the Government of New
Zealand as the administering Power,
Noting with appreciation that the administering
Power has responded positively to the requests contained in the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly by extending an invitation to the Special
Committee to send a visiting mission to Niue and the
Tokelau Islands in 1972,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Niue and the Tokelau Islands to self-determination in
conformity with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);
2. Calls upon the administering Power to take
further measures, in accordance with the wishes of the
people, to enable the people of the Territory to exercise
their right to self-determination as soon as possible;
3. Takes note of the arrangements made by the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for
the dispatch of a visiting mission to Niue in 197225
and requests the Special Committee to instruct the
visiting mission to obtain first-hand information on conditions in the Territory and on the wishes and aspirations of its people and to recommend practica! steps
for their advancement as soon as possible towards selfgovernment and self-determination;
4. Requests the administering Power to provide al1
the necessary assistance and facilities to the visiting
mission in the discharge of its tasks;
5. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine this question and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session.
2028th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.

2869 (XXVI). Question of American Samoa, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands,
Brunei, Cavman Islands, Cocos (Keeling)
Islands, Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Guam,
Montserrat, New Hebrides, Pitcairn, St. Helena, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Turks and
Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin
Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin lslands, Brunei,
Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Gilbert and
Ellice Islands, Guam, Montserrat, New Hebrides, Pitcairn, St. Helena, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Turks
and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
24 lbid., Twenty-sixth Session, Fourth Committee, 1960th
meeting.
25 !bid., Twenty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/8423/
Rev .1), chap. IV, para. 22.
