VI.

4. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 103 called for under General Assembly resolution 33/178 of 20 December 1978, on replies to the
questionnaire;
5. Calls upon Member States which have not yet
done so to reply to the questionnaire, as called for under General Assembly resolutions 32/63 and 33/178;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session further information provided in response to the questionnaire,
and to submit all the information available which he has
received on the basis of the questionnaire to the Commission on Human Rights, to the Sub-Commission on
Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities and to the Sixth United Nations Congress on the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders;
1. Takes note also of the report of the SecretaryGeneral104 on unilateral declarations, called for under
General Assembly resolutions 32/64 and 33/178;
8. Invites Member States which have not yet done
so to deposit the unilateral declarations with the
Secretary-General, as called for under General Assembly resolutions 32/64 and 33/178;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
inform the General Assembly, in annual reports, of
unilateral declarations already deposited and of such
further unilateral declarations as may be deposited by
Member States;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment", for the purpose of reviewing the progress
achieved under this item.
106th plenary meeting
17 December 1979
34/168.

Draft Code of Medical Ethics

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the Declaration on the Protection of All
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, unanimously adopted by the General Assembly
in its resolution 3452 (XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Noting that, in the report submitted by the World
Health Organization to the Fifth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment
of Offenders, 105 it was suggested that a "Health Charter
for Prisoners" might be elaborated with the co-operation
of the World Health Organization,
Recalling its resolutions 3218 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974, 3453 (XXX) of 9 December 1975 and 31/85
of 13 December 1976, in which it invited the World
Health Organization to prepare a draft code of medical
ethics relevant to the protection of persons subjected
to any form of detention or imprisonment against torture. and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
purushment,
Having considered the note by the SecretaryGeneral106 transmitting to the members of the General
Assembly the report of the World Health Organization
on the development of codes of medical ethics,
108 A/34/144.
104

A/34/145 and Add.1-3.

105 A/CONF.56/9.
108 A/34/273.

185

Resolutio111 adopted on the repons of the Third Committee

Noting with appreciation that the Executive Board
of the World Health Organization has endorsed the
principles set forth in the report of its Director-General
on the development of codes of medical ethics and has
requested its Director-General to transmit that report
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate the
draft Code of Medical Ethics 101 to Member States, the
specialized agencies concerned and interested intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council for comments and suggestions, and to
submit a report to the General Assembly at its thirtyfifth session;
2. Decides to consider again the question of the
draft Code of Medical Ethics at its thirty-fifth session,
under the item entitled "Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment".
106th plenary meeting
17 December 1979

34/169.

Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement
Officials

The General Assembly,
Considering that the purposes proclaimed in the
Charter of the United Nations include the achievement
of international co-operation in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental
freedoms for all without distinction as to race sex
language or religion,
'
'
Recalling, in particular, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights 108 and the International Covenants on
Human Rights, 100
Recalling also the Declaration on the Protection of
All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 3452 (XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Mindful that the nature of the functions of law enforcement in the defence of public order and the manner in which those functions are exercised have a direct
impact on the quality of life of individuals as well as
of society as a whole,
Conscious of the important task which law enforcement officials are performing diligently and with dignity,
in compliance with the principles of human rights,
Aware, nevertheless, of the potential for abuse which
the exercise of such duties entails,
Recognizing that the establishment of a code of conduct for law enforcement officials is only one of several
important measures for providing the citizenry served
by law enforcement officials with protection of all their
rights and interests,
A ware that there are additional important principles
and prerequisites for the humane performance of law
enforcement functions, namely:
(a) That, like all agencies of the criminal justice
system, every law enforcement agency should be representative of and responsive and accountable to the community as a whole,
101 Ibid.,

annex.

toe Resolution 217 A (III).
1o9 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

General Allembly-Tblrty-fourth Session

186

(b) That the effective maintenance of ethical standards among law enforcement officials depends on the
existence of a well-conceived, popularly accepted and
humane system of laws,
(c) That every law enforcement official is part of
the criminal justice system, the aim of which is to prevent and control crime, and that the conduct of every
functionary within the system has an impact on the
entire system,
(d) That every law enforcement agency, in fulfilment of the first premise of every profession, should be
held, to the duty of disciplining itself in complete conformity with the principles and standards herein provided and that the actions of law enforcement officials
should be responsive to public scrutiny, whether exercised by a review board, a ministry, a procuracy, the
judiciary, an ombudsman, a citizens' committee or any
combination thereof, or any other reviewing agency,
(e) That standards as such lack practical value unless
their content and meaning, through education and training and through monitoring, become part of the creed
of every law enforcement official,
Adopts the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement
Officials set forth in the annex to the present resolution
and decides to transmit it to Governments with the
recommendation that favourable consideration should
be given to its use within the framework of national
legislation or practice as a body of principles for observance by law enforcement officials.

I 06th plenary meeting
17 December 1979
ANNEX
Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials

Article I
Law enforcement officials shall at all times fulfil the duty
imposed upon them by law, by serving the community and by
protecting all persons against illegal acts, consistent with the
high degree of responsibility required by their profession.
Commentary:110

(a) The term "law enforcement officials" includes all
officers of the law, whether appointed or elected, who exercise police powers, especially the powers of arrest or
detention.
(b) In countries where police powers are exercised by military authorities, whether uniformed or not, or by state security forces, the definition of law enforcement officials shall
be regarded as including officers of such services.
(c) Service to the community is intended to include particularly the rendition of services of assistance to those members
the community who by reason of personal, economic, social or other emergencies are in need of immediate aid.

o!

(d) This provision is intended to cover not only all violent, predatory and harmful acts, but extends to the full
range of prohibitions under penal statutes. It extends to conduct by persons not capable of incurring criminal liability.

Article 2

In the performance of their duty, law enforcement officials
shall respect and protect human dignity and maintain and uphold the human rights of all persons.
110
The commentaries provide information to facilitate the use
of the Code within the framework of national legislation or
pract/ce. In ~ddition, national or regional commentaries could
1~entify specific features of the legal systems and practices of
different States or regional intergovernmental organizations
which would promote the application of the Code.

Commentary:
(a) The human rights in question are identified and protected by national and international law. Among the relevant
international instruments are the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons
from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the United Nations
Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the International
Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime
of Apartheid, the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, the Standard Minimum
Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners and the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations.
(b) National commentaries to this provision should indicate regional or national provisions identifying and protecting
these rights.
Article 3
Law enforcement officials may use force only when strictly
necessary and to the extent required for the performance of
their duty.
Commentary:
(a) This provision emphasizes that the use of force by
law enforcement officials should be exceptional; while it implies that law enforcement officials may be authorized to use
force as is reasonably necessary under the circumstances for
the prevention of crime or in effecting or assisting in the lawful arrest of offenders or suspected offenders, no force going
beyond that may be used.
( b) National law ordinarily restricts the use of force by
law enforcement officials in accordance with a principle of
proportionality. It is to be understood that such national
principles of proportionality are to be respected in the interpretation of this provision. In no case should this provision
be interpreted to authorize the use of force which is disproportionate to the legitimate objective to be achieved.
(c) The use of firearms is considered an extreme measure.
Every effort should be made to exclude the use of firearms,
especially against children. In general, firearms should not be
used except when a suspected offender offers armed resistance
or otherwise jeopardizes the lives of others and less extreme measures are not sufficient to restrain or apprehend
the suspected offender. In every instance in which a firearm
is discharged, a report should be made promptly to the competent authorities.
Article 4
Matters of a confidential nature in the possession of law
enforcement officials shall be kept confidential, unless the performance of duty or the needs of justice strictly require otherwise.
Commentary:
By the nature of their duties, law enforcement officials obtain information which may relate to private lives or be
potentially harmful to the interests, and especially the reputation, of others. Great care should be exercised in safeguarding and using such information, which should be disclosed
only in the performance of duty or to serve the needs of
justice. Any disclosure of such information for other purposes
is wholly improper.
Article 5
No law enforcement official may inflict, instigate or tolerate
any act of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, nor may any law enforcement official invoke superior orders or exceptional circumstances such as a
state of war or a threat of war, a threat to national security,
internal political instability or any other public emergency as
a justification of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment.
Commentary:
(a) This prohibition derives from the Declaration on the
Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture

VI. Resolutlom adopted on 1be repor1I of the Third Committee
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, adopted by the General Assembly, according to
which:
"[Such an act is] an offence to human dignity and shall
be condemned as a denial of the purposes of the Charter
of the United Nations and as a violation of the human
rights and fundamental freedoms proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights [and other international human rights instruments]."
(b) The Declaration defines torture as follows:
" ... torture means any act by which severe pain or
suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally
inflicted by or at the instigation of a public official on a
person for such purposes as obtaining from him or a
third person information or confession, punishing him
for an act be bas committed or is suspected of having
committed, or intimidating him or other persons. It
does not include pain or suffering arising only from,
inherent in or incidental to, lawful sanctions to the extent consistent with the Standard Minimum Rules for
the Treatment of Prisoners. " 111
(c) The term "cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment" bas not been defined by the General Assembly
but should be interpreted so as to extend the widest possible
protection against abuses, whether physical or mental.
Article 6
Law enforcement officials shall ensure the full protection of
the health of persons in their custody and, in particular, shall
take immediate action to secure medical attention whenever
required.
Commentary:
(a) "Medical attention", which refers to services rendered
by any medical personnel, including certified medical practitioners and paramedics, shall be secured when needed or
requested.
(b) While the medical personnel are likely to be attached
to the law enforcement operation, Jaw enforcement officials
must take into account the judgement of such personnel
when they recommend providing the person in custody with
appropriate treatment through, or in consultation with, medical personnel from outside the law enforcement operation.
(c) It is understood that law enforcement officials shall
also secure medical attention for victims of violations of law
or of accidents occurring in the course of violations of law.
Article 7
Law enforcement officials shall not commit any act of corruption. They shall also rigorously oppose and combat all such
acts.
Commentary:
(a) Any act of corruption, in the same way as any other
abuse of authority, is incompatible with the profession of law
enforcement officials. The law must be enforced fully with
respect to any law enforcement official who commits an act
of corruption, as Governments cannot expect to enforce the
law among their citizens if Qtey cannot, or will not, enforce
the law against their own agents and within their own
agencies.
(b) While the definition of corruption must be subject to
national law, it should be understood to encompass the commission or omission of an act in the performance of or in
connexion with one's duties, in response to gifts, promises or
incentives demanded or accepted, or the wrongful receipt of
these once the act has been committed or omitted.
(c) The expression "act of corruption" referred to above
should be understood to encompass attempted corruption.

Article 8
Law enforcement officials shall respect the law and the present
Code. They shall also, to the best of their capability, prevent
and rigorously oppose any violations of them.
111 First United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of O.ienders: report prepared by the
Secretariat (United Nations publication, Sales No. 1956.IV.4),
annex I.A.

117

Law enforcement officials who have reason to believe that a
violation of the present Code has occurred or is about to occur
shall report the matter to their superior authorities and, where
necessary, to other appropriate authorities or organs vested with
reviewing or remedial power.
Commentary:
(a) This Code shall be observed whenever it has been incorporated into national legislation or practice. If legislation
or practice contains stricter provisions than those of the present
Code, those stricter provisions shall be observed.
(b) The article seeks to preserve the balance between the
need for internal discipline of the agency on which public
safety is largely dependent, on the one hand, and the need for
dealing with violations of basic human rights, on the other.
Law enforcement officials shall report violations within the
chain of command and take other lawful action outside the
chain of command only when no other remedies are available
or effective. It is understood that law enforcement officials
shall not suffer administrative or other penalties because they
have reported that a violation of this Code has occurred or is
about to occur.
(c) The term "appropriate authorities or organs vested
with reviewing or remedial power" refers to any authority or
organ existing under national law, whether internal to the law
enforcement agency or independent thereof, with statutory,
customary or other power to review grievances and complaints
arising out of violations within the purview of this Code.
(d) In some countries, the mass media may be regarded
as performing complaint review functions similar to those
described in subparagraph (c) above. Law enforcement officials may, therefore, be justified if, as a last resort and in accordance with the laws and customs of their own countries
and with the provisions of article 4 of the present Code, they
bring violations to the attention of public opinion through
the mass media.
{e) Law enforcement officials who comply with the provisions of this Code deserve the respect, the full support and
the co-operation of the community and of the law enforcement agency in which they serve, as well as the law enforcement profession.

34/170.

The right to education

The General Assembly,
Recalling the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 2200 A (XXI) of 16 December
1966, which recognizes the right of everyone to
education,
Bearing in mind the importance of the Convention
against Discrimination in Education, 112 adopted on 14
December 1960 by the General Conference of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization,
Convinced of the topicality of the provisions of
General Assembly resolution 2542 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969, containing the Declaration on Social
Progress and Development which, inter alia, stresses the
importance of the training of national personnel and
cadres for the over-all development of society,
Emphasizing the paramount importance of the implementation of the right to education for the full development of human personality and for the enjoyment
of other fundamental human rights and freedoms,
Considering that the educational process could bring
a substantial contribution to social progress, national
development, mutual understanding and co-operation
among peoples and to strengthening peace and international security,
112

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 429, No. 6193, p. 93.
