total of 1,395 electoral personnel will now be required to supervise the voting in _more than 350 polling stations throughout the Territory.
"I also informed the Council that after carefully
examining this recommendati~m, I came to the _co~clusion that I had no alternative but to accept 11, m
order to ensure that the United Nations Transition
Assistance Group would be capable of effective supervision and control of the elections. ~n this connection, I added that after the completion of related
preparatory work of a technical nature, I would revert
to the Council on this matter.
"I wish now to confirm that I am undertaking urgent consultations on this m~ttcr, includin~ i:iotifi~ation to the Advisory Committee on Admm1strat1vc
and Budgetary Questions of the cost implications,
following which I propose to dispatch the additional
353 personnel to Namibia starting in mid-October.
These election supervisors will be engaged for a period of one month at an estimated total cost of approximately $3 million which, in accordance with
paragraph 57 ofmy retort of23 J~nu?ry, will be considered as expenses o the Orga01zat1on to be borne
by Member States in accordann: with Article 17,
paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations.
"I should be grateful if you would bring this matter
to the attention of the members of the Security Council."
In a letter dated 17 October 1989, 28 the President of
the Council informed the Secretary-General as follows:
"I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 10 October 1989 concerning the increase in the
number of electoral supervisors for the forthcoming
elections in Namibia 27 has been brought to the attention of the members of the Security Council. They
have considered the matter and agreed to the proposal in your letter.
"The members of the Security Council expressed
their concern that expenditures for the United Nations Transition Assistance Group should continue to
be carefully monitored during this period of incrca~ing demands on peace-keeping resources."
At its 2886th meeting, on 31 October 1989, the Council discussed the item entitled "The situation in Namibia: letter dated 18 October 1989 from the Permanent
Representative of Kenya to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/20908)". 29

Resolution 643 ( 1989)
oDI October 1989

The Security Council,
Reaffirming all its relevant resolutions on the que~tion of Namibia, in particular resolutions 435 ( 1978) of
29 September 1978, 629 ( 1989 l of 16 January 1989, 632
28

S/20906.
See Offici.,: Rc,·ords of the Security ( 0111" ii, l·orry-J,J/m/i Yew
Supplement for Octoher. Nm·c,nhcr und [), conhcr 1989
29

( 1989) of 16 February 1989 and 640 ( 1989) of 29 August
1989,
Reaffirming also that the United Nations plan for the
independence of Namibia, contained in resolution 43_5
( 1978), remains the only internationall): a_cceptcd_ basis
for the peaceful settlement of the Namibia quest10n,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of 6 October 1989 and the addendum thereto of 16
October 1989, 30
Noting with dl'l'p concern that, one week before the
scheduled elections in Namibia, all the provisions of
resolution 435 ( 1978) arc not being fully complied with,
Noting the progress made so far in the implementa1ion of the settlement plan and the remaining obstacles
placed in its way as well as the efforts being exerted by
the United Nations Transition Assistance Group to
carry out its responsibilities,
Reaffirming the continuing legal responsibility of the
United Nations over Namibia until the full attainment
hy the Namibian people of national independence,
l. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
and the aJdendum thereto;
2. Expresses its _fi,l! support for the Secretary-General in his efforts lo ensure that resolution 435 (1978)
1, fully implemented in its original and definitive form;
3. Expresses its firm determination to implement resolution 435 (1978) in its original and definitive form in
order to ensure holding of free and fair elections in
Namibia under the supervision and control of the
United Nat ions:
4. Reaffirms its commitment in carrying out the continuing legal responsibility over Namibia until its independence to ensure the unfettered and effective
exercise by the peor,:e of Namibia of their inalienabk
rights to self-determination and genuine national independence in acl·ordancc with resolu lions 415 ( I 978)
and 640 ( 1989);
5. Demands immediate, full and strict compliance
by all parties concerned, in particular South Africa, with
the term~ of resnlutions 435 ( 1978), 632 ( 1989) and 640
( 1989);
6. Reiterates its demand for the complete disbandment of all remaining paramilitary and ethnic forces
and commando units, in particular the Koevoet and the
South-West Africa Territorial Force as well as the complete dismantling of their command structures, and
other defence-related institutions as required hy resolutions 4.~5 (1978) and 640 (1989);
7. Requests I he Secretary-General tn pursue his efforts to ensure the immediate replacement of the remaining South African Defence Force personnel in
accordance with resolution 435 ( 1978);
8. Demands the immediate repeal of such remaining restrictive and discriminatory laws and regulations
as inhibit the holding of free and fair elections and that
no such new laws he introduced and endorses the position of the Secretary-General as expressed in his report
that Proclamation AG 8 should he repealed;
9. lm·ites the Secretary-General to keep under con,tant reYicw the adequacy of the number of police
' 11 il,id .. l,ic11n1<·r 1, S/20SH:l and ;\dtl.l.

"The Council reiterates its full support for the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative as
well as its firm commitment tn ensure the full implementation of rcsolut inn 4]5 ( I 978) in its original and
definitive form."

monitors in order to undertake the process for any
appropriate increase that he may deem necessary for
the effective fulfilment of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group's rcsponsibil itics:
10. Demands that the South-West Africa Police
extend full co-operation to the Group civil police in
carrying out the tasks entrusted to it under the settlement plan;
11. Mandates the Secretary-General to ensure that
all necessary arrangements arc made in accordance
with the settlement plan to safeguard the territorial
integrity and security of Namibia in order to ensure a
peaceful transition to national independence, and to
assist the Constituent Assembly in the discharge of
responsibilities entrusted to it under the settlement
plan;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare appropriate plans for mobilizing all forms of assistance,
including technical, material and financial resources,
for the people of Namibia during the period following
the elections for the Constituent Assembly until the
accession to independence;
13. Urgently appeals to Member States, United
Nations agencies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to extend, in co-ordination
with the Secretary-General, generous financial, material and technical support to the Namibian people, both
during the transitional period and after independence;
14. Decides that, if the pertinent provisions of the
present resolution arc not complied with, the Security
Council shall convene as required before the elections
to review the situation and consider appropriate action;
15. Requests the Secretary-General 10 report on the
implementation of the present resolution as soon as
possible;
16. Decides to remain seized of the matter.

At its 2893rd meeting, on 20 November 1989, the
Council discussed the item entitled "The situation in
Namibia: further report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of Security Council resolution
435 ( 1978) rnnccrning the question of Namibia
(S/20%7)".-q
Al the same meeting, following consultations with
the members of the Council, the President made the
following statement 1111 behalf of the members of the
Council:12
"The members of the Security Council welcome
with satisfaction the successful conclusion of the elections in Namibia, certified by the Special Represent at ivc of the Secretary-General as free and fair, 33 thus
paving the way for the convening of the Constituent
Assembly and the early independence of Namibia at
a date to be determined by the Constituent Assembly.
"The members of the Council congratulate the
people of Namibia !or the successful exercise of their
democratic rights and look forward to the early independence of Namibia. They arc deeply appreciative
of the efforts of the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative and the United Nations Transition
Assistance Group for the role they have played,
which attests to the effectiveness and credibility of
the United Nations.
"The members of the Council reaffirm the continuing important role of the United Nations in the
transition period in ensuring the implementation of
the settlement plan on the basis of its legal responsibility over Namibia until independence, so that the
Constituent Asscm hly, reflecting the collective will of
the people, can draw up and adopt, in accordance
with the settlement plan and free from any interference, a Constitution that will accord sovereignty to
Namibia. In this regard, they express support to the
Secretary-General in his continuing efforts to ensure
the full implementation of the settlement plan and
request him to make the necessary arrangements
under the settlement plan to safeguard the territorial
integrity and security of Namibia. They also stress the
importance of full compliance with all the remaining
provisions of resolution 435 ( 1978) in its original and
definitive form. The members of the Council express
the hope that, in the transition period, the utmost
political responsibility will he displayed to facilitate
the earliest possihk acces~ion of Namibia to independence.
"'The members of the Council call upon the Constituent Assembly to carry out its responsibility cxpedit iously and request the Secretary-General to
provide it with all ncce~sary assistance."

Adop1cd unanimous/_1 cu 1hc
2886th mccling.

Decisions
On 3 November 1989, following consultations, the
President of the Council issued the following statement
on behalf of the Council: 31
"The Security Council deplores the false alarm by
South Africa on 1 November 1989 concerning the
alleged movement of forces of the South West Africa
People's Organization across the Angola-Namibia
border.
"The Council expresses its profound concern
about this incident as well as the potential implications for the elections of the initial South African
reaction to it. It, therefore, calls upon South Africa
to desist from any ~uch further actions.
"The Council strongly commends the prompt action taken by the United Nations ·rransition Assistance Group to clarify the situation and to establish
that such allegations were unfounded.
"The Council calls upon all parties to honour their
commitments in accordance with the settlement plan.
31

': SI 20974.
'-' 01.ficial Record., of !he Scrnri1v Council, FortyJmmh Year, S11pplcmc111 for Octoha. No,·emhcr a•1d December 1989, document
S/20%7. para. 5.

S/20946.

7
