UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/11
14 March 1994
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND FRENCH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3349th meeting of the Security Council, held on 14 March 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item "The situation in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina", the President of the Security Council made
the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council remains gravely concerned at the continuing
hostilities in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It especially
deplores the rapidly deteriorating situation in the Maglaj area and the
threat it poses to the survival of the remaining civilian population. It
notes that this intolerable situation has been perpetuated by the intensity
of the nine-month siege of the town, for which the Bosnian Serb party is
primarily responsible.
"The Security Council strongly condemns the indiscriminate shelling by
the Bosnian Serb party of the civilian population of Maglaj, which has
resulted in heavy casualties, loss of life and material destruction.
"The Security Council notes with particular concern reports of the
recurrent obstruction and looting of humanitarian aid convoys destined for
the civilian population of Maglaj, including the most recent incident which
took place on 10 March 1994, in which six aid trucks were prevented from
reaching the town. It is appalled that not one convoy has reached the town
since 25 October 1993. The Council notes that the civilian population has
been totally dependent on airdrops and commends those who have provided
these vital missions. The Council demands that the Bosnian Serb party and
the Bosnian Croat party allow forthwith and without conditions passage to
all humanitarian convoys, and the immediate evacuation of those in need of
urgent medical attention. The Council also demands that the siege of
Maglaj be ended immediately.
"The Security Council welcomes the fact that United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR) personnel have now obtained access to Maglaj. It demands
that the Bosnian Serb party permit unimpeded and continuing access by
UNPROFOR to Maglaj.

94-12993 (E)

140394

/...

S/PRST/1994/11
English
Page 2

"The Security Council also condemns recent attacks against the
personnel of UNPROFOR as well as of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations. It reiterates
its demands that all parties ensure the safety and security of UNPROFOR, as
well as all other United Nations personnel and those of non-governmental
organizations, and their unimpeded freedom of movement throughout the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
"The Council affirms its determination to maintain and build upon the
recent positive developments towards peace in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and in this context notes the importance of protecting Maglaj
and its civilian population from further hostilities. It will consider the
situation in Maglaj further in the context of its examination of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/1994/291) pursuant to its resolution
900 (1994)."

-----
