S/PV.7551

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7551st meeting

Monday, 9 November 2015, 9 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hammond. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Lamek
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Aman
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ybáñez Rubio
Ms. Power
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2015/702)
Letter dated 7 October 2015 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2015/762)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-35543 (E)
*1535543*

S/PV.7551

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 9.05 a.m.

I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2015/702, containing the
report of the Secretary-General on Somalia, and to
document S/2015/762, which contains a letter dated
7 October 2015 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2015/702)
Letter dated 7 October 2015 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2015/762)

A vote was taken by show of hands.

The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General, Ministers
and other representatives present in the Security
Council Chamber. Their presence today underscores
the importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Somalia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke, Prime Minister
of the Federal Republic of Somalia, and request the
Protocol Officer to escort him to his seat at the Council
table.
Mr. Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke, Prime
Minister of the Federal Republic of Somalia, was
escorted to a seat at the Council table.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Susana
Malcorra, Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General;
Mr. Nicholas Kay, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia; and His Excellency
Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2015/840, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Angola, Chad, France,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria, Spain, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America.

2/26

09/11/2015

In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2245 (2015).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make a statement after the vote.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We voted in favour of resolution 2245 (2015),
prepared by the delegation of the United Kingdom,
to change the mandate of the United Nations Support
Office to the African Union Mission in Somalia
(UNSOA), as we, like other members of the Council,
are interested in seeing the swift establishment of
sustainable peace and stability both in that country and
in the Horn of Africa region as a whole.
However, we note the extreme density of the text
of the resolution pertaining to resources that we think
should be minimized. That is particularly important
given the fact that the provision of technical and
material support to UNSOA — now the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia — is among the issues most
often raised made by auditors of the Organization.
We also call attention to the very tight time frames
for the drafting of the resolution and the need to support
the provisional rules of procedure and the established
working practices of the Security Council with regard
to such types of documents, whereby amendments can
be made to a draft resolution right up to the voting, and
its publication in blue does not automatically mean that
the drafting is at an end.

15-35543

09/11/2015

The situation in Somalia

We also believe that the deployment of Government
staff remains in the grey zone of administrative and
budgetary control, and we are concerned about it as a
matter of principle.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Malcorra.
Ms. Malcorra: It is with pleasure that I am here to
deliver a message on behalf of the Secretary-General.
“I commend the United Kingdom for conveying
this ministerial meeting and for its long-standing
leadership on Somalia. The stakes are high. The
international community must stand strong with
Somalia.
“Next year can be momentous. A peaceful
constitutional transition of power will make an
extraordinary milestone on Somali’s path to
democracy. The new national consultative forum is
responsible for agreeing on the modalities for the
process. I urge the Federal Government to actively
engage as many people as possible, including
women, young people and minorities.
“At the same time, Somalia is consolidating its
federal system. I urge Somali leaders to complete
the process by the end of 2016. I also call on them
to achieve genuine, inclusive reconciliation in all
regions. Progress on the Provisional Constitution
will be essential in the next few months. I welcome
the commitment of Somali leaders to re-energizing
the delayed review.
“We are deeply grateful to the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for its sacrifices.
The United Nations will not waver in our
commitment to the Mission. I call on all partners
to ensure that our military and political strategies
are fully aligned. We must also redouble our efforts
to strengthen Somali security forces so they can
secure the country for the long term.
“Military operations alone will not defeat
Al-Shabaab. Today, I renew my call on the
Security Council to support a comprehensive
approach that addresses the Al-Shabaab threat by
offering Somalis a better alternative. That will
require greater investments in community security,
human rights, justice and economic opportunity,
especially for young people. We must denounce the
propaganda of Al-Shabaab, address the grievances
that drive recruitment, and open the way for all to
renounce violence.

S/PV.7551

“The best way to weaken the pull of extremism
is to strengthen people’s chances for a better future.
That is why I also urge the international community
to increase its contributions to the New Deal
Compact before its review in Istanbul in February.
An investment in the people of Somalia will also
benefit security in the region and the world. We
must urgently provide opportunities for Somalia’s
strong women and girls, who suffer from poverty,
violence and abuse without fair participation in
decision-making. I urge the Federal Government to
work to exceed the goal of 30 per cent representation
of women in Parliament.
“Guaranteeing basic human rights is essential
to offering a credible alternative to extremism.
I have repeatedly stressed that all operations
against violent extremism, anywhere and under
any conditions, must fully respect human rights. I
commend the Government for actively participating
in the Human Rights Council’s universal periodic
review. I also stress the importance of observing
international humanitarian and human rights law
in the conduct of military operations. In line with
resolution 2245 (2105), adopted today, we can build
on the tangible success of the United Nations/
African Union partnership and the achievments of
the United Nations Support Office for AMISOM.
We can do even more with the new United Nations
Support Office in Somalia. I am committed to
strengthening our collaboration.
“Right now, some 3.2 million people in
Somalia need assistance to survive. Over the past
six months, more people have lost the ability to
feed their families. More children suffer from acute
malnutrition. Most of these are internally displaced
persons living under the constant threat of forced
evictions and abuse. The dire situation is growing
worse; we are expecting dangerous flooding and
drought. Our humanitarian response plan is only
36 per cent funded, so we cannot fully carry out
our life-saving programmes.
“Donors can make the difference between life
and death, and that can help move Somalia towards
greater stability and peace. The United Nations
will continue to do everything possible to achieve
political progress, boost security, promote human
rights and relieve suffering. I urge the Council to
provide active support. This is our path to defeating
the threat of terrorism and realize the vision of

15-355433/26

S/PV.7551

The situation in Somalia

Somali’s for a united federal country that serves
all of its people and contributes to our common
future.”
The President: I thank Ms. Malcorra for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kay.
Mr. Kay: I am grateful to you, Sir, for giving me
the floor. I am delighted to be here with His Excellency
Mr. Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke, Prime Minister
of Somalia, whose constant support for the United
Nations is deeply appreciated.
As I shall end my assignment at the end of the year,
I wish to take this, my final opportunity, to thank the
Council for its unstinting support over the past two
and a half years. Without it, Somalia would not have
progressed as it has. In 2013, there was hope in the air,
but also anxiety. The mountain to climb was steep. As
Somalia inches towards 2016, I believe that we should
recognize what is going well, reflect on why it is
working and what we should learn, and set out clearly
the challenges ahead.
Somalia is well advanced in its political and
security transformation from failed to recovering
State. When the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia started in 2013, the Federal Government was
corralled in Mogadishu. Across the rest of the country
was a patchwork of different local power-holding
arrangements, with no tangible link to Mogadishu,
little in the way of governance institutions, and with
many entire districts under the control of Al-Shabaab.
Today a new Somalia with a new political map
is emerging. Three new federal member states will
shortly join Puntland as foundation stones of the new
Federal Somalia. The fifth will be formed from Hiraan
and Shabelle Dhexe and, while recognizing important
recent progress, I urge swift conclusion of that
process. I also urge continued progress on the national
consultations leading to an electoral process in 2016
that will be conducted on time and be more inclusive
than in 2012.
We should never forget that political progress has
been made possible only by the sacrifices of the Somali
National Army and the forces of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). The Somali National
Army faces huge challenges and needs to improve its
capabilities and its organization, but the Council’s
support for it and for AMISOM has been vital. Since

4/26

09/11/2015

2013, 14 districts, including strategically important
ports, have been recovered from Al-Shabaab. Today,
there is intense interchange between Mogadishu and
the regions on political, economic and technical issues.
Almost daily, we help Somali delegations fly across
that largely roadless country the size of France. In
each of the emerging Federal member states, there is
a Government, an assembly and an agreed charter.
Increasingly, Somalis see Government closer to them,
more able to deliver for the people and be held to account
by them. There is still a long way to go in terms of
service delivery, the rule of law and inclusive politics.
But I shall never tire of saying that, at last, Somalia is
facing the problems of a country coming together rather
than falling apart.
I believe we should recognize some other significant
achievements; each is a collective achievement by
Somalis and the international community. It is now
more than three years since pirates seized a major
commercial ship off the coast of Somalia. The United
Nations Development Programme has helped State
institutions to start delivering a range of services and,
with the World Bank, is establishing a professional
civil service. In 2014, early warning by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
led to early action, and Somalia avoided repeating
the devastating famine of 2011. In 2015, for the first
time in a quarter of a century, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
began a programme to assist thousands of refugees to
return voluntarily to Somalia. Last month, two years
after polio erupted again in Somalia, the World Health
Organization (WHO) declared Somalia polio-free. In
2014, Somalia exported a record number of livestock;
it is no coincidence that the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations vaccinated a record
number of animals the same year. Schools across
Somalia are reopening, and teachers are being trained
and paid through a UNICEF-backed programme.
Enormous challenges remain. Social and economic
progress so far is a drop in the ocean, but it is progress.
Why are things progressing and what should we
learn? This is not the moment for detailed analysis,
but let me highlight five key elements in Somalia’s
success. First and foremost is the common agreement to
put political State-building at the heart of everything,
Somali-owned and Somali-led. Secondly, creative
approaches and partnerships have been key, not only
as enshrined in the New Deal Compact, but also in the
unique parnership among the United Nations, the African
15-35543

09/11/2015

The situation in Somalia

Union, the European Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development. The third factor is the
courage and commitment of the African Union forces in
AMISOM. And the fourth element is a truly integrated
United Nations that is delivering as one. Finally, there
is the unity and willingness of the Security Council to
innovate and to trust, for which I thank members.
While thanking partners and the Council for what
they have done, it may not be surprising to members
if I also ask for more. Somalia has to compete for
attention and resources in an ever more troubled world.
But scaling back now will crush the hopes of millions
of Somalis, endanger peace and security in the Horn
of Africa and East Africa, bolster violent extremism
globally and risk a renewed exodus of refugees.
Reducing effort should not be an option. Collectively
we need absolutely to do more and better on three
things: undertaking local community recovery and
development in areas recovered from Al-Shabaab;
supporting economic recovery nationwide to help the
seven out of every 10 Somalis under the age of 35 to
find jobs; and putting in place a more comprehensive
approach to Al-Shabaab to engage those who truly
wish to join a Somali-led political State-building
project. Those are the future actions that will lock in
the political and security success to date. The Council’s
decision today to establish an enhanced United Nations
support office is vital for the next phase.
While rightly looking back and forward, we should
be somberly realistic about the present. The plight of
millions of Somalis is a calamity and an indictment.
The vast majority continue to suffer abject poverty,
displacement, insecurity and predatory corruption, with
little rule of law or respect for human rights. Somali
resilience is legendary, but even the most resilient may
buckle in the end. In all conscience, Somalia’s leaders
and international partners need to do more rather than
less.
Delivering humanitarian and development progress
in the short term, especially given the impact of the
El Niño effect, will be hard. OCHA is working flatout to ensure the right response. The year 2016 will
be one of heightened political tension — a bumpy,
adrenaline-fuelled ride. Al-Shabaab will do everything
it can to disrupt federalism and the electoral process.
Somalia’s leaders need to reconcile competing demands
and strive to place national interests above personal or
community interests. International partners need to stay
the course, be united and respect Somali ownership, but

S/PV.7551

be crystal-clear on their expectation that Somalis need
to agree the rules for the 2016 electoral process and
then stick to them.
My final words are ones of thanks, not only to the
Security Council and the Secretary-General for giving
me the honour to serve in Somalia, and to my team, who
work tirelessly in austere and dangerous conditions, but
also to the President, the Prime Minister and the people
of Somalia for their hospitality and patience. I thank
the African Union for its constant partnership, and I
welcome the new Special Representative of the Chair of
the African Union, Ambassador Madeira.
My final thoughts are with the family and friends
of the seven United Nations colleagues murdered in the
line of duty in Somalia since 2013. The most fitting
tribute we can pay to them is to redouble our work for
peace. I salute and thank the whole United Nations
family in Somalia for its service, comradeship and
courage.
The President: I thank Mr. Kay for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Téte António, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations.
Mr. António: Today’s meeting is taking place
against the backdrop of major achievements in Somalia
towards the realization of Vision 2016, for which we must
commend the leadership of the Federal Government of
Somalia and the Somali security forces. We must also
commend the countries of the region, which, through
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), have remained actively engaged in the efforts
to achieve peace, security and reconciliation in Somalia.
I pay tribute to all the uniformed and civilian
personnel of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), as well as to the troop- and
police-contributing countries, namely, Burundi,
Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Nigeria and Uganda. Since
their deployment, which is now entering its ninth year,
AMISOM personnel has displayed an unparalleled
commitment, sense of duty and courage. At the
African Union (AU), we take particular pride in their
achievements. The huge sacrifices they have made
have enabled Somalia to open a new and more hopeful
chapter in its troubled history. We are determined to
ensure that the sacrifices made are not in vain.
I would like to thank the United Kingdom for
convening this meeting, which will provide us with an
opportunity to take stock of the situation, including

15-355435/26

S/PV.7551

The situation in Somalia

the implementation of Vision 2016, and agree on how
best to address the remaining tasks. I acknowledge
the presence of the Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs, which is yet further testimony
of the importance that the United Kingdom attaches
to the situation in Somalia and a reflection of its
determination to assist that country to overcome the
daunting challenges confronting it.
I commend the members of the Security Council
for their continued commitment to the quest for peace
and reconciliation in Somalia. Over the years, they have
continued to extend significant support to the African
Union-led efforts aimed at neutralizing the Al-Shabaab
terrorist group and creating the conditions for the
successful conclusion of the ongoing political process.
It would be remiss of me if I did not once again put
on record the African Union’s deep appreciation to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon for his tireless efforts
towards the promotion of peace and security on the
African continent and in Somalia in particular. I have
no doubt, as we move ahead, that we can continue to
rely on his support. The deployment of AMISOM and
the progress made in the implementation of its mandate
would not have been possible without the support
of other African Union partners. Those include the
European Union and its member States, as well as the
United States of America.
As we gather in this Chamber today, we should
applaud the Federal Government of Somalia for
reaffirming its commitment to respecting the
constitutionally-mandated terms of the legislature and
executive. These, as all members know, will expire
in August and September 2016, respectively. In this
respect, the recent launch of the national consultative
forum on elections is another promising step. The forum
agreed on the consultative process and methodology,
and began the initial debate on the approaches to the
electoral process. In just a few days, public consultations
on the electoral process will commence in various parts
of Somalia. It is our hope that the national and regional
stakeholders will maintain the unity of purpose they
have shown thus far.
Significant progress has also been made against
key milestones in the completion of Somalia’s federal
State formation process and towards reviewing the
Provisional Constitution. These positive developments
have greatly enhanced the prospects for the successful
conclusion of the political process. Much remains to be
done, however. Against this backdrop, all international
6/26

09/11/2015

stakeholders should continue to provide the required
support to Somali stakeholders in order to overcome
the remaining challenges. The African Union remains
committed — including through AMISOM, whose
mandate, as determined by the Peace and Security
Council, also includes a political component — to
continuing to support and facilitate these processes, in
close coordination with IGAD, the United Nations and
other partners.
Nevertheless, while reviewing the ambitious
State-building agenda that lies ahead, we must not shy
away from assessing the effectiveness of the efforts
deployed on the ground, the extent to which we are
promoting a truly Somali-owned process and the level
of coordination among the international partners. It is
only through such an approach that we can ensure that
we are taking the realities on the ground in Somalia
into account at every step and maximizing the impact
of our support.
In Somalia, we are now facing a threat of a different
nature than what we were contending with just a year
ago. AMISOM and the Somali National Army have
conducted a number of successful offensives, the latest
being Operation Juba Corridor. While these offensives
have continued to deplete Al-Shabaab capabilities
by limiting their sources of revenue and freedom of
movement, AMISOM was also, as a result, compelled
to extend its lines of communication. The Mission now
covers an expanded area of operation.
Under pressure to maintain relevance, Al-Shabaab
is taking advantage of these extended lines of
communication to conduct targeted attacks against
AMISOM and the Somali National Army defensive
positions. The group has also continued to conduct
asymmetric attacks with increasing efficiency and
lethality on the Government and the local population
alike. The most recent attack was just a week ago on a
popular hotel in Mogadishu patronized by Government
officials. These attacks serve as a constant reminder of
the fragility of security, not just in Mogadishu, but in
Somalia as a whole.
Another source of concern is a potential alliance
between Al-Shabaab and the so-called Islamic State.
As a result of its depleted capability and desperation
for support, Al-Shabaab is exploring this avenue for
survival by possibly shifting alliances to more resourced
international terrorist groups. This is a worrying
development that all stakeholders must closely monitor.

15-35543

09/11/2015

The situation in Somalia

To address the evolving security challenges, there
is a pressing need to step up efforts to complete the
expansion phase, with a view to liberating the remaining
areas controlled by the Al-Shabaab terrorist group. This
will pave the way for the transition to the stabilization
phase by March 2016. In line with the relevant decisions
of the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the Security Council, the Commission, with the
involvement of all concerned stakeholders, including
the United Nations, has developed a revised concept of
operations for AMISOM. This document was forwarded
to the Secretary-General by the AU Commissioner for
Peace and Security on behalf of the Chairperson of the
Commission, Dr. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, through a
letter dated 23 October, for onward transmission to the
members of the Security Council.
The strategic end-state, as identified in the concept
of operations, is significantly to deplete the military
and related capacity of the Al-Shabaab and other armed
opposition groups. Within this context, the security
strategy in the period ahead is to create and preserve an
enabling environment for the unfolding political peace
and reconciliation processes in Somalia. The concept
of operations addresses the challenges identified by
the Joint African Union/United Nations benchmarking
exercise. It is imperative to note that the most consistent
view expressed during the development of the concept
of operations was the importance of the provision of
flexible and timely logistical support to AMISOM
through a more responsive and robust United Nations
Support Office for AMISOM.
It was against this background that, in its
communiqué of 18 September, the African Union
Peace and Security Council, having welcomed the
strategic review of the United Nations Support Office
to AMISOM (UNSOA), underlined the imperative
for UNSOA to remain an independent and dedicated
capacity that reports to United Nations Headquarters
and is accountable to the Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for all
matters relating to logistical support for AMISOM. This
was seen as a sine qua non for the delivery of logistical
support in a flexible, timely and responsive manner.
While taking note of resolution 2245 (2015) and
acknowledging the advances it contains with respect
to support to both the AMISOM and Somali national
security forces, I would like to reiterate the relevance of
the Peace and Security Council’s position, as outlined
above, and regret that this position was not adequately

S/PV.7551

reflected in the resolution. I commend the African
members of the Security Council for the sustained
efforts they have made in the course of the consultations
on the draft resolution for the AU’s concerns to be taken
into account.
In the period ahead, the African Union will consult
with the Secretariat on the implementation of the
relevant provisions of the resolution to ensure that the
required support to AMISOM takes into account the
peculiar conditions in which the Mission is operating
and is delivered in a timely and responsive manner,
based on the needs of the Mission and on the request
made by the AMISOM leadership.
The African Union welcomes the planned provision
of in-theatre medical evacuation for the Somali police
force. We express the hope that that step will be
followed, in the not too distant future, by a logistical
support package to the Somali police force, along the
lines of the one provided to the Somali National Army.
That is critical, in view of the increasing role expected
of the Somali police forces in the period ahead in the
context of the revised AMISOM concept of operations.
While the African Union appreciates the United
Nations support for AMISOM, it is also important to
bear in mind that, in deploying a mission in Somalia, the
AU is acting on behalf of the Security Council, which
has the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Accordingly,
the United Nations has the duty to provide all the
necessary support to AMISOM, whose action aims at
creating conditions conducive for the early deployment
of a United Nations peacekeeping operation that would
support the long-term stabilization and reconstruction
of Somalia.
Such enhanced support is all the more urgent and
necessary, as AMISOM is facing additional constraints
brought about by the decision of the European Union
to cut the allowances to the uniformed personnel of
AMISOM by 20 per cent, beginning in January 2016.
That measure affects the very personnel who are
making the ultimate sacrifice in the line of duty on
behalf of the entire international community. There is
no doubt that that decision will have a serious adverse
effect on the morale of uniformed personnel, at a time
when more is expected of AMISOM on the ground. Let
me add that the decision by the European Union will
compound the serious financial gap already created by
the depreciation of the euro in relation to the dollar.

15-355437/26

S/PV.7551

The situation in Somalia

In conclusion, I would like to stress that we are in
the last stretch of our long journey aimed at helping
the Somali people and authorities bring to a definite
end over two decades of senseless violence, untold
suffering and complete anarchy, which has affected
both regional and international security. At this critical
juncture, AMISOM and the Somali national security
forces deserve increased support. Without such
support, we run the risk of undermining the tremendous
achievements made at such a high cost during the past
nine years.
Needless to say, our support to Somalia should
go beyond security. We have to step up our efforts to
address the prevailing humanitarian challenges, which
were compounded by the recent flooding, which resulted
in additional displacement of populations. We have to
increase our economic and financial support to provide
the much-needed peace dividends to the suffering
Somali population. We have to step up our capacitybuilding assistance for the emerging Somali State to be
able to stand on its own and shoulder its responsibilities.
It should nonetheless be clear that, ultimately, Somalia’s
leaders have the primary responsibility for responding
to the aspirations of their people to peace, security and
reconciliation. They ought to do more and demonstrate
the necessary leadership, vision and determination to
that end.
The President: I thank Mr. António for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Omar
Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke, Prime Minister of the
Federal Republic of Somalia.
Mr. Sharmarke (Somalia): I am pleased to be
present here today to participate in discussions on
moving Somalia forward. It is indeed an honour for
Somalia and to all of us here. Somalia cannot thank
the Security Council enough for all that it has done to
support it over the years. I was pleased to hear from
the speakers before me today of their optimism and
commitment to support the progress that Somalia is
making.
I would also like to welcome the United Kingdom
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonweath
Affairs, Mr. Philip Hammond, and to commend him
for his leadership in presiding over today’s meeting. I
would also like to thank the Special Representative to
the Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Kay, for his role
in Somalia over the past two and a half years. Those
must have been two difficult but also rewarding years

8/26

09/11/2015

for him in term of the progress that Somalia has made
during his tenure as the Special Representative of the
Secretary General. Mr. Kay has been steadfast in his
support and infectious optimism for Somalia. It is a
matter of disappointment that he has not been left to
complete the process, which he has invested so much
effort and emotion in shaping, along with national and
international partners, especially at the present moment,
when Somalia is experiencing an unprecedented level of
collective momentum in the political process. I would
like to assure Mr. Kay and the Council that Somalia’s
political leadership, both at Federal and regional levels,
are committed to move forward what is in the best
interests of its people and country. All of us recognize
that it is in the best of interests of Somalia to complete
the State-building and electoral processes within the
mandate of the current Government, which ends in
August 2016.
As all the briefers attested to, significant progress
has been made in Somalia in almost all security and
political fronts. At this early stage of rebuilding our
Government, we have yet to bolster the economic
sector, as has been the case with reard to the political
and security sectors. With much more remaining to be
done, as leaders we are prepared to go the extra mile to
record more progress.
The progress in Somalia since this Government
took over the reins of leadership, at the end of 2012,
the challenges that have to be overcome and the tasks
that are still outstanding were all covered in great
detail during the last High-level Partnership Forum,
held in Mogadishu from 29 to 30 July. We are certain
to talk about even greater milestones at the next such
meeting, to be held some time in February 2016. We
encourage high-level participation and we hope both
you, Mr. President, and Secretary-General Ban Kimoon will join us to take stock of our achievements
and challenges and to plan for a sprint-lap to elections
in 2016.
As the Council is well aware, we held a series of
top-level meetings on the political process in the month
of October, which culminated in the inauguration of
national consultative forum. Its maiden plenary session,
which was held in Mogadishu on 19 and 20 October,
brought together high-level representatives from the
existing four regional administrations, led by their
respective Presidents, the top leadership of the Federal
Government of Somalia, as well as representatives from
our international partners. Regional-level consultations

15-35543

09/11/2015

The situation in Somalia

will start in earnest in a matter of days, ahead of the
national consultative forum meeting in December, to
discuss and unveil the best possible election option,
in the absence of a one-person-one-vote election, and
agree on a timeline for the process for elections, which
must take place in 2016.
I am pleased to say that the process of establishing
the last and final interim regional administration has
officially begun. A technical committee, which will
manage the process, has been put together. We expect
to usher in the birth of a new regional administration,
Hiraan and Middle Shabelle, by the end of the year.
The reconstruction-review process is in progress.
Although we are not happy with the pace of progress,
the institutions concerned are progressing in a manner
that has neveaur before been seen.
A United Nations-facilitated workshop on the
constitutional review, with stakeholder participation,
was recently held in Mogadishu under my stewardship.
A review of two chapters has been concluded, and we
expect the remainder to be fast-tracked.
There is no refuting the fact that we have made
gains in the security sector. To cement those gains,
the leadership of the Federal Government of Somalia
has made public its commitment to security-sector
reform, especially in the areas of transparency and
accountability. Progress in the integration of forces is
under way. The Guulwade (Victory) Plan is key to the
success of the integration process. What has not been
inspiring, however, is the lack of donor support for the
plan — as elaborate as it is. The Somali National Army
still lacks in equipment, training and logistical support.
That has hampered our ability to leverage the benefit of
force integration in terms of the envisioned sustained
offensive operations against Al-Shabaab. While being
committed, the Federal Government of Somalia still
faces challenges in assuming full responsibility for
the payment of salaries to the security forces. Once we
attain that goal, which we hope to do by January 2016,
we hope to redirect stipends funding from our partners
to further cover equipment, training and logistical
support.
Despite the military gains against Al-Shabaab that
Council members have mentioned, Al-Shabaab’s recent
offensive attacks against the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and Somali National Army
targets are disconcerting, to say the least. Complex
attacks against hotels are a sign that, although Somalia

S/PV.7551

and its international partners have won the war against
Al-Shabaab, that group has yet to be dismantled.
The Somali terror network’s recent proclamation of
allegiance to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) is not to be taken lightly. For all its modest gains
against that terrorist organization, Somalia cannot
afford to allow a space for ISIS to exploit, which could
enable it to reverse the hard-earned progress on security
for which AMISOM and the Somali National Army
have sacrificed so many lives. That is why we need the
support of the Council more than ever before: to stand
with Somalia against that terror network and to deny
it the ability to regroup and to pose renewed threats in
Somalia and the region.
A resolution of the crisis in Yemen is crucial. That
would go a long way towards keeping Al-Shabaab from
accruing support from ISIS by using Yemen as conduit
or launching pad. It is also vital to rally support for the
Guulwade Plan. The Federal Government is committed
to building the ability of its security forces to absorb the
kind of support that they expect from our international
partners. That is the job of the leadership of the Somali
National Army, as well as the essence of effecting
recent leadership changes at the top, namely, to bring
about strategic, technical and operational reforms. The
Federal Government of Somalia is prepared to back up
those changes with progressive policies and civilian
control.
There is a serious need for AMISOM and the
Somali National Army to reflect on recent attacks on
their bases. The toll that Al-Shabaab is exacting against
them compromises the confidence of the Somali people
with respect to confronting Al-Shabaab. We welcome
and encourage the efforts of our international partners
to eliminate the leadership of Al-Shabaab. We owe it
to AMISOM and to the Somali National Army to fulfil
their commitment to defeating them.
Finally, concerning security, while our special
forces have performed impeccably well in saving lives,
in real time, in the face of complex attacks on civilian
business premises, our intelligence and pre-emptive
capacities remain seriously flawed. Because of
systematic intelligence shortcomings, our people are
being subjected to preventable losses. That must end. It
is disappointing that we seem to have resorted to verbal
condemnations of Al-Shabaab. Their tactics are well
known. We must focus further on action. With better
coordination among AMISOM forces and between
AMISOM and the Somali National Army, we can again

15-355439/26

S/PV.7551

The situation in Somalia

turn the tables against Al-Shabaab and neutralize its
ability to pose any real threat to civilian or military
targets.
Thanks to the Security Council’s anti-piracy
resolutions, we have seen almost no incidents of
violence during the past two years or so in Somali
waters. While the result is reassuring, there is a need for
sustainability. There is a need to protect the livelihood
of coastal communities, long ravaged by piracy
activities. Somalia also needs the Coucil’s support with
respect to illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
in its waters.
Lastly, poverty and the lack of economic
prosperity play a major role in the appeal of extremism
and terrorism. Uneducated, underemployed and
unemployed youths remain a ticking time-bomb
for Somalia — time that we cannot afford to waste.
Somalia needs investment to support job-creation
initiatives, education, vocational training and other
basic infrastructure development programmes that will
lead to true stability and sustainability. We can look
to examples in the region for proof that the appeal to
violent extremism decreases with individual or societal
prosperity. As a Government, we are putting in place
the necessary legal frameworks to attract and guarantee
investment.
Ones again, I would like to thank the Council and
its leadership for promoting world peace and prosperity
in general and for its continued support to the people
of Somalia.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the Secretary of State for Foreign
and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
It is an honour to follow the Prime Minister
of Somalia, who is working so hard to rebuild his
country. Let me also thank the Secretary-General
and Ambassador Téte António for all that the African
Union has done to ensure that the United Nations and
the African Union are working together to bring peace
and prosperity to the people of Somalia.
Our purpose today is to discuss what more we can
do to defeat Al-Shabaab and deliver a better future for
Somalia. But before we do so, I think it is helpful to
remind ourselves of the past. Just four short years ago,
Al-Shabaab controlled major cities inside Somalia,
including Kismayo and the capital, Mogadishu. The

10/26

09/11/2015

security environment made trying to run a business
a high-risk venture, where owners risked their goods,
their property and sometimes their lives. That affected
all of us directly too. In 2010 alone, there were 174
pirate attacks, and Somali pirates held 404 hostages.
Fortunately, there has been much progress. Al-Shabaab
is on the back foot, with the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali National Army now
controlling 80 per cent of Somali territory. Somalia’s
economy is reviving, with gross domestic product on
the increase and shops and businesses opening at ever
increasing rates. Off the shores of Somalia, as the Prime
Minister has said, there have been no successful pirate
attacks for over two years.
I am pleased to describe that progress, because
the United Kingdom has long recognized the need to
build enduring peace and security in Somalia. Our
commitment is clear and we have invested heavily. We
are Somalia’s second-biggest bilateral donor. We have
opened an Embassy in Mogadishu, the only European
Union member State to do so. And we have strong
personal links with the thriving Somali diaspora in the
United Kingdom.
But we must today take time to recognize and pay
tribute to the bravery and sacrifices made by the brave
AMISOM and Somali National Army troops on the
front line of the fight. We should also pay tribute to the
Federal Government of Somalia for the commitment it
has demonstrated in helping to steer Somalia towards
the completion of the federal map and a permanent
sustainable political settlement.
I also commend the vital role of the United Nations.
Nick Kay has worked tirelessly since July 2013 as
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to ensure that the United Nations is at the centre of
international coordination and support for Somalia
under difficult conditions, including the tragic loss of
seven United Nations civilians. We are very grateful
to him and his team for everything they have done. I
am also grateful to the United Nations Support Office
for AMISOM (UNSOA), the most direct and tangible
contribution of the United Nations to countering
terrorism and extremism in the Horn of Africa. The
successes of AMISOM and the Somali National Army
in combating Al-Shabaab would have been impossible
without the essential logistical support the Mission
provides. It is clear that UNSOA has been underresourced and that it has been operating at the very edge
of its capabilities. I am therefore pleased that today we

15-35543

09/11/2015

The situation in Somalia

have all agreed to put that right, and I thank the Council
for supporting resolution 2245 (2015).
But the challenge for all of us — Somali and
non-Somali alike — is to sustain effort and momentum,
and to be fully coordinated as we do so. On security,
that work has started. The President has committed to
significant security sector reform, and I urge him and his
Government to press forward with the implementation
of those reforms. The United Kingdom will continue
to play its part. As our Prime Minister announced
here in September, we will deploy military, logistical,
engineering and training expertise to reinforce the
United Nations Support Office in Somalia in support
of the African Union peacekeeping mission in Somalia.
Building security and stability are key, but the
foundation on which they rest is political progress.
In 2016 the eyes of the world will be on Somalia.
Conducting a credible electoral process next year is
critical. A failure to do so would risk undermining the
collective effort to defeat Al-Shabaab, and all that has
been achieved so far. It would risk undermining the
international community’s support for Somalia but,
most important, it would undermine the right of the
Somali people to hold its leaders to account. Ensuring
a credible electoral process will allow Somalia to show
the world just how much progress has been made since
2012. It will quieten the remaining sceptical voices that
say that political renewal cannot be achieved, and it
will help in ensuring that the international community
remains committed to supporting Somalia on the right
path — a path towards a more secure, peaceful future.
The United Kingdom remains committed to
supporting progress in Somalia. I urge the Council and
other international allies to continue their commitment
to the country. Unity of purpose and effort will ensure
success. Over the coming year, our commitment
must be shared by all across the political spectrum
in Somalia. Personal differences and vested interests
must be set aside for the good of the nation as a whole.
As the Council has set out in resolution 2232 (2015),
all key actors and institutions in Somalia, including
Parliament, should engage constructively to ensure
progress. Only then can we truly say that Somalia has
turned a corner.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council. I now give the floor to other members of the
Security Council.

S/PV.7551

Mr. Aman (Malaysia): Mr. President, through you,
I wish to express my delegation’s appreciation to His
Excellency Mr. Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke, Prime
Minister of the Federal Republic of Somalia, for his
presence and for his briefing, which we heard with great
interest. I also wish to thank Ms. Susanna Malcorra,
Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Nicholas Kay
and Ambassador Téte António, Permanent Observer of
the African Union, for their respective briefings, which
were informative and helpful.
I also take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
tireless dedication and efforts of the men and women
serving in Somalia under the United Nations banner and
in the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
We honour their bravery, sacrifice and selfless service
as we do the bravery, sacrifice and selfless service of
the Somali national security forces. The unflagging
commitment to and sacrifices made in providing
support and assistance to the Government and the
people of Somalia are a shining example of cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union,
fully in line with the highest ideals of the United
Nations as enshrined in the Charter.
Your presence here today, Mr. President,
demonstrates the United Kingdom’s commitment to
Somalia, particularly in its development and transition
towards political and economic stability and to lasting
peace and security in the country and in the region as a
whole. Taking into account Somalia’s troubled history,
its achievement to date of many significant milestones
in building a democratic and politically inclusive State
bodes well for the future. We are pleased to note and
commend the strong commitment and ongoing support
provided by a multitude of international partners and
stakeholders towards entrenching democratic norms,
good governance, including management of public
finances, justice and rule of law, and respect for human
rights as well as in addressing the acute humanitarian
and development needs of the country.
As a current member of the Council, Malaysia
has participated actively in ongoing deliberations on
how best we could collectively provide the necessary
assistance and support needed by Somalia, while being
fully mindful of the need to ensure that such efforts
remain fully Somali-owned and Somali-led. In addition
to resolution 2245 (2015) just adopted, the Security
Council has adopted this year alone resolutions 2244
(2015), 2232 (2015) and 2221 (2015), which attests to

15-3554311/26

S/PV.7551

The situation in Somalia

the comprehensive and high level of Council’s attention
on Somalia.
Such attention is not only appropriate, but also
absolutely critical to ensuring Somalia’s continued
upward trajectory and in maintaining international
peace and security, particularly in the region of the
Horn of Africa. In this regard, we are heartened that
Somalia’s State-formation processes, including the
establishment and operationalization of state and
regional administrations, could be concluded in 2015,
paving the way for the realization of Vision 2016.
Accordingly, we would urge all parties to conclude the
necessary arrangements for an inclusive, transparent
and credible electoral process.
We are also pleased to note that notable progress
has also been made on women’s political participation
and leadership at national and local levels. We hope
that efforts to redress gender imbalance in political
representation are sustained. We are confident that,
with the full commitment and determination of all
leaders and relevant actors at the national level, coupled
with support from international and regional partners,
further key political and developmental milestones
could be achieved. Looking ahead, Malaysia believes
that future United Nations engagement with Somalia
should more closely involve the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture. With the support of the
United Kingdom, we were pleased to have convened
an informal interactive dialogue of the Council with
Somali Government representatives, the Peacebuilding
Council (PBC) and United Nations system actors
during Malaysia’s presidency in June 2015. We are
convinced that there is much scope for enhancing
complementarity between the Council and the PBC,
including on Somalia.
While noting the many significant and positive
gains made thus far, one key challenge which threatens
to derail the progress achieved to date is the prevailing
security threat. At the forefront of such threat is, of
course, Al-Shabaab. While significant headway has
been made in degrading Al-Shabaab’s capabilities,
it retains a significant ability to inflict death and
destruction, as was seen in its recent attack on the
Sahafi Hotel earlier this month.
We wish to stress that the fight against terrorism
cannot be won through the force of arms alone. We
therefore continue to advocate a comprehensive strategy
of winning hearts and minds, not only of perpetrators
but perhaps more critically, of their support bases
12/26

09/11/2015

within the civilian population. At this delicate stage
of transition, it is important that public trust and
confidence in national security institutions and actors
be maintained. Malaysia believes that political leaders
at the national and local levels, working in close
coordination and collaboration with the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), AMISOM
and the Somali national security forces, are best placed
to take the lead in this regard.
A related area of worry is the protection of civilians.
We remain concerned by reports of allegations of
continuing human rights violations and abuses,
particularly against women and children. We urge the
relevant authorities to investigate such allegations and
ensure that perpetrators are held to account. At the
same time, we greatly appreciate the ongoing efforts
by United Nations actors on the ground, particularly
UNICEF and UNSOM, in promoting awareness and
mainstreaming the issue of child protection in the
policies and activities of the Somali National Army. We
commend the Federal Government’s commitment and
determination to end and prevent recruitment and use
of children by national security forces.
The humanitarian situation in Somalia remains
fragile, due in part to the volatile security situation
and domestic economic challenges that exacerbate
the difficulties observed in delivering humanitarian
assistance across large parts of the country. The
conflict in Yemen has also placed additional stresses
on the humanitarian infrastructure in Somalia.
Despite having only modest resources and
capabilities, since the early 1990s, when we first
contributed troops to the United Nations Operation
in Somalia II, Malaysia has supported and assisted
Somalia; it continues to do so today. To date, Malaysia
has undertaken a number of development initiatives in
Somalia, including projects to refurbish and upgrade
existing wells as well as to install water pumps in remote
areas in order to supply clean water to approximately
20,000 people. We have also disbursed financial and
in-kind contributions to schools for disabled children,
internally displaced persons, orphanages and the
Somali National Eye Centre.
Recently, the Malaysian non-governmental
organization, Perdana Global Peace Foundation,
initiated a microcredit project aimed at empowering
women and single mothers to start their own small
businesses. In line with our commitment to South-South
cooperation, Malaysia continues to offer technical
15-35543

09/11/2015

The situation in Somalia

S/PV.7551

assistance, including higher education scholarships,
to Somali nationals under the Malaysian Technical
Cooperation Programme. We stand ready to consider
providing tailored courses if so requested.

interconnected fronts — improving security through
increased military and police pressure on Al-Shabaab
and improving governance by supporting accountable
Government institutions.

In conclusion, I reaffirm Malaysia’s commitment to
working closely with all Council members, the Federal
Government of Somalia, the United Nations, the African
Union and the international community towards lasting
peace, security and development for Somalia.

Thanks to the perseverance and sacrifice of African
Union soldiers, and with support from the United
Nations Support Office for the African Union Mission
in Somalia (UNSOA), the territory that Al-Shabaab
controls is shrinking, while Government authority
is expanding, as seen, for instance, in the recapture
of key towns such as Baardheere and Diinsoor. But
while Al-Shabaab is diminished, its brutal strikes
on civilians in Mogadishu and large-scale attacks on
AU peacekeepers demonstrate that it is not defeated.
Fulfilling that mission will require continuing the
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union.

Ms. Power (United States of America): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
and for the United Kingdom’s deep commitment to
stability and democracy in Somalia. I would also like
to thank Prime Minister Sharmarke for joining us today
and for his leadership. I am grateful to Mr. Kay, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his dedicated work and for all he has given and the
risks he has taken for Somalia over the years, and to
Ambassador António for all that the African Union
(AU) has invested in and sacrificed for Somalia.
At the end of August, Mogadishu experienced
something it had not had in years — an international
book fair. More than 1,000 people came from around
the country and abroad. President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud was one of them. They bought books,
attended readings, participated in panels and discussed
issues ranging from literature to education to local
governance. According to one report, more than half
the books sold were written by women. That such an
event could occur and so many people would attend
demonstrated just how much is changing in Mogadishu.
Locals recalled the open-air book fairs that used to take
place in the 1980s. One said, “With events like this,
Mogadishu is gradually reclaiming its image”. A Somali
who travelled from the northern city of Hargeysa told
a reporter,
“It is my seventh time in Mogadishu. This
time it is different. So much creativity and talent
displayed in one place... It is beautiful being here.”
The change under way in Somalia is real. We all
know the fragility of the political transition, and we all
know the horrors still being inflicted by the terrorist
group Al-Shabaab, which continues to assault Somalia’s
Government and people. But it is important to recognize
that there have been security and economic gains and
that those gains are meaningful and important. The
international community’s focus must now be on
building and sustaining momentum on two critical and

Resolution 2245 (2015) will help ensure that the
United Nations, through the renamed United Nations
Support Office in Somalia, improves its logistic support
to the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
the Somali National Army and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia. The recently completed
strategic review of UNSOA identified key ways to
improve our support to the political transition, and we
very much appreciate the United Kingdom’s leadership
in addressing the report’s recommendations through
today’s resolution. The number of personnel supported
by UNSOA has more than quadrupled, to more than
33,000. The area of operations has increased 4,000
times over. It is extremely important that the changes
in resolution 2245 (2015) have now taken account of
those new circumstances and responsibilities.
Maintaining momentum on the security front will
require continued bilateral support for AMISOM.
The African troops fighting for Somalia’s future have
achieved major successes, but not without significant
costs — first and foremost the scores of AMISOM
troops who have given their lives to this important
mission and whose sacrifice we deeply respect and
honour. The United States will remain a steadfast
partner of the AMISOM troop-contributing countries,
providing equipment, pre-deployment training and
other assistance. And, as we do with United Nations
peacekeeping operations, we will continue to urge that
AMISOM investigate reports of serious violations or
abuses of human rights, including those that involve
the killing of civilians or sexual exploitation and abuse,
and that AMISOM hold accountable those responsible.

15-3554313/26

S/PV.7551

The situation in Somalia

Ultimately, lasting security in Somalia will come
through the development of a professional and effective
Somali National Army that respects human rights and
civilian control. The United States has provided some
$300 million in training and other support, and we
will continue to help the Somali National Army build
capacity so that it can defend its people. But a new
Somalia will not come through military force alone,
needless to say, and improving governance in Somalia
must be a huge and urgent priority.
The security gains of AMISOM and the National
Army have created a historic opportunity. It is now
up to Somalia’s political leadership to seize it and,
with the help of the international community, to lead
the transition to a stable, national and representative
Government. To that end, we welcome President Hassan
Sheikh’s repeated commitment to holding elections in
2016, which have been reiterated by his administration,
the Parliament and regional officials. We urge the
Somali Government to work with the international
community to ensure a process that is free and fair and
that ultimately represents the will of the Somali people,
including internally displaced persons and refugees.
We also appreciate the President’s public
commitment to improving accountability and
transparency in the security sector. The same high
standard must be rigorously applied across the entire
public sector. There can be no tolerance for corruption,
fraud or abuse within the Government or the electoral
process. Such misconduct will threaten the entire
transition. The Somali people deserve a Government
that puts the public’s needs first and is committed to
serving all Somalis.
The Mogadishu international book fair points to the
readiness of Somalis to put war behind them. As one of
the fair’s organizers said, “Next year will be bigger and
better, God willing”. He was referring to the fair, but
his words ring equally true for his country. Somalia’s
future can be bigger and better if security and political
progress continues. The United States stands alongside
Somalis in their determination to see that happen.
Mr. Ybáñez Rubio (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting at such a crucial time for Somalia, and to
thank Prime Minister Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke
and the key actors in the region, such as the African
Union, as represented by Ambassador António, for
their presence. I would also like to take this opportunity
to thank Ms. Susana Malcorra, Chef de Cabinet of the
14/26

09/11/2015

Secretary-General, and especially Mr. Nicholas Kay,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
all his work in helping us to reach this hopeful moment.
During our time on the Security Council, Somalia
has definitely remained high on the African agenda.
Spain is firmly committed to Somalia and the region,
as we have demonstrated through our participation in
major international forums, most recently the Highlevel Partnership Forum held in Mogadishu in July,
and through our contribution to and participation in the
operations and missions in the area.
The Somali political process has suffered numerous
ups and downs in the past few years. While we can
say that significant progress has been made, much
still remains to be done. With our focus fixed on the
coming year and meeting the goals established in
Vision 2016, we should urge all the Somali political
actors to be decisive in addressing the country’s major
challenges — the process of creating a federation, the
2016 elections and the fight against Al-Shabaab. In that
regard, we welcome the progress that has been made
with the process of building a federal State, in which
a number of states are already participating, and with
successfully completing their interim constitutions,
and we urge them to continue negotiations with the
remaining states.
The 2016 elections will be key for Somalia. We
were pleased to see the launch of the consultative
process for settling the election format and the holding
of the most recent national consultative forum on
19 and 20 October. We hope that spirit of cooperation
will continue in the regional consultations due to take
place in the coming weeks, so that in December, at its
next national consultative forum, Somalia can agree on
a format for the 2016 elections.
In the preparations for the elections, there are two
issues to that we consider to be fundamental. First,
we must ensure that, regardless of the formula used,
the electoral process will be inclusive, transparent
and representative. The second concern is holding the
elections on schedule in August 2016. Achieving that
will require that the executive and legislative bodies
overcome their potential differences and work on
constitutional reform and developing a legal framework
that allows for the holding of the elections. We commend
President Mohamud’s commitment made at the United
Nations in New York to holding elections in 2016, and
we are convinced that Somalia, with its various powers,
is ready to carry out that task successfully in the coming
15-35543

09/11/2015

The situation in Somalia

S/PV.7551

months. To that end, it has the support of the United
Nations and the Security Council.

briefings, and Prime Minister Sharmarke for his
statement.

Al-Shabaab poses the greatest threat to security in
Somalia and the region. Its terrorist activities this year
demonstrate that the group remains active with full
operational capability. While we welcome the advances
of the African Union Mission in Somalia in recent
months, we draw attention to the need to effectively
exercise State authority in the territories that have been
recovered from Al-Shabaab so that their inhabitants can
enjoy the dividends of peace. We believe that military
operations in and of themselves cannot end the threat
of terrorism, and that what is necessary is a broader
approach to fighting Al-Shabaab, including support
for the development of a State capable of providing its
citizens with security, political participation, economic
opportunities and the protection of human rights.

New Zealand has had a considerable involvement
with Somalia and the Somali people during the past
25 years. A good number of Somalis came to New
Zealand as refugees in the 1980s and 1990s and have
settled in our country. The last time we served on the
Council in 1993 and 1994 coincided with the high point
of the United Nations peacemaking efforts through the
United Nations Operation in Somalia II and then the
sad collapse of those efforts as Somalia descended into
a state of lawlessness that made the continued presence
of peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel untenable.
It was a sad and difficult time for the Council and for
the United Nations as a whole, for Africa and, most of
all, for the Somali people.

Security sector reform is key in that regard. The
Somali National Army and police should increase
their role and effectiveness so as to ensure security
in the zones liberated from Al-Shabaab and along the
principal supply routes. To that end, we encourage the
Somali authorities to implement the Guulwade Plan
and Heegan Plan, because we consider it crucial to
achieve substantive progress in reforms before the 2016
elections.
The humanitarian situation remains extremely
serious and risks being exacerbated by the El Niño
weather phenomenon. We are also concerned about
the arrival of Somali refugees from Yemen, given the
limited resources to receive them.
To conclude, Spain is convinced that the peace,
stabilization and development of Somalia will not
be possible without the construction of a State, and
there will not be a sustainable State without Somali
ownership. To that end, while we recognize and
appreciate the efforts made so far, we encourage the
transitional Government and the various institutions
and actors participating in the process to overcome
their differences and work together for Somalia and for
Vision 2016, which have the international community’s
support.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): The presence
in the Council today of Secretary Hammond confirms
the United Kingdom’s strong commitment to Somalia.
We also wish to thank the Secretary-General’s Chef de
Cabinet, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Kay and Ambassador Téte António for their

Thanks principally to the efforts of the African
Union (AU) and the countries of the region, acting
through the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and with the support of the United Nations,
Somalia is now in a better, if still difficult situation.
There is much that can rightly be celebrated — not
least the fact that there is in place a functioning Federal
Government of Somalia and Government security
forces that, together with the AMISOM troops, have
managed to push back Al-Shabaab and loosen its hold
on much of the country. We commend the bravery of the
Somali and AMISOM troops and pay particular tribute
to the willingness of Ethiopia and Kenya to continue to
lead the fight against terrorism in the Horn of Africa.
Thankfully, as we have heard, piracy is no longer the
perennial threat off Somalia’s coast that it used to be.
However,
the
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2015/702) highlights the many difficulties that still
have to be addressed across a wide spectrum, ranging
from the basic need to establish security and stability
across the whole of the country, to putting in place sound
and representative governance structures, to re-igniting
economic development and to ensuring respect for the
rule of law and human rights. It is clear that Somalia
has some distance to go in its transition to again being
a fully functioning State.
It is essential that the Security Council and the
wider United Nations system continue to support
Somalia, the States of the region and the African Union
throughout the process. Important measures have
been taken in the past few months to put that support
on a firmer basis. We note in particular the steps to
harmonize the mandates of AMISOM and the United

15-3554315/26

S/PV.7551

The situation in Somalia

Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM),
following the joint United Nations-AU benchmarking
review of AMISOM and the recasting of the United
Nations support operations for AMISOM and UNSOM
through resolution 2245 (2015), which we have adopted
today.
The Council will need to continue to pay close
attention to the situation in Somalia in the coming years.
Despite the many other pressing issues on its agenda,
the Council cannot afford to see Somalia slip back into
anarchy and violence. As the past 20 years have shown,
that would be a disaster for the whole region, as well
as for the people of Somalia. On the ground, there will
need to be practical measures to improve coordination
as recommended in the benchmarking review, in
particular, the proposed High-level Partnership Forum
and the trilateral memorandum of understanding
between the United Nations, the AU and the troopcontributing countries. We urge the newly appointed
heads of AMISOM, UNSOM and the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia to make relationshipbuilding and cooperation between their organizations
key priorities.
We also urge other States in the region to continue
to support Somalia’s process of national rebuilding.
They are central to progress on federalism and to
long-term political stability. They need to be part of
stabilization and service delivery in the areas recovered
from Al-Shabaab. The development of a truly national
Somali National Army requires their support for the
implementation of the Guulwade Plan and for the longterm development of the Army.
At the political level, the Somali National
Consultative Forum and next year’s elections will
be important milestones on Somalia’s path back to
nationhood. Somalia’s leaders at both the national and
regional levels have vitally important roles to play.
Their focus must be on the good of the country and of
the Somali people and not on their personal or clan selfinterest. It was the pursuit of those narrow interests that
led Somalia to national disaster in the 1990s. In that
regard, the levels of corruption in Somalia are a real
threat to stability and to economic and political progress.
The non-payment of Somali soldiers is a continuing
example of that, and one that will undoubtedly affect
security both in the short term and the long term. We
welcome the Federal Government’s efforts to tackle
corruption, including by investigating the non-payment
of soldiers, and urge it to continue those efforts.

16/26

09/11/2015

It is almost 25 years now since Somalia last
knew peace. Through the courage, determination and
sacrifice of the Somali leadership and people, AMISOM
contributors and other international partners, we now
have the real possibility of a different Somalia — one
of unity, stability and prosperity. The Council must
continue to play its part in making this a reality.
Finally, let me thank Nicholas Kay for his signal
contribution to Somalia’s recovery.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I wish at the outset to
thank you, Sir, for convening this debate. My delegation
expresses its gratitude to Ms. Malcorra, Mr. Kay,
Mr. Téte António and Prime Minister Omar Abdirashid
Ali Sharmarke for their briefings.
Despite the security constraints, the political
situation in Somalia has seen progress, as reflected in
the commitment of the political leaders of that sisterly
nation and the Somali people to promoting for peace and
stability. On 23 October, the Permanent Representative
of Somalia briefed the Council (see S/PV.7541) on the
progress seen in the functioning of institutions, such as
the Board of Directors of the Central Bank of Somalia,
Somalia’s parliamentary oversight committees, the
Office of the Accountant General and the independent
Office of the Auditor General.
We applaud the various achievements under
way in the country’s political process, in particular
the establishment of the Boundaries and Federation
Commission, which will be responsible for advising
Parliament on the delimitation of the federal states’
borders, regional Administrations and districts in the
country. Venezuela emphasizes that the achievement
of lasting peace in Somalia will depend largely on that
important federalization process.
We also look forward to achieving an agreement
on security sector reform, with clearly defined roles
and responsibilities for the institutions in the new,
federalized Somalia. Such reform must encourage the
integration of the militias into the national security
apparatus and create human rights accountability
mechanisms. Importantly, the measures to strengthen
peace and political stability must be implemented
holistically, with improvements in the socioeconomic
conditions of the Somali people at the core of the process
as a whole. Without a genuine focus on the conditions
that fuel terrorism, neither peace nor security will exist

15-35543

09/11/2015

The situation in Somalia

for Somalia and the neighbouring countries that are
suffering the brunt of such acts.
With respect to the security situation in Somalia,
we highlight the smooth triangular cooperation among
the African Union, through the deployment of ground
troops, the United Nations through its political and
logistical assistance, and the European Union and other
countries in providing financing. Everything has been
carried out with the consent and active participation
of the State of Somalia, including its national armed
forces.
In that context, Venezuela reaffirms its full support
for resolution 2245 (2015), which was just adopted by
the Council and, inter alia, establishes the mandate
of the United Nations Support Office in Somalia to
provide logistical support to the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia nd the Somali armed forces through
joint operations with AMISOM. However, Venezuela
remains concerned about the spread of Al-Shabaab
deeper into the Horn of Africa, particularly in northeastern Kenya, and its new strategy of blocking
humanitarian access routes and asymmetric attacks. We
are also concerned that the absence of a viable civilian
administration in areas liberated from Al-Shabaab is
leading to a resurgence of intercommunal conflict in
southern and central Somalia.
With respect to the humanitarian situation, we must
keep in mind that, although the situation has improved
exponentially compared to 2010 and previous years,
3.2 million people still require survival assistance.
I recall that Somalia ranks second worldwide in
infant mortality, to which we must add the 203,000
malnourished children and 1.1 millions individuals
displaced from their homes.
In that context, Venezuela expresses deep concern
over the decline in humanitarian aid due to financial
and security constraints. On the one hand, United
Nations action is severely underfunded, achieving only
28 per cent of the necessary funding; on the other, the
important and noteworthy humanitarian effort that took
place in Mogadishu in 2011 has been undermined by
the actions of the Al-Shabaab terrorist organization,
which has resorted to blocking humanitarian aid access
routes. It is particularly alarming that, as the presence
of new diplomatic actors has increased in the capital,
the number of humanitarian actors in the country has
been reduced by the lack of resources and insecurity.

S/PV.7551

In short, Somalia has accomplished important
progress in the political sector in recent years. Going
forward, the Somali authorities should proceed with
caution, ensuring that the process of federalization is
compatible with the sustained political and institutional
momentum.
To conclude, the ongoing dynamic compels
us to maintain and strengthen our commitment to
the State of Somalia and its authorities in the fight
against Al-Shabaab, to overcoming the conditions
of socioeconomic exclusion of the majority, to
consolidating the political process and to caring for
those affected by the conflict. Without international
help, that will prove impossible.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too
wish to begin by thanking you, Sir, for presiding over
this meeting. Indeed, it signals the United Kingdom’s
commitment to an issue that is so important to us all.
I thank the Prime Minister of the Federal
Government of Somalia, the Chef de Cabinet of the
Secretary-General, the Permanent Observer of the
African Union and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia, for their interventions. I
wish to pay tribute, through the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, to those United Nations
personnel who have paid with their lives in their
commitment to assisting the Somali people.
We have just adopted resolution 2245 (2015), on
redefining the logistical assistance mandate entrusted
to the entity that will henceforth be known as the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS). I thank
the British delegation for drafting the resolution, which
implements the conclusions of the strategic review
conducted by the Secretary-General. The mandate of
the entity is clarified and the procedures are simplified,
with a focus on increased operational effectiveness in
the field. Those changes were necessary.
France salutes the courage and dedication of
the troops of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the Somali security forces in leading
the fight against Al-Shabaab. I pay tribute to all soldiers
of the African Union who have made the supreme
sacrifice in the fight against Al-Shabaab. The efforts
of the international community, especially the African
Union, with the support of the European Union and the
United States, are paying off, but they can be reversed.
Much more progress is necessary.

15-3554317/26

S/PV.7551

The situation in Somalia

Al-Shabaab is demonstrating significant resilience,
and while international and Somali forces theoretically
control 80 per cent of the territory, the terrorist
organization remains capable of operating over a
large part of the same. Our common objective is to
continue the fight against that terrorist group, which
persists in carrying out murderous attacks against
Somali institutions and AMISOM, as well as in
Kenya. Al-Shabaab remains undefeated, as was again
demonstrated by the 1 November attack, which caused
many casualties. France extends it condolences to the
Prime Minister and, through him, to the people of
Somalia over this new, heinous attack.
Given the situation, it is essential that AMISOM
quickly resume the offensive in order to exert maximum
pressure. The need for a surge in effectiveness would
correspond to a qualitative improvement in the
functioning of AMISOM and its troops, as affirmed by
resolution 2124 (2013) and recalled in resolution 2232
(2015) of last July. That should result in concrete and
operational improvements. AMISOM troops must be
fully integrated under a single, clear chain of command,
with joint planning and execution, and full sharing of
information; necessary force multipliers must be made
available. AMISOM would greatly benefit from such
implementation without further delay. We call on the
African Union and the troop-contributing countries to
follow up.
Qualitative improvements in logistical support,
through the adoption of a new mandate for UNSOS,
will remain dead letter without the active involvement
of the Somali Government in building a credible Somali
National Army that is responsive and financially
sustainable. That is one of the main challenges of the
current period. The international community stands
ready to tackle this issue, in support of the Somali
authorities; however, international support in the
area of security-sector reform must be contingent on
an increased demonstration of the will of the Somali
Government in this respect. The issue of the payment of
salaries and bonuses must also be resolved as a priority
matter, failing which the security situation could
deteriorate.
As previous speakers have noted, the headway made
in the military drive against Al-Shabaab will be lasting
only if it goes hand in hand with a robust, dynamic and
credible political process. France welcomes the efforts
of the Somali Government to reach agreement on a
federal structure and better governance, particularly

18/26

09/11/2015

through the creation of regional interim administrations
and a strengthened effort to combat corruption.
Beyond that, from a political point of view, 2016
will be a decisive year because of the elections. This
will help to confer indisputable legitimacy on the
country’s authorities, which will be able to continue
and consolidate their efforts to bring Somalia back
onto the path towards lasting peace and long-awaited
development.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We wish to thank the Secretary of State for Foreign
and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom,
Mr. Philip Hammond, for having convened a meeting
on this important issue. We would like also to thank
Ms. Susanna Malcorra for her briefing, on behalf
of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, and that of His
Special Representative for Somalia, Mr. Nicholas Kay.
We welcome the Prime Minister of the Federal
Republic of Somalia, Mr. Omar Abdirashid Ali
Sharmarke, and Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer
of the African Union.
In recent years, we have been witness to the
joint efforts undertaken by the Somali authorities,
international partners, the African Union and the United
Nations system to bring about peace and development in
Somalia. Given that the year 2016 will be a key one for
Somalia, the international community must redouble its
efforts to support that country. Political actors must also
continue to contribute to the achievement of unity and
consensus, especially in the areas of the restoration of
the rule of law, the constitutional process and political
and federal integration.
We value the indications given by Somali leaders
with regard to their intention to continue on the path
of a broad and inclusive political process. In this
regard, we hope that women will be included as active
participants at all stages of peacebuilding, as they are
powerful agents for change.
The security situation remains a source of concern.
We value the efforts of the Federal Government of
Somalia, the African Union Mission in Somalia
and other international actors in the fight against
Al-Shabaab, and we reiterate that this offensive, in
keeping with international law and human rights,
must go hand in hand with a process of stabilization
and consolidation. As we have repeatedly stressed in
the Council, terrorism cannot be overcome through
military means alone. It is vital to address the issues
15-35543

09/11/2015

The situation in Somalia

of social exclusion, poverty and limited access to
education, all of which provide fertile ground for the
spread of extremism and terrorism.
We are concerned by the humanitarian situation
in Somalia and its impact on boys and girls. The
international community must respond to the regional
crisis by supporting the various humanitarian calls
made.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2245
(2015). Given the pivotal role that the United Nations
Support Office for the African Union Mission in
Somalia has played, it was deemed necessary to adapt
its configuration to the current situation on the ground,
so that it could continue to be a relevant actor. We hope
that the United Nations Support Office in Somalia will
address and respond to the existing administrative,
coordination and structural shortcomings.
The resilience of the people of Somalia and their
desire to overcome conflict are encouraging, which is
why at this stage the international community cannot
fail them. As President Michelle Bachelet so rightly
stated in the Council last January (see S/PV.7361), peace
is a prerequisite for the protection and promotion of
fundamental rights, and social inclusion and inclusive
development are preconditions for peace.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I should like, at the
outset, to thank you, Mr. President, for having come to
New York to preside over this important meeting on
Somalia. I wish in particular to welcome the presence
of the Prime Minister of Somalia, whom I also thank for
having come to New York and for having shared with
the Council his vision of the new Somalia. I also thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
his briefing, and the permanent Observer of the African
Union for participating in this meeting as well.
The Angolan delegation welcomes the convening of
this debate on the situation in Somalia at a crossroads
for the country’s future. The briefings delivered here
have provided a better understanding of the progress
achieved and of the challenges being faced by the
people and the Government of Somalia, the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the United
Nations and international partners, which have joined
forces to help to build the new Somalia in peace and in
stability.
In 2016, Somali is expected to hold elections, which
will represent a crucial landmark in the implementation

S/PV.7551

of Vision 2016, the road map established by the Somali
authorities regarding the federal and State-building
process, the constitutional review and preparations for
elections. However, despite the significant progress
achieved so far, we must acknowledge deep concerns
over the political crisis and tensions among State actors
at the highest level.
Last year, political tensions between the President
and the former Prime Minister resulted in considerable
delays in the establishment of vital parliamentarian
organs and overall progress in the implementation of
the Vision 2016 inclusive political framework. After
decades of instability, Angola expects that the political
actors will put the highest interests of the State and
the people at the centre of their concerns, instead of
political agendas.
The leaders and the people of Somalia must stand
united and remain focused on the country’s political
priorities, which, in accordance with the national
and international consensus, are the preparations
for and holding of elections in 2016, to advance the
State-building process and fight against Al-Shabaab
terrorists.
In this regard, we welcome the second Ministerial
meeting of the High-level Partnership Forum, the creation
of the National Independent Electoral Commission,
the Boundaries and Federation Commission and the
Independent Constitutional Review and Implementation
Commission. The avowed possibility that a one-person,
one-vote election may not be held in 2016 is a matter
of concern, and we look forward to the setting up of an
alternative electoral ballot method, taking into account
the need for inclusivity and the enfranchisement of all
Somalis.
Inclusiveness and commitment are key issues in
the Somali political and constitutional process. The
meeting on the constitutional review process recently
held in Mogadishu produced a road map for an inclusive
and participatory process. It established benchmarks
for the adoption of a new constitution by March 2016,
which we hope will be met.
The most recent report of the Somalia and Eritrea
Monitoring Group on Somalia (see S/2015/801) raises
alarming questions related to the misappropriation of
resources by the political and business elite, corruption,
human rights violations by anti-Al-Shabaab forces,
delays in the establishment of vital parliamentary
organs, and activities of individuals or groups referred

15-3554319/26

S/PV.7551

The situation in Somalia

to as “spoiler networks in Somalia”. Everything must
be done to impede those alleged spoilers to jeopardize
the efforts and hopes of the whole nation, especially
Somali youth.
Regarding the fight against Al-Shabaab after the
success achieved by Operation Eagle and Operation
Indian Ocean, it is vital to establish State authority
in the areas recovered from the terrorists, establish
services that benefit the population and, by so doing,
remove some of the root causes of support for terrorist
groups. In that regard, we welcome the progress made
in building the capacities of the Somali National Army
and State police forces and in the implementation of
the national programme for disengaged combatants,
while expressing concern over the lack of sufficient
funding for those crucial projects. The National Army
and police will be called upon to play a crucial role in
securing the elections during the electoral period, when
the Al-Shabaab terrorists are expected to try actively to
disrupt the electoral process.
In that context, we are deeply concerned that the
Somali Government is experiencing difficulties in
paying salaries to the Somali National Army and other
security forces. That situation might gravely impair the
preparations, readiness and the security and stability
of the country in general. Nevertheless, we commend
the support that the United Nations Support Office for
the African Union Mission in Somalia is providing
to the Somali National Army and that of all Member
States contributing to the United Nations Multi-Partner
Trust Fund established at Somalia donor conference.
We also commend the countries contributing troops to
the African Union Mission in Somalia and the troops
themselves, who are engaged in an extremely difficult
mission. Angola takes this opportunity to express a
heartfelt tribute to all those who have paid the ultimate
sacrifice in the fight against the forces of terrorism, and
for the attainment of freedom and, ultimately, for peace
in Somalia.
With regard to the human rights situation, we deem
it particularly important that the Federal Government
and the regional authorities ensure strict compliance
with international standards and respect for the rule of
law in security operations.
In conclusion, despite the substantial progress
achieved to date, the situation prevailing in Somalia
is still fragile. It is up to the international community,
particularly the Security Council, to remain vigilant
and supportive in ensuring sustainable peace, stability,
20/26

09/11/2015

economic and social development, and respect for
human rights and the rule of law in Somalia. The Somali
Federal Government and all stakeholders must remain
committed to those goals in order to continue enjoying
the confidence and support from the international
community for the attainment of the goals which
involved a great investment to guarantee a better future
for the people of Somalia.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Your presence in the Council
today, Sir, demonstrates the importance that the United
Kingdom accords to the search for peace and security in
Somalia. We welcome the Prime Minister Sharmarke of
Somalia to the Security Council, and thank him for his
statement. We deeply appreciate the statements of our
briefers. We thank Mr. Nicholas Kay for his resilience,
Ambassador Téte António for his determination and
Ms. Susana Malcorra for her commitment.
Somalia has made significant progress in its postconflict recovery. That seems to be the consensus
around the table. The formation of federal states and
the creation and consolidation of regional Interim
Administrations are eloquent examples of that
progress. We also see encouraging developments in the
establishment of key mission-building institutions, in
particular the Boundaries and Federation Commission.
We believe that these building blocks are essential to
the realization of efficient and stable federalism in
Somalia.
The conduct of nationwide elections will serve
to consolidate that federalist approach. We urge the
Somali Government and other stakeholders to commit
to an inclusive, legitimate and peaceful process in
the conduct of the 2016 elections. The composition of
the National Independent Electoral Commission and
the appointment of the chairperson are significant
developments. It is essential that the Commission be
sufficiently equipped and empowered to successfully
prepare and manage the 2016 electoral process.
The current attacks by the Al-Shabaab terrorist
group continue to pose a threat not only to Somalia,
but indeed to the entire region. We commend the
determination and courage of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali National Army
in fighting Al-Shabaab, and we express are unwavering
support for the ongoing Operation Juba Corridor. We
welcome the recent African Union-United Nations
harmonized concept of operations for AMISOM. We
hope that it will enhance United Nations support to
AMISOM and political process in Somalia.
15-35543

09/11/2015

The situation in Somalia

It is crucial that the military gains recorded by the
joint operations of AMISOM and the Somali National
Army against Al-Shabaab be consolidated to forestall
a resurgence of the group. We believe that this can be
best achieved by a coordinated stabilization strategy.
The formation and operation of functional caretaker
administrations in the newly recovered districts must
remain a priority in order to avoid the creation of a
vacuum that could be exploited by terrorists.
Security sector reform (SSR) is an important vehicle
for supporting the security and safety of the State and
indeed the Somali people. In that regard, we take note
of the efforts of the Federal Government of Somalia to
build a more integrated and accountable security sector.
The development of effective and accountable security
sector institutions would significantly benefit the
process of stabilization in Somalia. If those strategies
are to produce tangible outcomes, attention must be
paid to the development of a Somalia national security
architecture and other SSR initiatives.
On the economic front, we acknowledge the efforts
of the Federal Government to promote sustainable
economic development in Somalia through a national
development plan based on the New Deal Compact.
We welcome the recent International Monetary Fund
article iv consultation mission in Somalia, described in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/702) as the first
in 25 years. It is our expectation that this will facilitate
the country’s access not only to concessional lending,
but especially its debt forgiveness process.
Still on economic issues, we commend the World
Bank for its support to the development of the Somali
power sector and other measures the Bank has taken
to enhance job creation and private investment in the
country. We also commend the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations for its support to the
Somali agricultural sector, including the vaccination of
14 million livestock.
With regard to health care, we welcome the
adoption in June of the Somali National Health Policy.
We acknowledge the progress made in service delivery
across Somalia with essential health services now
reaching over 4.2 million people.
Concerning the education sector, we are pleased
to note that, in June, over 7,000 students took the
first centralized examination for students completing
secondary school since 1991. This is a major achievement
for which we commend the Somali authorities. We urge

S/PV.7551

donors to field the funding gap that is hampering the
provision of non-formal training to overage children.
The more young Somalis can be productively engaged,
the better it will be for social stability in the country.
Resolution 2245 (2015), which the Council
unanimously adopted today, will significantly enhance
the capacity of the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia, the successor to the United Nations Support
Office for the African Union Mission in Somalia. This
is critical for effective operations by AMISOM and the
Somali National Army.
As the leaders of Somalia and all people of good
will steadily and stridently reassemble the elements and
ingredients of national power, we must all sustain the
momentum. We commend the leaders of Somalia for
their commitment to reducing the threats to peace and
security in their country. We acknowledge their efforts
to comply with relevant Security Council resolutions.
We encourage the Government and all stakeholders
to remain focused on the task ahead. Our collective
aspiration is to see in the very near future a peaceful,
stable, prosperous, federalist, democratic and united
Somalia.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I thank the
presidency of the United Kingdom for organizing this
briefing on Somalia, which reminds us that this country
definitely merits the Council’s focused attention. I thank
all the briefers for their valuable inputs. Allow me to
express special thanks to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Nicholas Kay, who established and
led the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) under exceptionally difficult conditions,
always with the interests of the Somali people at heart.
We warmly welcome Prime Minister Sharmarke’s
presence in the Chamber this morning.
The
recent
positive
developments
in
Somalia — political stabilization, the declaration of
Vision 2016 and genuine steps towards federalization
of the country — encourage cautious optimism about
its future. The Somali leadership has come together
and agreed to inclusive and transparent consultations
regarding the 2016 electoral process. The regional
consultations will provide crucial input to the meeting
of the National Consultative Forum in December,
where a decision will be taken on Somalia’s electoral
model. We understand that finding consensus will not
be easy, but it is what the Somali people need and the
international community expects.

15-3554321/26

S/PV.7551

The situation in Somalia

While some may call for an extension of the
current political dispensation, that is not the way to go.
Somalia deserves a political transition in 2016, through
an electoral process that gives the Federal Parliament,
President and Government enhanced legitimacy with a
new mandate. We welcome Somalia’s pledge to form
the final regional Interim Administration, consisting of
Hiraan and Shabelle Dhexe, before the end of the year.
This will, by and large, complete Somalia’s federal
map — an impressive achievement in itself. More
attention will be needed for a strengthened dialogue
and cooperation between the centre and the periphery.
Eradicating poverty and addressing the fragile
economy, the lack of alternative livelihoods and weak
governance structures must remain at the heart of the
Federal Government’s efforts, as all those factors are
a major source of instability. Efforts need to continue
to lay the foundations for an inclusive and sustainable
economic recovery and development, as well for support
for livestock, agriculture and the fisheries sector.
The active involvement of young people and
women in the ongoing processes is essential. Women’s
empowerment and their active involvement at all levels
is particularly important for sustaining the long-term
stability and development of the country.
With all the positive and promising developments
in Somalia, we cannot forget the serious and systematic
violations and abuses of human rights perpetrated
by Al-Shabaab and others against the civilian
population, including women, children, journalists,
parliamentarians, human rights defenders and
humanitarian workers. We are particularly alarmed
by the abuses against children. Other delegations have
spoken to this effect. Nearly 750 cases of grave violations
against children have been reported over a year’s
time. All parties to the conflict have a responsibility
to protect civilians. All allegations of mass atrocity
crimes must be investigated and perpetrators must be
held to account. The same applies to the allegations of
sexual violence, exploitation and abuse. We must stand
firm with regard to the imperative of a zero-tolerance
policy concerning sexual abuse and violence. Again all
allegations to that effect must be investigated and the
perpetrators held to account.
This year the Committee to Protect Journalists put
Somalia at the top of the list of countries most dangerous
to journalists. They are targeted by Al-Shabaab
militants who have for years threatened and assaulted
journalists for their courageous coverage of the group’s
22/26

09/11/2015

murderous activities. Most recently, on 1 November
several journalists were wounded and one killed in an
attack against a hotel in central Mogadishu. We must
remember those who dare to expose the terrorists, also
at the expense of their own lives. They too deserve
justice.
Concerted international assistance has played a
crucial role in the progress that Somalia has achieved
so far. We welcome the conclusions of the review of
the United Nations Support Office for the African
Union Mission in Somalia, which notes that this unique
Mission was overstretched and no longer entirely fit for
its purpose. We hope that the newly established United
Nations Support Office in Somalia, with its welldefined mandate and resources, will be able perform its
role as expected.
Continued adequate support for the African Union
Mission in Somalia, the Somali National Army and
UNSOM is required. It is important that the longdelayed and key force enablers, such as transport and
attack helicopters, be deployed, which would mark
a qualitative shift in the ongoing campaign against
Al-Shabaab and facilitate the permanent opening of the
main supply routes that are so critical to civilian traffic,
as well as humanitarian supplies.
We have 10 critical and sensitive months ahead of
us. We look forward to all Somali leaders and politicians
working together in good faith for the common good
of the Somali people and the Somali nation. Personal
interests should be put aside at this most critical
juncture, for the sake of continued progress towards
the fulfilment of Vision 2016. The continued and
well-coordinated assistance of Somalia’s international
partners is also required, under the leadership of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, to
provide Somalia with the political and financial support
that it needs.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank all participants in today’s meeting
who briefed the Council, in particular the Prime
Minister of the Federal Republic of Somalia, His
Excellency Mr. Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke.
We commend the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and share the
assessments of the Secretary-General with regard to the
activities of UNSOM contained in the strategic review
(S/2015/702). We note that the United Nations Support
Office for the African Union Mission in Somalia

15-35543

09/11/2015

The situation in Somalia

has to operate against the backdrop of an unfolding
humanitarian crisis and unabated terrorist attacks by
Al-Shabaab. At the same time, it is actively involved
in the political process and is addressing a growing
number of tasks.
We believe that the tense military and political
situation in Somalia calls for the armed fight against
Al-Shabaab to be intensified through capacitybuilding for the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the Somali national security forces,
which will require, first and foremost, a scaling up
of United Nations-provided material and technical
support. We are concerned about the increase in
Al-Shabaab’s activity, both inside and outside Somalia;
the coordination of actions between Somali extremists
and other terrorist organizations in Africa — Boko
Haram, Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and Ansar
Eddine; and increasing Al-Shabaab attacks against
neighbouring States, including Kenya, and hostilities
against Ethiopia and Djibouti. We believe it is necessary
to maintain military pressure on Somali extremists. We
urge the international community to continue to take
measures to strengthen the capacity of the Somali army
and AMISOM. We highly value the efforts of UNSOM
in supporting AMISOM to implement Security Council
decisions in this area.
The growing task-load and problems for
UNSOM — chiefly, its underfunding and
understaffing — must be addressed immediately.
We have no objections to proposals to increase
financing to the Mission, in due compliance with
standards of transparency and accountability for
specialized programmes, as well as the involvement
of other United Nations agencies in implementing
such projects. Through targeted contributions to the
relevant United Nations funds and programmes, the
Russian Federation regularly provides humanitarian
assistance to the Federal Government of Somalia and
for Somali refugees in neighbouring countries. From
2011 to 2014, our assistance exceeded $12 million. This
year, through the World Food Programme, Russia has
provided $1 million for Somalia and $2 million for the
approximately 1 million Somali refugees in Kenya.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I must first
thank the United Kingdom presidency for having
organized this briefing on the situation in Somalia. I
also thank Mr. Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke, Prime
Minster of Somalia; Ms. Susana Malcorra, Chef de
Cabinet of the Secretary-General; Mr. Nicholas Kay,

S/PV.7551

Special Representative of the Secretary-General; and
Ambassador Téte António, Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations, for their briefings.
Over the past few years, thanks to the huge
sacrifices and tireless joint efforts on the part of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the
Somali defence and security forces, significant success
has been achieved by military operations. Al-Shabaab
has been notably weakened and driven from its strategic
strongholds. Eighty per cent of Somalia’s territory has
been won back. The security situation has improved
and a fertile political environment is developing slowly
but surely. We take this opportunity to highly commend
the AMISOM contingents and the Somalian forces for
their invaluable efforts and successful achievements.
We also pay tribute to all the soldiers fallen for the
cause of peace.
We are also pleased to note that, on the political
level, the efforts of the Federal Government of Somalia
have made possible significant progress, in particular
in the implementation of Vision 2016. That has been
demonstrated by, among other things, the implementation
of three interim regional administrations, the National
Independent Electoral Commission and the Boundaries
and Federation Commission. In addition, on 19 October,
the President of Somalia launched the work of the
National Consultative Forum, which brings together
all the major stakeholders to arrive at a consensus on
a more inclusive and transparent electoral process that
takes into account the diversity of the Somali people.
We call on the entire international community to step
up its efforts to complement those under way by the
Federal Government of Somalia aimed at setting up the
last interim regional administration between now and
the end of this year, at speeding up the review of the
Provisional Federal Constitution and at putting in place
a new electoral process for 2016.
Despite all of the undeniable progress that has
been made, the security situation continues to be of
concern because of the serious threat that the terrorist
group Al-Shabaab poses. Through its indiscriminate
and lethal attacks, that group continues to undermine
the peace process, with the sole goal of rendering
the country ungovernable. For that reason, the joint
offensive military operations by AMISOM and the
Somali security forces must continue, while leaving
to door open to those willing to accept a negotiated
solution. Along those lines, there is an urgent need
to mobilize increased support to AMISOM and the

15-3554323/26

S/PV.7551

The situation in Somalia

Somali security and defence forces in order to fully
drive out Al-Shabaab from Somalia. In particular,
that must be done by providing AMISOM with force
multipliers, which have been long-awaited. That will
allow AMISOM to be more effective and better adapted
to countering terrorist mobility. It is equally important
to build the capacity of the Somali security forces so as
to gradually prepare them take over from AMISOM in
the stabilization of liberated areas.
Moreover, it is fitting to note that military operations
alone are not enough. They must be accompanied by a
political opening and social and economic development
efforts, as well as an improvement in the humanitarian
situation. In that regard, it is particularly important
that support from the international community be
far-reaching, multifaceted and based on the premise
of rebuilding the country by according priority to
social and economic recovery, as well as by promoting
education and youth employment. In that same spirit,
we call on the international community to scale up its
humanitarian assistance to people in need, especially
those in areas where the terrorists have influence.
We hope that resolution 2245 (2015), which we have
just adopted, will contribute to significantly reinforce,
through the support of the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia, the joint efforts of AMISOM and the
Somali security forces, which from this point forward
will allow them to benefit from more significant,
flexible and timely logistical support. Along the
same lines, while we welcome the future deployment
of military personnel in Somalia announced by the
Government of the United Kingdom, we hope that that
deployment will provide the African Union forces with
support adapted to the fields of logistics, engineering
and medical assistance.
In conclusion, we once again convey our pride and
satisfaction in seeing ANISOM and the Somali forces,
with the international community’s support, accomplish
with dignity and devotion such a difficult mission to aid
the Somali people to recover from a long and disastrous
war. The Mission sufficiently proves that Africans can
well live up to the security challenges that Africa is
now facing, provided that the international community
agrees to provide them the material financial and
logistical support necessary. The lessons learned from
that exemplary cooperation among the African Union,
the United Nations and the European Union should lead
to the development of such a model in the framework of
other operations.

24/26

09/11/2015

Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to begin by thanking Mr. Philip Hammond for having
convened this important meeting, which is geared to
shedding light on what is happening in the Federal
Republic of Somalia in all of its aspects. I would also
like to thank the Prime Minister of Somalia, Mr. Omar
Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke, for his presence at today’s
meeting. We are fully aware of the situation in Somalia,
and therefore would like to convey to him how much
we appreciate his work in that country. Jordan also
would like to express its gratitude to Mr. Nicholas Kay,
Ms. Susana Malcorra and Mr. Téte António for their
presence here.
Jordan also sponsored today’s resolution 2245
(2015), but that was not initially mentioned.
Jordan highly welcomes the considerable efforts
of Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, President of the
Federal Republic of Somalia, the Prime Minister and
parliamentarians to build a State and restore peace
over the past three years. Jordan is very pleased by
the achievements at the political level, which include
the establishment of regional Interim Administrations,
constitutional reform, the creation of the National
Independent Electoral Commission, and the convening
of the National Consultative Forum to explore the
various modalities and formats for the elections.
Jordan affirms the need for the Government of
Somalia to continue to implement the action plan
agreed in the context of Vision 2016 to provide for
overall reconciliation, promote social cohesion and
integration, and emphasize the need to involve all
aspects of society in the democratic process through
free, credible and transparent elections in 2016 in order
to meet the expectations of the Somali people and to
return lasting peace and security to the country. We
encourage all stakeholders and institutions in Somalia
to cooperate to implement Vision 2016.
We also stress the importance of consolidating
the United Nations presence in Somalia and assistance
to Somalis throughout the country with a view to
promoting reconciliation and the protection of human
rights. We call on the international community to
maintain its financial and political support to the
federal Government of Somalia so that it can fulfil its
functions at all levels, including the organization of
elections in 2016.
Jordan strongly condemns the terrorist attacks
perpetrated by the Al-Shabaab movement in Somalia

15-35543

09/11/2015

The situation in Somalia

and neighbouring countries, which have wounded and
killed many people, including innocent civilians, civil
servants and others working in the missions there. We
pay tribute to the important role of the African Union
and its Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in neutralizing
Al-Shabaab and liberating the regions still under its
control. Those military operations must be continued
in order to completely neutralize Al-Shabaab.
In that context, Jordan believes that the international
community should support the implementation of a
comprehensive regional strategy to eliminate terrorism
through an integrated approach that deprives terrorist
organizations of an enabling environment and cuts
off their sources of financing, while helping people to
meet their socioeconomic challenges so that there is no
longer fertile ground for the promotion of terrorism.
However, military operations are not enough to
restore stability and peace. It is important to promote
the rule of law and reform the security sector while
establishing the necessary administrative structures
and strengthening national reconciliation efforts so
that Somali institutions can assume responsibility for
providing security and replace AMISOM in that area.
Some 3 million people in Somalia still require
humanitarian assistance. Increased coordination
and support from United Nations agencies and the
international community in the sphere of humanitarian
assistance are therefore vital. We stress the need for
AMISOM and the Somali national armed forces to
continue to provide protection for roads and supply
lines and to provide for the free circulation and delivery
of humanitarian assistance to those who most need it.
Finally, we urge the international community to assist
the Somali economy by supporting economic recovery
and stability in Somalia.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the initiative of the United Kingdom in
convening today’s meeting. We wish to thank Secretary
of State Hammond for presiding over today’s meeting
and welcome the presence of Prime Minister Sharmake
of the Federal Republic of Somalia.
China listened carefully to the briefings by Prime
Minister Sharmarke of Somalia; Ms. Susanna Malcorra,
Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General; Mr. Nicholas
Kay, Special Representative of the Secretary-General;
and Ambassador Téte António, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations.

S/PV.7551

Somalia is entering a period of historic
opportunities for State-rebuilding. The Federal
Government of Somalia, with the support of the
international community, is fully implementing Vision
2016, actively promoting the federalization of the
country and striving to promote social reconciliation,
speed up development and improve people’s livelihood.
China welcomes such efforts. Meanwhile, the security
and humanitarian situation in Somalia remains fragile,
and peaceful rebuilding will be a long journey. The
international community should continue to support
Somalia and help the Somali people emerge from the
shadow of conflict as soon as possible so as to achieve
lasting peace and sustainable development. I wish to
emphasize the following three points.
First, in order to steadily advance the peace
process in Somalia, China calls upon the international
community to follow the principle of Somali leadership
and ownership, actively help the Federal Government
of Somalia to improve its governance capability, speed
up institution-building at the local level and promote
social reconciliation. We hope that all parties in
Somalia will proceed from their overarching interest in
the future of the nation and its people, and that they will
settle their differences appropriately through dialogue
and consultations so as to jointly maintain the country’s
peace and stability.
Secondly, with a view to fully consolidating
security and stability in Somalia, the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali National
Army have worked closely together since the beginning
of the year and achieved good results in combating
terrorism. China highly appreciates the contribution of
the African Union and the countries of the region to
the maintenance of security and stability in Somalia,
and welcomes today’s adoption of resolution 2245
(2015), establishing the United Nations Support Office
in Somalia. We hope that the resolution will be fully
implemented so as to provide sustained and stable
logistical support to AMISOM and the Somali National
Army.
Thirdly, with respect to speeding up economic
and social development in Somalia, only through
development can the root causes of conflict be
removed and people’s fundamental interests and rights
safeguarded. Somalia is rich in natural resources, with
great potential for development. The international
community should strengthen its input into the
infrastructure and agricultural sectors of Somalia

15-3554325/26

S/PV.7551

The situation in Somalia

in order to enhance its capacities for sustainable
development. In so doing, the international community
should remain in close consultation with the Federal
Government of Somalia and respect its opinions.
China has been a firm supporter of the peace
process in Somalia. China has long supported Somalia
and AMISOM within its abilities. Within the framework
of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, China has
trained a large number of personnel to rebuild the State
in Somalia. Despite the terrorist attack on the Chinese
Embassy in Somalia last July, which caused huge
losses in human life and property, China’s presence
and ongoing activities in Somalia have remained
steadfast, fully demonstrating the unswerving support
of the Chinese Government for the peace process and
State-rebuilding in Somalia. China is prepared to work
with the international community to play a constructive
role in the speedy revitalization of Somalia.
China and Africa, as part of a community of common
destiny and interests, have been through thick and thin
together. In December, the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation will hold a summit in Johannesburg, South
Africa, that will be the second summit of the Forum and
the first to be held on the African continent. Since the

26/26

09/11/2015

inception of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, 15
years ago, through the efforts of both sides, pragmatic
cooperation between China and Africa has grown by
leaps and bounds and brought tangible benefits to the
peoples of Africa and China. The theme of the Forum’s
upcoming summit is “China and Africa Joining Hands
for Win-Win Cooperation and Common Development”.
China is ready to take that opportunity to work with all
the countries of Africa, including Somalia, to enhance
mutually beneficial cooperation in such key areas as
industrialization, modernization of agriculture, health
care, personnel and cultural exchanges, peace and
security. We are ready to join hands with Africa to
make the summit a historic gathering for enhancing
solidarity and cooperation between China and Africa.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. In conclusion, I again thank
the Prime Minister of Somalia for his presence and
his statement. I also thank the briefers. I welcome the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2245 (2015) and
commend Mr. Nicholas Kay for his outstanding service
to the United Nations.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

15-35543
