United Nations

S/PV.6678

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6678th meeting
Wednesday, 7 December 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Čolaković
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Wang Min
Mrs. Duarte
Mr. Briens
Mrs. Onanga
Mr. Eick
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mr. Onowu
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Nel
Mr. McKell
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Letter dated 15 November 2011 from the President of the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991 addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2011/716)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-62592 (E)

*1162592*

S/PV.6678

Letter dated 16 November 2011 from the President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994, addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2011/731)

2

11-62592

S/PV.6678

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January 1994 and
31 December 1994
Letter dated 15 November 2011 from the
President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991 addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2011/716)
Letter dated 16 November 2011 from the
President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide
and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994,
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2011/731)
The President (spoke in Russian): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Croatia, Rwanda and Serbia to
participate in this meeting.
The President (spoke in Russian): Under rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Judge Theodor Meron, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia; Judge
Khalida Rachid Khan, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda; Mr. Serge Brammertz,

11-62592

Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia; and Mr. Hassan Bubacar
Jallow, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda.
On behalf of the Security Council, I welcome the
presence at this meeting of His Excellency Mr. Andries
Nel, Deputy Minister of Justice and Constitutional
Development of South Africa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to documents S/2011/473 and S/2011/716, which
contain, respectively, the report of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, and a
letter dated 15 November 2011 from the President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia addressed to the President of the Security
Council.
I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to documents S/2011/472 and S/2011/731,
which contain, respectively, the report of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and a letter
dated 16 November 2011 from the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Judge Theodor Meron.
Judge Meron: It is a great honour for me to
appear before the Security Council today as President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and to do so under the presidency
of the Russian Federation. I congratulate Ambassador
Churkin for his able management of the Security
Council.
As the Council may be aware, I assumed the
presidency of the Tribunal on 17 November. The report
(see S/2011/716) that was submitted to the Council
earlier this month details the work of the Tribunal
under the leadership of my predecessor Judge Patrick
Robinson. I would like to pay tribute to his outstanding
achievements, which have significantly strengthened
the ICTY. In particular, I would underscore his
initiative to establish a victims’ trust fund — a plan
that has my full support. In that regard, I am pleased to
note that the International Organization for Migration
has secured funding to carry out a comprehensive
assessment study.

3

S/PV.6678

Before I turn to the current state of the Tribunal, I
believe it is fitting to underscore the significant
successes that we have achieved. The recent arrests of
indictees Goran Hadžić and Ratko Mladić mean that
there are no outstanding fugitives. All living persons
indicted by the Tribunal have been, or will be, tried in
a court of law, either at the Tribunal or in courts of
national jurisdictions.

I am acutely aware of the requirement of
resolution 1966 (2010) that the Tribunals do all in their
power to ensure the completion of all cases by
December 2014. I would note that this resolution was
adopted prior to the arrests of Mladić and Hadžić. All
efforts will be made to complete their trials prior to
December 2014, but appeals emanating from them will
fall under the aegis of the Residual Mechanism.

With respect to legal doctrine, the greatest
achievement of the Tribunal and of its sister court, the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
has been their contribution to developing substantive,
procedural and evidentiary international criminal law.
That corpus of jurisprudence outweighs by far that of
Nuremberg.

It is also my duty as President to draw the
Council’s attention to the charts attached to President
Robinson’s last completion report, which indicate that
the Tribunal may not be able to conclude appeals
emanating from the Tolimir, Šešelj, and Prlić cases by
December 2014. Further, according to the charts
recently presented by the ICTR, the appeal, if any, of
Ngirabatware may go to the Residual Mechanism
because the notice of appeal would miss the July 2012
deadline. In addition, I am advised that the completion
report’s estimate for the translation of the Prlić case
must be corrected. It is actually 21 months, reflecting
an anticipated 4,000 or more judgement-sized pages.
That said, the Tribunal will do its utmost to ensure that
its proceedings are completed as expeditiously as
possible, while ensuring that the fair trial rights of the
accused are fully respected.

I would also underscore that the Tribunal has
made tremendous strides in assisting national
judiciaries of the region of the former Yugoslavia
through the War Crimes Justice Project and its outreach
offices, as well as through its assistance in creating the
War Crimes Chamber of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Partly due to the example and assistance of the
Tribunal, national judiciaries in the former Yugoslavia
are successfully prosecuting war-crimes cases. In that
respect, I am pleased to note that the statute of the
Residual Mechanism provides for assistance to be
given to national judiciaries in response to their
requests.
Let me now turn to the current state of affairs at
the Tribunal. I note that the report of President
Robinson gives details with respect to all cases
currently pending before the Tribunal. My comments in
that regard can therefore be brief.
The Tribunal continues to work as rapidly as
possible, given the constraints imposed by limited
resources and the need to ensure the highest standards
of procedural fairness. Proceedings are ongoing against
35 persons — 18 at the trial level in seven cases and 17
at the appellate level in six cases. It is anticipated that
judgements in six trials will be issued in 2012, with the
Karadzić judgement issued during 2014. It is still
impossible to predict when judgements will be issued
in the cases of Mladić and Hadžić, who were recently
arrested. One appeal judgement is expected to be
delivered in 2012, with a further five delivered in
2013, including the two multi-accused cases of
Šainović et al. and Popović et al.

4

In line with that commitment, among my first
acts as President was to review the Tribunal’s activities
to identify possibilities to reduce the time needed to
complete appeals. On the basis of that review, I
identified the translation of judgements as a potential
area for exceptional measures. It is estimated that one
ICTR trial judgement will take 18 months to translate.
At the ICTY, the eventual judgement in one ongoing
ICTY trial case is currently projected to take 21
months, while those in two others are each projected at
nine months. Despite our resort to embedded
translators in judgement drafting teams, the translation
time represents a considerable impediment to a timely
appellate process, with the risk of running beyond the
target dates set by the Security Council.
Therefore, as President of the ICTY and the ICTR
Appeals Chambers, I have instructed the Registrars of
both the ICTR and the ICTY — Mr. Adama Dieng and
Mr. John Hocking, respectively — to take immediate
and exceptional measures to bolster the number of staff
assigned to judgement translation and to make every
effort possible to expedite translations, even if it means
reverting to outside contractors. As I see it, after the
various reforms already carried out in the Tribunals,

11-62592

S/PV.6678

judicial work must run its course, or else the principle
of judicial independence and fairness would be
compromised. But I can certainly address the logistical
question of translations, with the object of drastically
reducing the time allocated to them through
exceptional measures. My goal is to halve the
translation time in the cases of Butare, with its seven
appellants, Prlić, with its six potential appellants,
Šešelj and Tolimir. I am pleased to report that both
Registrars have committed in writing to that goal. I am
also requesting the Registrars to ensure that those
extraordinary measures do not significantly slow down
translations of other judgements. Even with those
efforts, however, I must underscore that the four
appeals I have referred to may still not be completed
by the target date of 31 December 2014.
A second measure that I am considering is
directed towards minimizing the disruption caused to
our substantive caseload by contempt proceedings.
There are currently 10 outstanding contempt cases. The
burden of those cases is, for the most part, borne by the
Tribunal’s eight permanent trial judges. Some of those
judges are currently sitting on seven or eight contempt
cases in addition to their substantive cases. This
situation represents a real obstacle to the efficient
completion of the Tribunal’s substantive cases. Under
these circumstances, it is my intention, unless I hear
objections from the Security Council requiring
additional steps, to depart from the previous practice of
the Tribunal, which precluded assignment of the nine
ad litem judges to contempt cases not arising from their
trials, and assign them to any contempt cases which a
fair and efficient distribution of the workload warrants.
Of course, these assignments — and let me emphasize
this — would not trigger an extension of service
beyond the cases to which an ad litem judge has
already been formally assigned.
Another serious matter that may severely impact
the efficiency of our proceedings is the issue of staff
retention. That problem was repeatedly raised by
President Robinson, most recently and fully in his
report to the Council of 15 November, and was referred
to in the last three Security Council resolutions —
1931 (2010), 1954 (2010) and 1993 (2011) —
concerning the Tribunal, in which the Council
requested that the Secretariat assist the Tribunal in
addressing this challenge. However, no progress was
made in the meetings held in November with the
Secretariat by President Robinson and separately by

11-62592

Registrar Hocking with respect to our modest
proposals for a retention bonus in the form of a small
termination indemnity of the type that is paid under
staff rules to staff whose contracts are terminated or
abrogated prior to the expiry of their term. While a
termination indemnity may assist the Tribunal in
retaining such critical, long-serving staff, it will not
prevent staff departures, particularly with regard to the
junior professionals in Chambers, a category critical
for judicial work, where we have already suffered
serious attrition.
In the Tribunal’s view, many problems would be
remedied if it were allowed to hire its most talented
interns directly to open posts. In cases where an intern
has participated in a trial for some time, allowing him
or her to replace a departing staff member can ensure
that retraining, which might cause months of delay, is
rendered unnecessary. However, General Assembly
resolution 51/226 is currently interpreted as preventing
such interns from being employed by the Tribunal for a
period of six months following the completion of their
internships. Without an interpretation or authorization
for the Registry, the Tribunal will be prevented from
implementing this solution.
I would urge the Council to request the
Secretariat to revisit this matter and come up with a
pragmatic and flexible solution. Given the limited life
of the Tribunal, the fact that it is not fully integrated
into the Secretariat, and the interest of the Organization
in the completion strategy, I believe that the case for a
narrowly focused green light is compelling. I would
therefore be grateful for the Council’s explicit support
for this proposal and for its assistance in obtaining the
necessary assent for this cost-free measure, which
would, in any event, apply only to a very small number
of interns.
Finally, I would note that President Robinson has
already drawn the Council’s attention to the difficulty
of finding additional places appropriate for convicted
persons to serve their sentences. I would find it most
helpful if the Council could reiterate the request it
made in resolution 1993 (2011), asking States to
cooperate with requests by the Tribunal relating to the
enforcement of sentences.
Having reviewed the Tribunal’s past successes
and described our current work and challenges, I will
turn briefly to the future. The establishment of the
Residual Mechanism, with judges whose remuneration

5

S/PV.6678

will be per day of work only and who will be allowed
to hold outside occupations, will inevitably present
many challenges for the Tribunal. We are moving into
uncharted territory. I personally am committed to
making the transition to the Residual Mechanism and
its functioning as smooth as possible.
Before I conclude, I would like to express how
honoured I am to serve for a second time as President
of the ICTY. I am privileged to follow in the footsteps
of my two predecessors, Judges Patrick Robinson and
Fausto Pocar. Their outstanding efforts have greatly
strengthened the Tribunal.
Born of the darkness emanating from
Yugoslavia’s break-up, the Tribunal faced particularly
difficult challenges in its early years. While the
Tribunal will soon cease to exist, it will leave a world
transformed, and its legacy will be an indelible
testament
to
the
international
community’s
commitment to justice: the noblest of human ideals.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Judge
Meron for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Judge Khan.
Judge Khan: I would like to begin by
congratulating Judge Meron on his election as
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) for the second time. I also
congratulate the representative of the Russian
Federation, who is presiding over the Security Council
during the month of December, as well as the
representatives of Azerbaijan, Guatemala, Morocco,
Pakistan and Togo for their nations’ election to the
Security Council beginning in January 2012. I wish
them all the best for a successful tour of duty.
I would also like to thank the representatives of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon, Lebanon and
Nigeria for their nations’ service to the Security
Council as they near the completion of their term, and
to express the appreciation of the entire Tribunal to all
of the Governments of the countries that are members
of the Security Council for their continued support as
we draw ever closer to the completion of our work.
In particular, the Tribunal very much appreciates
the swift action taken by the Council in resolution 1995
(2011), making ad litem judges eligible for election as,
and able to vote in the election of, the President and
Vice-President.

6

In this, my second address to the members of the
Security Council, I am happy to report to the Council
on the very positive progress we have made since my
previous address (see S/PV.6545).
All of the judgements projected for completion
during the past six months were delivered, and the final
multi-accused trial judgement will be delivered in two
weeks. Moreover, trial work is expected to be finished
by June 2012, and appeals work is on track to be
completed by the end of 2014.
In June, the Tribunal rendered a historic
judgement in the Butare case involving six accused —
the largest in our history — and on 30 September the
Tribunal delivered the judgement in the case of
Bizimungu et al. with respect to four accused.
Judgement was also rendered last month in the singleaccused Ndahimana case, and on 21 December
judgement will be delivered in accordance with
projections made to this Council since December 2010
in the final multi-accused, Karemera et al.
Currently, only one case remains in the evidence
phase, and it is expected to finish by early 2012. After
December, judgement will remain to be rendered in
only three single-accused cases, all of which are
projected to be delivered in the first half of 2012. If
arrests are made in the three pending contempt cases in
the near future, we anticipate that trials will begin in
early 2012.
Next, I turn an important request that I recently
sent to the Security Council and the General Assembly,
seeking extension of the terms of office for a number
of judges, to correspond to the work remaining. All the
judges’ terms are scheduled to end by June 2012, or
earlier if they complete their assignments before then.
The extensions are required to finish all judicial
activities in accordance with the completion strategy. I
also wish to add my support to Judge Meron’s
streamlining of the assignment of the ad litem judges to
contempt cases. That will have a positive impact on the
ability of the Tribunals to meet the completion strategy
targets.
In June, for the first time the Tribunal referred a
case to the courts of Rwanda for trial. The accused,
Jean Bosco Uwinkindi, appealed the decision to refer
his case. We expect this appeal to be decided shortly. If
the Trial Chamber’s referral is upheld on appeal, the
case will be transferred to Rwanda, and the Prosecutor
will bring a further four referral applications. They will

11-62592

S/PV.6678

all be dealt with in the first half of 2012. However,
should Uwinkindi’s appeal be granted, his trial will not
be referred to Rwanda. In that case, the Uwinkindi trial
will take place at the Tribunal and is expected to finish
by the end of 2012. The same may be true with respect
to Bernard Munyagishari, who was arrested in May of
this year.
There are still nine fugitives wanted for trial by
the Tribunal. In order to help ensure that evidence is
still available with respect to three of the most highranking fugitives — Félicien Kabuga, Protais Mpiranya
and Augustin Bizimana — preservation of evidence
proceedings under rule 71 bis have been taking place.
The Prosecutor has concluded his preservation of
evidence in all three cases. Under the Rules of
Procedure and Evidence, the defence duty counsel for a
fugitive accused is entitled to apply to preserve
evidence as well. In Kabuga, the defence duty
counsel’s request to investigate was granted, and
investigations are currently underway. In the other two
cases, we have not received such a request.
I urge all Member States, especially those in the
Great Lakes region, to redouble their cooperation
efforts with the Prosecutor so that none of the fugitives
escape justice.
As I stressed to the General Assembly in
November (see A/66/PV.58), our greatest challenge for
the coming months remains the retention of
experienced staff. Nearly one third of Chambers legal
staff have left for more stable employment just in the
past few months. The departure of such experienced
staff causes a loss of institutional memory, which
greatly hinders our ability to work within projected
timeframes. Moreover, staff who remain at the Tribunal
are faced with a severely increased workload, which
only serves to further lower morale and increase
departures.
We appreciate that this Council continues to
highlight in its resolutions the importance of
maintaining adequate staff levels in the Tribunals.
Continued efforts to improve flexibility in contractual
terms are essential to ensure that we have adequate
staff to meet our completion strategy goals. In this
same context, I echo the concerns raised by President
Meron regarding a problem faced by both Tribunals:
the alarming rate of attrition of junior legal staff in
Chambers. I strongly support his proposal to allow the
most qualified interns to be hired as Tribunal staff

11-62592

without a six-month break, as that will greatly assist
with maintaining adequate staffing levels for the
Tribunals in our final months.
Another increasingly difficult problem that I
would like to revisit is the relocation of acquitted
persons. In national jurisdictions, a person acquitted of
criminal allegations is set free and allowed to fully
reintegrate into society. Because no formal mechanism
exists for securing assistance from Member States to
relocate them, persons acquitted by the Tribunal are
forced to remain in safe houses in Arusha.
With two recent acquittals, the number of
acquitted persons remaining under the protection of the
Tribunal has increased to five, one of whom has been
in Arusha for more than five years since his acquittal
was confirmed by the Appeals Chamber. The Registrar
has been working with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to find solutions to this
problem. We hope that Member States will support
their forthcoming joint proposal in this regard.
Next, I would like to discuss an important
programme that needs the support of Governments
represented here. In 2004, the Tribunal, committed to
helping Rwanda on its road to recovery, set up the
UNICTR Clinic for Victims and Witnesses of the
Rwandan Genocide. The Clinic has not only provided
vital medical treatment for patients suffering from
HIV/AIDS and diseases such as tuberculosis, sexually
transmitted diseases and malaria, but it also provides
one of the few available sources of comfort for its
patients.
For these victims, the genocide may not have
taken their lives, but it took away their dignity, their
trust, and their security. With the help of the Clinic’s
highly trained staff and with counselling sessions, the
patients are able to slowly gain this back. The Clinic’s
success can be seen in its statistics. In its first year, the
Clinic provided treatment to about 200 patients. By
2011, that number has increased to about 1,000. The
Clinic, which runs on voluntary donations, is facing
closure due to the depletion of funds. I hope that the
Governments
represented
here
will
consider
contributing to the trust fund upon which the Clinic
depends.
I will now provide an update on the preparations
for the Arusha Branch of the Residual Mechanism for
the International Tribunals.

7

S/PV.6678

The Arusha Branch is slated to begin its work in
July 2012. In addition to the already heavy workloads,
staff from both the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) are working tirelessly,
under the coordination of the Office of Legal Affairs,
to prepare for the transition. Among the work already
completed is the provision of substantive inputs to the
Mechanism’s first budget proposal. Both Tribunals
have also provided, and will continue to provide,
comments on the draft Mechanism Rules of Procedure
and Evidence.
The Arusha Branch of the Residual Mechanism
will also be the home of the ICTR archives. Those
archives will hold the nearly 900,000 pages of
transcripts and audio and video recordings of more
than 6,000 trial days, as well as more than 10,000
interlocutory decisions and the judgements of all
persons accused at the trials.
As
one
of
our
longest-lasting, most permanent legacy projects, the
archives will help to ensure that the international
community remains conscious of the battle against
impunity that the ICTR has fought for so many years.
In the coming months we also intend to focus on
continuing the Tribunal’s legacy work in the region. It
is with that in mind that we are planning a regional
international criminal law workshop for lawyers,
scholars and judges in East Africa in early 2012.
The Tribunal has taken great steps forward in the
past six months, and our work is almost complete.
Looking back upon the many years of hard work by the
entire Tribunal, there is much to be proud of.
The creation of ad hoc tribunals was a groundbreaking move by the international community,
premised on the noble goals of accountability, justice
and ending impunity. Building upon the framework of
their predecessors, the Tribunals have served as a
bridge to more recent internationally supported
tribunals and courts. Together, we have developed
international criminal law from its embryonic stage.
The tribunals are thus compelling proof of our shared
evolution towards a more effective system of
international justice, one in which perpetrators of
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity are
held accountable.
As a part of our mandate to contribute to lasting
peace and reconciliation in the region, the Tribunal has
given a voice to thousands of victims. The Tribunal has

8

heard over 26,000 hours of testimony from more than
3,200 witnesses. Their testimony describing the
horrific events of a genocide will remain forever
engrained in the memories of all who have been a part
of that important process. In is in their honour that
during our final months we work with renewed vigour,
rededicating ourselves to preserving the memory of the
victims of the Rwandan genocide and leaving for
posterity the lessons we learned and the experience we
gained at the ICTR.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Judge
Khan for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Brammertz.
Mr. Brammertz: I thank the Council for this
opportunity to speak on our progress towards the
completion of our mandate.
The major development over the last reporting
period has been the arrest of the Tribunal’s last
fugitive, Goran Hadžić, and, as President Meron
already mentioned today, of the 161 persons indicted
by the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), none remain at large.
The significance of that development is multilayered and goes well beyond simple statistics. The
arrests mean that no individual has ultimately escaped
the ICTY’s reach and that the final impediment to
completing our mandate has been removed. The arrests
also mean that an important and problematic chapter in
Serbia’s cooperation with the ICTY has been closed,
even if it took too long and redress for the victims was
much too delayed.
We hope that the arrests also mean brighter
prospects for international justice. Over the past two
decades, international justice has spread to more and
more parts of the globe, but difficulties in arresting key
suspects are all too common.
It is worth reflecting on the ICTY’s success and
applying the lessons we have learned to other courts
and tribunals. If the ICTY has no more fugitives, it is
because the international community understood that
sometimes justice is a long-term project. It is because
the international community maintained pressure and
provided positive incentives for Serbia to choose
accountability over impunity and the rule of law over
misplaced loyalty to war criminals.

11-62592

S/PV.6678

With Radko Mladić and Goran Hadžić in custody,
we are now fully occupied with finishing our trials and
appeals. The completion strategy is fast becoming a
reality. The evidence presentation in the majority of
our trials will likely conclude in the next reporting
period. Our focus will then be on the remaining
trials — Karadžić, Mladić and Hadžić — as well as on
managing our appellate case load as it rapidly expands
throughout the course of next year. The departure of
key staff in the midst of our cases is an ongoing
problem requiring careful consideration and smart
solutions.
As long as we have ongoing cases, the
cooperation of States, particularly in the former
Yugoslavia, will remain essential. When it comes to
Serbia, the arrest of the final two fugitives put our
cooperative relationship on a new, more positive
footing. In my written report, I have acknowledged the
good work done by the authorities in Belgrade under
the leadership of the President, particularly the
National Security Council, the action team established
to track the fugitives, and the Security Service
operatives who carried out the arrest operations. We
are also grateful to Serbia’s National Council for
Cooperation with the Tribunal, which coordinates
responses to our requests for assistance. Thanks to the
Council’s work, we receive the information we need
for our cases promptly, allowing us to meet our tight
court deadlines.
In the next reporting period, we want to see
results from Serbia’s investigation into how ICTY
fugitives, including Mladić and Hadžić, managed to
evade justice for so many years. Following the final
two arrests, Serbia undertook to hold accountable any
individuals who assisted the fugitives. During my visit
to Belgrade in November, I saw very little followthrough on this issue, and we expect more to be done
by Serbia.
I turn now to cooperation between my Office and
Croatia. With no ongoing trials involving Croatian
accused persons, my Office is making far fewer
requests for assistance to the Croatian authorities. The
limited requests we have made were adequately dealt
with by the department for cooperation with
international courts.
During my last statement to the Security Council
(see S/PV.6545), I mentioned our concern about
statements from high-level Croatian authorities

11-62592

questioning the validity of the ICTY’s work. Our
concerns have been reinforced in the present reporting
period. State officials at the highest level in Croatia
continue to glorify illegal wartime conduct and
question the impartiality of the ICTY’s judgements.
Legislation recently passed to annul war crimes
indictments issued by Serbia against Croatian citizens
reinforces our concerns.
In relation to Bosnia and Herzegovina, I can
report that the day-to-day cooperation with my Office
is proceeding well. However, we see troubling signs
that the national war crimes strategy is struggling and
urgent action is required to turn the situation around.
The case of Radovan Stanković is symptomatic of the
broader problems. Stanković, a so-called Rule 11 bis
transferee from the ICTY, was convicted by the State
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina and sentenced to 20
years of imprisonment. He escaped from prison in Foča
more than four years ago, yet very little has been done
to return him to custody. We struggle to understand
why the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina appear
unconcerned about a fugitive who has committed
crimes against its own citizens and who has scorned
their judicial process. Neighbouring countries also
have a role to play in resolving the Stanković situation.
Here, too, little action is visible, despite our repeated
requests that more be done.
More generally, during my trip to Sarajevo a
month ago, I noted limited political will and
insufficient resources to complete the remaining war
crimes prosecutions. There is a large backlog of cases,
including investigation files transferred by the ICTY,
and cases are not efficiently moved between State and
entity-level prosecutors. We also remain deeply
concerned by frequent political attacks on the judiciary
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which undermine the
national war crimes strategy. We ask the international
community to help Bosnia and Herzegovina steer a
more successful course towards accountability for
wartime atrocities.
As the completion strategy builds momentum, so
too do our preparations for the Residual Mechanism. In
this reporting period, we continued to work together
with our colleagues in the ICTY Registry and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda Office of
the Prosecutor to facilitate a smooth transition. We
have heard and understood the Council’s message that
the Mechanism must be a small and efficient operation.
Our first budget proposal for our counterpart office

9

S/PV.6678

within the Residual Mechanism was drafted with that
message firmly in mind. We have kept costs to a
minimum by ensuring that the majority of posts are
double-hatted with the ICTY for the first phase of the
Residual Mechanism’s operations.
Sixteen years after the Dayton Peace Accord, we
have delivered the long-awaited news that all ICTY
indictees have been, or soon will be, held accountable.
That positive development renews our energy for the
work ahead, but at the same time we see another
significant challenge looming. National war crimes
strategies in the region, particularly in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, are floundering. If they are left to fail,
the ICTY’s legacy, along with reconciliation and the
rule of law, will be endangered.
It would be easy to dwell on those problems.
Instead, I want to end by emphasizing the opportunity
that now presents itself for leaders in States of the
former Yugoslavia. If they have the courage and
commitment, those leaders could choose a future built
on accountability and the rule of law, instead of
nationalism and strife. But to succeed they will have to
put aside narrow-minded and short-term political
agendas. The international community, too, has a
critical role to play. We ask the Security Council to
show the same commitment and vision in helping
States in the region cement their commitment to
justice, as it has shown over the past two decades in
building the ICTY’s success.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Brammertz for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Hassan Bubacar
Jallow, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda.
Mr. Jallow: First of all, I would like to place on
record my deep appreciation for the decision of the
Security Council to renew my mandate as the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for a further term. I am indeed greatly
indebted to the Council and to His Excellency the
Secretary-General for their continued support to me
and to the ICTR in the discharge of our
responsibilities. I look forward, with their support, to a
timely and proper completion of the ICTR mandate
during this term.
Some 17 years following its establishment —
after 93 indictees, 83 arrests, the conclusion of the

10

trials of 70 accused persons, with 60 convictions and
10 acquittals, the discontinuation of the trial of five
accused persons and the referral of two accused to
France for trial, and with nine fugitives at large — the
ICTR is today on the verge of concluding an important
phase of its mandate, that is, the completion of all trials
at first instance.
In the past six months, we have concluded trial
proceedings in respect of four accused persons. The
only ongoing trial is Augustin Ngirabatware. As of
now, trial judgements have been rendered in all the
multi-accused cases except Karemera et al., which is
scheduled for December. While proceedings for the
preservation of evidence in terms of Rule 71 bis
against the three top fugitives — Kabuga, Mpiranya
and Bizimana — are still ongoing, I am pleased to
report that much progress has been achieved, as the
prosecution phase of such proceedings has been
concluded in all three cases.
Currently, there are only two detainees at the
ICTR, namely, Uwinkindi and Munyagishari, whose
cases are pending trial. In a landmark decision
delivered in June, the ICTR Referral Chamber granted
the request of the Prosecutor for the Uwinkindi case to
be referred to Rwanda for trial under Rule 11 bis of the
ICTR rules. The Chamber did so on the conviction that
having regard to the legal framework in that
jurisdiction, the capacity-building efforts to improve
the legal system of Rwanda and the arrangements made
for the monitoring of the trial in Rwanda, the accused
would have a fair trial in Rwanda. That is the first case
of an indictee being referred by the ICTR for trial in
Rwanda, or indeed in any African jurisdiction.
The case is now pending in the Appeals Chamber
of the ICTR. The decision of the Appeals Chamber will
either way impact on the ICTR Completion Strategy. If
the referral is confirmed, I expect that it will pave the
way for the transfer of the only other remaining
detainee for trial. We shall also proceed with the
hearing and determination of requests already filed for
referral in respect of two other cases. In addition, I
shall file additional applications for the referral of four
of the remaining fugitives, leaving only the cases of the
three top fugitives.
Litigation over the referral of cases will therefore
be a significant aspect of our workload in the months
ahead. A confirmation by the Appeals Chamber of the

11-62592

S/PV.6678

referral may therefore result no new trials being
commenced at the ICTR.
My office will also be focusing on the
prosecution and management of appeals, the tracking
of fugitives, the servicing of foreign requests for
assistance and preparing for a smooth and effective
transition to the Residual Mechanism. Following the
delivery of judgements in two multi-accused trials and
one single-accused trial, involving 15 accused, and
with further judgements anticipated in Karemera and
another case, and in three single-accused trials,
involving five more accused — for a total of 20 — my
Office expects a significant increase in the workload of
our Appeals and Legal Advisory Division during 2012
and part of 2013. The Division is already fully
occupied prosecuting and responding to numerous
appeals in a number of other cases, involving 18
accused persons and 24 separate appeals.
The tracking and arrest of the remaining nine
fugitives remains a major challenge for a timely and
proper completion by the ICTR, and therefore remains
one of the priorities of the Office of the Prosecutor.
The tracking and arrest of the remaining nine fugitives
remains one of the priorities of the Office of the
Prosecutor. We plan to intensify activities in that
regard, in an effort to reduce the workload for the
Residual Mechanism by transferring a smaller number
of fugitives to it when its Arusha branch commences its
work, on 1 July 2012. I have therefore continued
diplomatic engagement with relevant States, with a
view to securing their cooperation in the tracking and
arrest of the remaining fugitives. Those initiatives
complement the continuous efforts of the Tracking Unit
in my Office. I am hopeful that with greater
cooperation, in particular from member States of the
Great Lakes Conference, the many fugitives located in
the territories of the Conference will be arrested and
brought to account, thereby serving the interests of
both global justice and regional peace and stability.
The joint ICTR-Kenya Police Task Force has
been reactivated and operating since November 2010 to
secure the arrest and transfer of Félicien Kabuga to the
ICTR for trial. Kenya must cooperate fully with the
ICTR to bring the matter to a satisfactory conclusion. I
wish to record our appreciation of the involvement of
other Member States that have contributed to the work
of the Task Force.

11-62592

Difficulties continue with regard to the
apprehension of Protais Mpiranya, another top-level
fugitive earmarked for trial by the Residual
Mechanism. Reliable information received by the
ICTR indicates Mpiranya’s presence in Zimbabwe. The
Security Council should request that both Kenya and
Zimbabwe fully discharge their legal obligations in that
respect and cooperate with the ICTR.
In order to further effectively prepare for the
transition to the Residual Mechanism and to reduce its
workload, my Office is currently updating the case
files in respect of six fugitives to ensure their readiness
for trial before the Residual Mechanism or for transfer
to a national jurisdiction, as the case may be. That
exercise is expected to conclude by the end of the first
quarter of 2012.
The steady increase in the number and origin of
foreign requests to my Office in support of national
investigations and prosecutions is a strong indication
of the growing partnership between national systems
and international courts in combating impunity through
legal accountability. In 2010, my Office received and
attended to 143 such requests from 12 countries. In the
period from January to November, we processed 106
such requests from 26 Member States. The continued
growth in the number of such requests, as well as the
number of Member States utilizing the service, are
expected to take up significant time and resources of
the Residual Mechanism. In that respect, we are
committed to ensuring that the Mechanism will be able
to effectively continue providing that important service
to Member States.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Jallow for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council.
Mr. Nel (South Africa): Allow me to thank
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) Judge Theodor Meron and
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda Judge Khalida Rachid Khan for their
briefings. We also express our gratitude to the
Prosecutor of the ICTY, Mr. Serge Brammertz, and the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), Mr. Hassan Jallow, for their
interventions.

11

S/PV.6678

We note the progress made by the two Tribunals
to complete the cases before them. We are encouraged
by the efforts that the Tribunals have made to ensure
the completion of their work in time for the start of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. In the course of the month, the General
Assembly will elect the 35 members of the Residual
Mechanism. That should remind us of the urgency of
bringing the remaining cases to a close as soon as
possible.
We strongly support the need to provide sufficient
resources to the Tribunals to assist them in completing
their work. We recognize the difficulty in retaining
staff as the Tribunals begin to wind down their work
and staff search for stable employment elsewhere. We
therefore remain committed to exploring innovative
ways to retain competent staff members, including
through incentives, as appropriate.
One important way to assist the Tribunals in
completing their work is through the referral of cases
to relevant and appropriate domestic jurisdictions. We
have noted the applications to refer cases to Rwanda
and the decision of the ICTY to refer a number of cases
involving low- and middle-level accused to national
courts in the regions.
Our delegation remains concerned about the
unwillingness of Member States to enter into
agreements with the ICTR for the transfer of
individuals who either have served their sentences or
have been found not guilty. We urge Member States,
particularly in the immediate region and where family
members of the individuals are located, to consider
reaching such agreements with the Tribunals. We
welcome the report that, in July, one convicted person
was transferred from Arusha to a Member State. We
also express our appreciation to the Government of
Tanzania for its willingness to provide facilities in the
interim, in particular safe houses.
South Africa stresses the importance of
cooperation with the Tribunals, in accordance with the
respective statutes, in particular article 28 of the ICTR
statute and article 29 of the ICTY statute, and the
relevant Security Council resolutions. We especially
stress the obligation to cooperate with the Tribunals in
effecting the arrests of those wanted. This year, we
have seen substantial progress in that regard with the
arrest of the key indictees Bernard Munyagishari,
Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić. We urge Member

12

States to step up efforts to locate, capture and,
ultimately, surrender the remaining nine fugitives to
the ICTR.
Finally, we wish to register our appreciation of
the cooperation between the ICTR and the ICTY and
the Office of Legal Affairs in doing the necessary work
in preparation for the Residual Mechanism, including
the preparation of a joint budget and the work on the
rules of procedure.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): First of all, I
wish to thank the Presidents and the Prosecutors of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for their very comprehensive and
useful briefings. Allow me a special word to
congratulate Judge Meron on his recent election as
President of the ICTY, to wish him all the best and,
through him, to convey to Judge Robinson our
appreciation for the excellent work as President of the
Tribunal.
Some major progress has been made in the
implementation of the completion strategies of the
ICTY and the ICTR in the period covered by the latest
reports of the Tribunals and the Prosecutors.
First and foremost, of course, is the capture of
Ratko Mladić and, more recently, Goran Hadžić, the
remaining ICTY fugitives. That is a development with
vast implications for the fight against impunity in the
Western Balkans. It has also removed an important
stumbling block in Serbia’s European path. Also
important is the capture of Bernard Munyagishari,
which was a good example of fruitful cooperation
between the ICTR and the national authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We also welcome
the fact that the ICTR has worked hard to stay on track
to complete all of its trial work by mid-2012.
In short, in the past six months, the Tribunals
have continued to perform their invaluable work in the
field of accountability for the worst crimes in a most
professional way under difficult circumstances. Both
Tribunals have also made valuable contributions to the
setting up of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals in due course, including by
contributing to the ongoing drafting process of its rules
of procedure and evidence, the preparation of the
budget and other necessary activities.

11-62592

S/PV.6678

As Chairman of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, I wish to commend the support
of both Tribunals and the Office of Legal Affairs in the
many different tasks of that rather complex process
aiming at enabling the Residual Mechanism to perform
fully its functions from day one, that is, from 1 July
2012. I also seize the opportunity to thank all members
of the Working Group for their cooperation in that
collective task and for their support to the Chair.

impunity for the war crimes committed in Rwanda and
the former Yugoslavia acquires new importance. In that
context, we welcome the significant outreach and
capacity-building efforts by the Tribunals aimed at
strengthening local judicial institutions and raising
awareness among members of civil society. Through
those efforts, the ICTY and the ICTR are ensuring that
their legacy of accountability and reconciliation will
bear fruit in a lasting way.

That brings me to the challenges ahead. They are
of two sorts: first, staff and resources; and secondly,
national and regional ownership and cooperation.

An essential element of regional ownership is the
extent to which States cooperate among themselves in
war crimes investigations and prosecutions. We
encourage strengthened cooperation in that regard. We
should not forget the large volume of war crimes cases
that remain to be domestically prosecuted.

On the first challenge, both Tribunals share a
grave concern about the effect that staff attrition and
recruitment issues are having on their ability to fulfil
the completion strategies endorsed by the Council.
Despite a number of Security Council resolutions
recently adopted referring to the issue, the problem
persists, and even seems to increase in intensity.
Creative, realistic and cost-effective solutions to the
issue need to be found and implemented as a matter of
urgency.
We therefore encourage practical and ad hoc
solutions, such as those put forward by Presidents
Meron and Khan concerning retention incentives and
the waiver of the six-month rule for application for
professional posts, which could be of tremendous
practical help in the context of the Tribunals’
completion strategy. We have to bear in mind the
particular nature of the Tribunals as judicial bodies that
require a distinct or, at least, a more flexible
interpretation of the general administrative norms.
Those norms were meant to regulate the administrative
bodies of the Secretariat, not the Tribunals. Moreover,
we cannot forget the need to align that interpretation
with the particular situation of those judicial bodies,
which are struggling to abide by trial deadlines while
pursuing the process of discontinuing all court activity.
Conversely, the measures suggested by President
Meron to expedite translations and, in particular, his
intention to assign ad litem judges to contempt cases,
may indeed have important and beneficial
repercussions in speeding up the work of the Tribunal
in line with the completion strategy. As such, those
measures are welcome management improvements.
With regard to the second challenge, as the
Tribunals enter the final stages of their work, the issue
of national and regional ownership in the fight against

11-62592

Also, we cannot overstate the importance of
cooperation with the Tribunals and, in that regard, the
need to arrest the nine remaining fugitives being
searched for by the ICTR. In that respect, we urge the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to continue efforts
to facilitate the arrest of those fugitives, and we
encourage the Kenyan authorities to continue their
cooperation in tracking the whereabouts of Félicien
Kabuga.
As we approach the end of the Tribunals’ work
and the projected number of convictions, we have to be
prepared for the increasing number of requests from
the Tribunals addressed to States to host convicted
persons to serve their sentences and to respond to the
need to find appropriate and prompt responses to those
requests. We also must find definitive solutions to
address the situation of the acquitted persons, such as
those referred to by the President of the ICTR, who
remain under protective measures in safe houses in
Arusha because they cannot safely return to their
communities or find host countries willing or able to
accept them. That is an unsustainable situation with
human rights implications, and a prompt solution must
be found.
In conclusion, Portugal wishes to congratulate the
Presidents, Prosecutors and staff of the two Tribunals
on their outstanding work. Above and beyond the
important trial-related activities under the completion
strategy, they are also laying the groundwork for the
future. They are helping to set up the Residual
Mechanism and are assisting the countries of the
respective regions, their judicial authorities and their

13

S/PV.6678

civil societies as they take over the vital task of
fighting impunity for the gravest of crimes.
Mr. Eick (Germany): I would like to start by
once again expressing Germany’s full support for the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and for their invaluable contributions
to the fight against impunity for serious international
crimes. I also thank President Meron and President
Khan, as well as the ICTR and ICTY Prosecutors, for
their reports (see S/2011/716 and S/2011/731) and
commend them on their significant achievements in
recent months. Let me assure them that we have taken
note of their proposals and ideas to improve the
efficiency of the Tribunals and that we stand ready to
support them in those endeavours.
In that context, we share the view of President
Meron that the existing prohibition on the employment
of interns by the Secretariat for a period of six months
after the completion of their internships does not, by its
rationale, apply to a Tribunal that is in the process of
closing down.
We note with concern that, in the course of the
downsizing of the Tribunals in preparation for the
completion of their work, both are facing serious
challenges in retaining staff. That creates an immense
workload and places a heavy burden on remaining
staff. We welcome the Security Council resolutions
adopted in that regard, most recently resolution 1993
(2011), which called upon the relevant United Nations
bodies to intensify cooperation with the Tribunals and
to take a flexible approach in order to find practicable
solutions to address the issue. Although the Tribunals
are approaching the final phase of their respective
completion strategies, we should remain mindful that
important work remains to be done.
The arrest and transfer to The Hague of the longsought fugitives Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić
heralds the approaching end of impunity for serious
international crimes committed in the former
Yugoslavia. It also proves that the level of influence
and acceptance of the ICTY in the region of the
Balkans is high. It is that acceptance and support that
enables the ICTY to significantly contribute to lasting
peace and reconciliation in the region by bringing
justice to the victims and their families. With regard to
the ICTR, we welcome the judgement delivered this
year in the “Butare” case against six accused.

14

The cooperation of States is a crucial prerequisite
for the work of the Tribunals. Their support enables the
Tribunals to complete their mandates. The Tribunals
depend on the will and the actions of the States — of
all States — not only those directly concerned because
they have become a harbour for fugitives, but also
those that have access to relevant information and
evidence. We therefore recall the obligation of all
States to fully cooperate with the Tribunals, which is,
and remains, essential for the Tribunals’ functioning.
With regard to cooperation between the ICTY and
the region of the Balkans, we appreciate that States
remain committed to meeting their obligations towards
the Tribunal. We note with appreciation the
cooperation of Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Croatia with the ICTY during the reporting period. In
particular, Serbia’s efforts to apprehend the last two
fugitives and transfer them to The Hague are a
welcome demonstration of its commitment to the ICTY
and its goals.
It is of the utmost importance to bring to justice
those who have been indicted. Therefore, we also
commend the cooperation of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo with the ICTR, which led to the arrest
and transfer of the long-sought fugitive Bernard
Munyagishari on 25 May. However, it is a matter of
concern that nine accused and internationally sought
persons still remain at large, among them the three
most high-ranking fugitives. Germany calls on the
international community and, in particular, on the
concerned States of the region to ensure that all
possible efforts are made to bring those persons to
justice.
The Security Council, in its resolutions 1503
(2003) and 1534 (2004), emphasized that the transfer
of lower- and mid-level accused to competent national
jurisdictions for trial was an essential prerequisite for
the completion of the work of the Tribunals. The cases
of 13 accused have been referred to national authorities
in the Balkans to date.
Germany welcomes the ongoing efforts of
Rwanda to strengthen both its national legal system
and its ability to adjudicate cases referred by the ICTR.
Germany expresses the hope that the reforms in
Rwanda will ultimately permit the ICTR to refer the
cases of lower-level accused to Rwandan courts for
trial.

11-62592

S/PV.6678

With respect to the transition of both Tribunals to
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, we note that both Tribunals are taking the
measures necessary to facilitate a smooth handover. We
commend them for realizing gains from increased
efficiencies in trial management in order to handle the
remaining cases effectively. Although the late capture
and transfer of fugitive indictees may have led to
certain delays, we are confident that the respective
deadlines will be met for the completion of the
transition to the Residual Mechanism. In that context,
we also sincerely acknowledge the contribution that the
Office of Legal has made in order to render the
Residual Mechanism operational.
Mr. McKell (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by expressing the United Kingdom’s continued
support for both the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). Their work is
essential to combat impunity and deliver justice to
victims in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.
I would like to thank President Meron and
President Khan and Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow
for their very comprehensive briefings and reports.
Furthermore, while congratulating and welcoming
Judge Meron on his return to the office of President of
the ICTY, I would also like to express our thanks to
Judge Robinson for his years of service as President.
We wish him well for the future.
We would like to praise the Serbian Government,
police force and judiciary for the apprehension and
transfer of Goran Hadžić and Ratko Mladić. As the
report states (see S/2011/716), those arrests represent
important milestones for the Tribunal and for
international justice. It is important that the work of the
ICTY be organized efficiently over the coming months,
to take account of the extra work that those cases will
generate. The arrest and transfer of both Mladić and
Hadžić are evidence of Serbia’s continued commitment
to cooperating with the Tribunal and are indeed
milestones for international justice. However, it is
important that Serbia’s support continue. Questions
remain on how it was possible for two high-profile
fugitives to evade capture. We encourage the Serbian
authorities to continue their good work and ensure that
all people found to be responsible for supporting a
former fugitive be held accountable for their actions.

11-62592

In general we are pleased with the levels of
cooperation that have been provided by Croatia. As
with Serbia, Croatia’s ongoing cooperation with the
Tribunal remains essential. We also share the concerns
that the report raises on the greetings sent by Prime
Minister Kosor to Generals Gotovina and Markać, both
of whom have been convicted of war crimes and
crimes against humanity. We reiterate the importance
of Croatia demonstrating full cooperation with the
Tribunal. In that regard, we note that the European
Union Commission’s monitoring will focus in
particular on commitments undertaken by Croatia in
the area of the judiciary and fundamental rights. That
remains an essential part of the European Union
accession process.
We note the difficulties that have been
highlighted as a result of the Tribunal’s staffing levels
and we are mindful of the extra burden that this has
placed on the current staff members. We remain
grateful for their ongoing efforts and understanding.
The level of staffing in both Tribunals will continue to
be an issue as they each complete their work. Until a
solution is found for that problem, we encourage the
Tribunal to prioritize its staffing resources as
effectively as possible.
We support the efforts of President Meron to
reassign ad litem judges to address the large number of
contempt cases and we welcome the assurance that
such reassignments will not result in the extension of
the terms of office of those judges. Furthermore, to try
to tackle the difficulties related to staff retention, we
believe that it would be appropriate to revisit the
interpretation of the regulations applying to the sixmonth prohibition on hiring people who have served as
interns. In supporting that action we note that there
would be no financial implications for the United
Nations.
Moving on to the ICTR, we remain concerned by
the number of indictees that remain at large. The
Tribunal’s mandate cannot be completed until all of
those individuals are apprehended. We encourage all
United Nations Members, especially Kenya and
Zimbabwe, to provide the Tribunal with their full
cooperation, in order to ensure that all individuals are
brought to justice. Regretfully, we note that once again
the ICTR report (see S/2011/731) states that there will
be a short delay in the Ngirabatware trial. The United
Kingdom remains concerned about the impact that
further delays will have on the Tribunal’s ability to

15

S/PV.6678

meet the deadlines that have been agreed in the
completion strategy. To address that issue, we
encourage both Tribunals to explore ways to share best
practices, in an effort to avoid further slippages. It is
also important for the continued success of the
completion strategy that lower level cases be
transferred smoothly to national jurisdictions under
Rule 11 bis.
Mr. Onowu (Nigeria): Let me join others in
thanking the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their instructive
briefings on the work of both Tribunals.
Nigeria welcomes the substantial progress made
by those important bodies during the reporting period
towards meeting the objectives in their completion
strategies reports. Regrettably, staffing shortages
continue to hinder the pace of their work, despite
persistent requests, including by members of the
Security Council, for measures to enable them to retain
and replace staff. We must therefore urgently find a
solution to the staffing challenges, one that gives the
Tribunals the capacity to expedite their proceedings. In
so doing, we are not only giving expression to the
provisions of resolutions 1954 (2010), 1955 (2010) and
1993 (2011) but we are also ensuring the timely
implementation of the completion strategies. Our point
of departure should be the staff retention and
recruitment measures suggested by the Tribunals.
Effective and sustained cooperation with the
Tribunals by Member States remains the crucial
vehicle for attaining their core priority goals. The
arrest and prompt transfer of Ratko Mladić and Goran
Hadžić to The Hague exemplify the cooperation that
should exist between Member States and the Tribunals.
That cooperation is also essential to address all
outstanding issues. Of equal significance is the arrest
of Bernard Munyagishari by the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in cooperation with
the ICTR. Such cooperation is required to underpin the
Tribunal’s efforts to track the remaining nine fugitives
and in relocating acquitted or convicted persons. We
share the Secretary-General’s assessment that those
arrests will not only reduce the Residual Mechanism’s
responsibilities and the costs of tracking fugitives but it
will also enable the Tribunals to meet their completion
strategy targets.

16

Given that capacity-building and outreach
activities constitute important aspects of the mandate
and legacy of both the ICTR and the ICTY, we
commend both Tribunals for increasing their activities
in both respects, especially in helping States to
strengthen their capacity to prosecute alleged
violations of international humanitarian law in their
own courts. We also commend those Governments and
organizations that have supported those efforts. Indeed,
the international community should remain unrelenting
in its support for those activities.
In our view, the preparation of a draft proposal on
rules of procedure and evidence of the Mechanism is
an invaluable step in the effort to implement resolution
1966 (2010) and ensure a smooth transition to the
Residual Mechanism. We support the plans for the
transition to the Mechanism of the Tribunals’ archives
management
functions
and
information
and
telecommunications
technologies
systems
and
infrastructure. Needless to say, sustained coordination
within and between the Tribunals and the Offices of the
Prosecutors remains crucial to ensuring a smooth
transition to an efficient and effective Residual
Mechanism.
Nigeria will continue to support the efforts of the
Tribunals in establishing accountability for genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity. We commend
the Presidents and the Prosecutors of the ICTY and
ICTR for their dedicated leadership and unwavering
commitment to justice and the rule of law. We also
appreciate the contributions of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, under the able
leadership of Ambassador Moraes Cabral, to this noble
endeavour.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I also thank the Presidents
and Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda for their informative
briefings and reports.
This debate is timely, especially in view of the
upcoming elections for the roster of judges of the
Residual Mechanism. Brazil takes this opportunity to
reaffirm its understanding that committed judges are
the pillars of any tribunal. We also commend the
Presidents and the Prosecutors efforts towards the
fulfilment of the remaining judicial functions of their
institutions in a timely manner. Both reports (see
S/2011716 and S/2011/731) address issues that are

11-62592

S/PV.6678

relevant to the current activities of the Tribunals and to
the legacy that those institutions will leave to the
international justice system. I would like to touch on
some of those issues today.
It is remarkable that, with the arrests of Ratko
Mladić and Goran Hadžić, there are no outstanding
fugitives from the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia. The nine fugitives from the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda who
remain at large remind us of the importance of
effective cooperation with Member States as a
cornerstone of the fulfilment of the Tribunals’ mandate.
Brazil emphasizes the fundamental value of a close
institutional relationship between the Tribunals and
national judicial systems.
The issue of staff retention should be dealt with
as a matter of priority by all relevant United Nations
bodies in the context of the ongoing completion
strategies. As the Tribunals approach the end of their
judicial activities, retaining adequate levels of staff
will have a positive impact both on the institutions’
productivity and in the wake of the judgements to be
delivered. Brazil follows with interest the measures
that the Tribunals are taking in implementing their
completion strategies. A smooth transition to a lean and
efficient residual mechanism is a fundamental element
in the fight against impunity and in the quest for
judicial accountability — two of the most important
contributions the Tribunals have made to international
justice.
We all know that judicial decisions alone cannot
bring peace and reconciliation to a region.
Accountability and the prevalence of the rule of law
must be part of the social equation that can ensure
national unity and progress. Such a scenario cannot be
attained from Arusha or The Hague alone. It is
particularly important to bring the Tribunals closer to
the communities involved in the events they are
mandated to investigate. Brazil commends the efforts
of both Tribunals in improving awareness of their work
among students, international and local researchers,
legal professionals, journalists and others. It is crucial
to emphasize capacity-building activities with legal
professionals in the areas affected by these crimes. We
strongly believe that the cooperation both Tribunals
provide in capacity-building and the training
professionals of national judicial systems constitutes an
important part of their legacy and therefore of their
contribution to lasting peace.

11-62592

Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
also like to thank the Presidents of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, as
well as the two Prosecutors, for their exhaustive
briefings.
I would like to begin by expressing our
satisfaction with the progress that the two Tribunals
have made in the past six months towards completing
all their trials diligently and without neglecting the
demands of justice. We welcome the parallel measures
that have been taken in order to guarantee the
transition to the Residual Mechanism as called for in
resolution 1966 (2010). We fully understand the
difficulties discussed in the reports (see S/2011/716
and S/2011/731) that both Tribunals face in completing
their work in a timely fashion. That is the reason that
we call for the adoption as soon as possible of a
practical solution to the issue of retaining the
Tribunals’ specialists and ensuring the replacement of
those who leave for more permanent posts, as that will
avert any delays in the Tribunals’ work. In that regard,
we would like to recall resolutions 1993 (2011) and
1995 (2011).
We would also like to express our satisfaction at
the arrests of the two remaining fugitives from the
ICTY, namely, Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić. We
call on Rwanda’s neighbouring countries to strengthen
their cooperation with the ICTR in order to ensure the
arrest of the nine remaining fugitives. We also believe
that it is important to give adequate attention to those
who have been freed but who have not been able to
return to their homes or be reintegrated into society,
which undermines their fundamental right to a decent
and safe life with their families.
As we come to the end of the year, we would like
to commend the Informal Working Group on
International Criminal Tribunals, chaired by Portugal,
for its efforts and constructive role in contributing to
the success of the Tribunals and assisting in the
transfer to the Residual Mechanism. Lebanon’s view is
that the juridical work and opinions of the Tribunals
have contributed to combating impunity and to
rendering justice for victims, as well as greatly
enriching and advancing international criminal law and
strengthening the rule of law, nationally and
internationally. Finally, I should like to reaffirm that
there can be no stability or peace without genuine
justice.

17

S/PV.6678

Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to thank the President and Prosecutor
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), Judge Meron and Mr. Brammertz, as well as
the President and Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), Judge Khan and
Mr. Jallow, for their briefings. I would also like to take
this opportunity to congratulate Judge Meron on his
election to the presidency of the ICTY.
I would like to make the following comments on
the work of the two Tribunals. First, both have entered
a critical wrap-up period. All ICTY fugitives have now
been arrested. And all ICTR trials have now reached
their final stages, with the pre-trial phases of all cases
remaining expected to be completed in the first half of
next year. We note both Tribunals’ progress and urge
them to continue to take effective measures in
accordance with the provisions of resolution 1966
(2010), in order to enable them to complete all their
work by the end of 2014 and achieve a smooth
transition to the Residual Mechanism. We hope that the
relevant United Nations bodies and other organizations
will work together to actively explore flexible and
feasible ways to address the Tribunals’ difficulties with
staff retention.
Secondly, we welcome the cooperation of Serbia
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as
of the countries in the relevant regions, in arresting and
transferring fugitives to the Tribunals. National
cooperation, particularly on the part of countries in the
region, is very important to the Tribunals’ ability to
carry out their mandates smoothly. We have noted the
challenges that the Tribunals face in transferring those
convicted for the enforcement of their sentences and in
relocating those who have been acquitted. We call on
those countries in a position to do so to display the
necessary political will and give positive consideration
to offering the Tribunals more support and cooperation.
Thirdly, we welcome the recent progress made by
the ICTR in referring cases to Rwanda, and we thank
Prosecutor Jallow for his work. Referring as many
cases as possible to countries that are able and willing
to do so is an important step in the Tribunals’
completion strategy. We hope to see more progress on
the part of the ICTR in that regard.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to join others in thanking Judge Theodor
Meron and Judge Khalida Rachid Khan for their

18

presentations and assessments of the work of the
Tribunals. We also appreciate very much the briefings
by the Prosecutors of the two Tribunals.
India welcomes the progress made by the two
Tribunals in expediting their work on the completion
strategies. We have noted various measures adopted by
the Tribunals to ensure a smooth transition to the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. We also welcome the cooperation extended
by Member States to the two Tribunals. The arrest of
Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić is an important
example of effective international cooperation. Now no
outstanding fugitive remains of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia since
(ICTY). However, nine of the accused of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
remain at large and need to be apprehended and
transferred to the ICTR.
It is critical that the Tribunals finish their work
on time. We have listened carefully to the concerns
expressed by Judge Meron and Judge Khan in relation
to their ability to keep pace with their work while
adhering to the projected timelines. The Judges have
pointed out that the Tribunals’ trials and appeals
continue to be affected by rules relating to the
assignment of contempt proceedings, the loss of highly
efficient staff members and the employment of interns.
We fully share those concerns. The retention of
adequate and experienced staff is necessary to enable
the Tribunals to complete their work in accordance
with the completion strategy.
In that context, there is a need for flexibility in
the existing rules, including on the retention of interns,
especially when the Tribunals are winding up their
work and experienced people are unavailable for short
periods. We support the suggestion made by Judge
Meron and Judge Khan in that connection. The issue
raised by Judge Khan on the relocation of convicted
persons is also important and needs to be addressed.
We have noted with satisfaction that both the
ICTY and the ICTR have been working closely in
coordination with the Office of Legal Affairs to
implement the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, established by resolution 1966
(2010). Enhanced cooperation among the ICTY, the
ICTR, the Office of Legal Affairs and the Council’s
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
will further streamline the implementation of the

11-62592

S/PV.6678

Residual Mechanism. The Council should stand ready
to address any functional, operational or institutional
issue that may arise in relation to the completion
strategy or the Residual Mechanism.
In conclusion, we believe that the two Tribunals
have admirably implemented their mandates. We
consider that the continued support of the Security
Council is crucial at this juncture, as the Tribunals are
taking all necessary steps to keep the trial and appeal
schedules on track. That will pave the way for the
successful trials of the remaining accused and a smooth
transition to an efficient Residual Mechanism.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the Presidents and the
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunals for
their reports.
With respect to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), the Tribunal’s President
and Prosecutor Jallow have both described the
considerable efforts that were made in recent months
by the entire staff of the Tribunal in order to complete
the trials under way and to preserve evidence under
rule 71 bis, in the event that the three high-ranking
fugitives — Félicien Kabuga, Protais Mpiranya and
Augustin Bizimana — are arrested one day. France
appreciates the work accomplished.
The transfer of the Uwinkindi case to Rwanda, if
confirmed, will also be an important step forward.
Judicial procedures are continuing in France with
respect to the Laurent Bucyibaruta and Wenceslas
Munyeshyaka cases. We look forward to hosting the
Prosecutor in France next week to assess the status of
the procedures.
Nine accused, including three who are highranking, remain fugitives. We welcome the efforts of
the Prosecutor to find and to arrest those fugitives. We
note that the Prosecutor expects increased cooperation
from Kenya in the Félicien Kabuga case.
More disturbing, the Prosecutor also mentioned
the presence of Protais Mpiranya in Zimbabwe. That is
a major concern. Everyone’s cooperation with the
ICTR is required in accordance with Security Council
resolutions. Undoubtedly, we will find a way to remind
every one of their obligations.
Lastly, the ideas presented by Judge Khan with
regard to ensuring the Tribunal’s legacy warrant our
full attention.

11-62592

With respect to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), France
welcomes the progress that has been made, as no
fugitives remain at large following the arrest of Goran
Hadžić, on 20 July. That is a crucial milestone in the
work of the Tribunal and sends an important message
to all of those who, even today, continue to attempt to
obtain power or remain in power by planning and
ordering attacks against civilians. It also sends a
message to all of those who are being sought under an
international criminal warrant for the commission of
war crimes, crimes against humanity or the crime of
genocide who believe that they can rely on the
Council’s inaction or lassitude to evade justice. It is
important that the Council maintain its determination
in that regard.
Given the complexity of the cases before the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, it is understandable, as the Tribunal’s
President and Prosecutor have explained, that the
proceedings require time. There is therefore a need to
ensure that the Tribunal has all of the means necessary
to work effectively, and in particular that it can address
the challenge of staff retention.
We listened attentively to the sensible proposals
of Judge Meron, whom we commend on assuming his
new functions. The proposals, which Judge Khan
supports, are important as they are specific and easy to
implement, as is the case with the recommendation on
the recruitment of interns. We are ready to ensure
follow-up under the leadership of the Chair of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
the Ambassador of Portugal.
With respect to cooperation with the ICTY, a
question that arose when we listened to the
Prosecutor’s report concerned the reasons as to why the
arrest of fugitives in Serbia has taken such a long time.
Another question concerns the escape of a criminal
who was imprisoned in Foča, and who has not yet been
caught.
Lastly, generally speaking, the lack of
cooperation of States in the region in tracking and
prosecuting mid-level criminals is disturbing. We must
stress that for the European Union, cooperation with
the ICTY and regional cooperation have always been,
and will remain, important considerations.
In its resolution 1966 (2010), adopted in
December 2010, the Security Council set a timeline for

19

S/PV.6678

the completion of the work of the two Tribunals and
established the Residual Mechanism to complete the
proceedings. We will soon elect the judges for the
Residual Mechanism. We would like to thank the
representatives of the Tribunals as well as the Office of
Legal Affairs of the Secretariat for their efforts made in
order to respect the timeline and to ensure the effective
operation of the Residual Mechanism.
Mrs. Duarte (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me once again to thank the Presidents and the
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for their briefings. My
delegation would also like to thank them for their
efforts and for the steps they have taken to implement
the completion strategy.
We would also like to highlight in particular the
arrest of the last two fugitives from the ICTY. This is
not only a great achievement but also without a doubt
eliminates one of the obstacles in the way of the
satisfactory conclusion of its mandate. We also
welcome the activities undertaken to facilitate the
transfer of specialized and institutional knowledge to
national jurisdictions and to other existing
mechanisms, including the International Criminal
Court (ICC).
It is very important to preserve the legacy of the
Tribunals in the area of international humanitarian law
and legal doctrine, including substantive and
procedural aspects, and the influence that their
jurisprudence could have on the future of global justice
and the promotion of human rights.
Through their activities, these two subsidiary
bodies of the Council have shown that the
establishment of an effective system of international
justice is not only possible but desirable. Their
achievements have contributed to paving the way for
the establishment of the ICC.
From a practical point of view, there is no doubt
that, as Presidents Meron and Khan stated so
eloquently, staff retention is the most serious problem
facing both Tribunals. If the existing difficulties are not
resolved, a situation could arise that would prevent the
timely implementation of the completion strategies
devised and adopted by the Council.
For that reason, we support the request made by
both Presidents to the effect that the activities currently

20

under way would be strengthened if we Council
members provide them with support and if we send a
clear and unequivocal message as to the importance of
resolving the retention and staff recruitment policies.
Failing that, it will be very difficult, if not impossible,
to guarantee the full implementation of the completion
strategies.
The Council should renew the appeals that it has
made in the past for the relevant bodies of the United
Nations to step up their efforts to resolve this
fundamental issue and make it easier for the Tribunals
to retain the human resources necessary for the timely
implementation of their completion strategies.
This is not a routine administrative problem,
since both Tribunals were established by the Council
under very specific circumstances and have provided
outstanding service in the cause of international justice
and the maintenance of international peace and
security.
We consider, for example, that the administrative
practice that prevents the recruitment of interns before
a certain period of time has elapsed is not applicable to
the Tribunals. Under its own terms, resolution 51/226
of the General Assembly applies only to Secretariat
personnel. The rationale for the establishment of this
rule clearly is not relevant to the particular situation
facing both Criminal Tribunals.
Colombia is of the view that the Tribunals have
worked diligently to comply with the decisions of the
Council in terms of the fulfilment of their
responsibilities. The International Criminal Tribunals
for the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda are the
main instrument through which the Council has
channelled the will of the international community to
put an end to impunity for heinous international
crimes.
Now that both judicial bodies will be wrapping
up their work, it is crucial that the various entities of
the United Nations take the actions necessary to ensure
that the Tribunals have the resources required to
conclude their mandates in an effective, orderly and
timely fashion.
Mrs. Onanga (Gabon) (spoke in French): On
behalf of my delegation, I should like to thank the
Presidents and the Prosecutors of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for

11-62592

S/PV.6678

their respective presentations on the implementation of
their completion strategies, in line with resolutions
1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004). I should like also to
congratulate His Excellency Ambassador José Filipe
Moraes Cabral on the skill with which he is steering
the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals.
My delegation welcomes the progress made in the
implementation of the completion strategy and
commends the strong determination of the Tribunals’
Presidents, Prosecutors, judges and staff to ensure the
swift completion of their work. We are convinced that
all of these efforts will enable a smooth transition to
the Residual Mechanism adopted by the Security
Council in its resolution 1966 (2010).
Our debate is taking place at a time when
important developments in terms of combating
impunity have just taken place. The successive arrests,
on 26 May and 20 July 2011, of Ratko Mladić and
Goran Hadžić represent an important milestone for
international criminal justice and for the victims. Those
arrests are evidence of Serbia’s determination to
mercilessly combat impunity in the country. Gabon
welcomes the determination and cooperation that the
Serbian Government has shown. We must now take
advantage of the resulting favourable environment in
order to further promote cooperation among States,
which is essential to facilitate first-instance trials and
appeals on the one hand and transfers to national
jurisdictions on the other.
While we welcome the cooperation with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in the arrest of
Bernard Munyagishari last May, we encourage the
countries neighbouring the Great Lakes region and
those of southern Africa to step up their cooperation
with the Rwanda Tribunal in order to facilitate the
arrest of the nine fugitives and implement the
completion strategy.
Without effective judicial and penal institutions
such as the International Criminal Tribunals, the
combat against impunity and the strengthening of
international criminal justice would be fruitless
endeavours. The standards-setting work of the Security
Council in this area is universal in scope and should be
strongly highlighted.
However, and most importantly, there is also a
need to intensify our vigilance and demonstrate
increased political will so as to bolster the work of the

11-62592

Tribunals. That is the kind of sustained effort they
require in order to complete their work by the trial
deadlines.
My delegation welcomes the measures taken by
the Security Council to support the efforts made by the
Tribunals despite the challenges encountered in
carrying out their work. Indeed, ongoing support on the
part of the Council for the work of the Tribunals
remains crucial to ensuring their smooth functioning.
On the basis of the provisions of resolutions 1931
(2010), 1932 (2010), 1993 (2011), 1995 (2011) and
2013 (2011), my delegation encourages the Council to
continue to strive to enhance the effectiveness of the
Tribunals. From that standpoint, the Tribunals must be
provided with sufficient resources so as to enable them
to resolve problems related to understaffing.
Furthermore, appropriate measures should be taken to
enable the Tribunals to retain qualified staff, whose
expertise is key to the optimal functioning of the
Tribunals, until the transfer of responsibilities to the
Residual Mechanism. The provisions of General
Assembly resolution 65/253 are relevant in this respect
and should be supported.
In conclusion, we would like to underscore the
crucial role played by the Tribunals in the development
of international law. The institutional and judicial
legacy they represent must be preserved. My country
supports the efforts made by the Tribunals and all the
stakeholders involved in the achievement of that lofty
goal. Raising awareness of the scope of the work of the
Tribunals is a part of that objective and warrants our
full support.
The international community must also devote
particular attention to the victims of the crimes
committed in the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda
and compensate them for the harm and abuses that they
suffered. In this respect, the creation of a special fund,
like that of the International Criminal Court, warrants
our support.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): For
almost two decades now, both the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
have been guided by the demand for justice for those
who suffered in those two respective regions.
Bosnia and Herzegovina supports the activities of
the Tribunals. It is therefore my pleasure to welcome

21

S/PV.6678

today Judge Theodore Meron and to congratulate him
on his assumption of the presidency of the ICTY for
the second time. I also wish to extend our welcome to
Judge Khan, President of the ICTR, as well as to the
Prosecutors of the Tribunals, Mr. Brammertz and
Mr. Jallow. Their respective briefings have provided
detailed and comprehensive accounts of all the
activities in the reporting period. Those reports are also
testimony to their dedication to justice and the fight
against impunity. Here, I would also like to underline
the great contribution of the staff of the Tribunals and
to thank them for their tireless work.
We take note of the Tribunals’ continuing efforts
to successfully complete their work, mindful of the
highest standards of fair justice. Their steadiness in
fulfilling their remaining judicial functions is
commendable, particularly in the face of unforeseen
challenges beyond their control. However, what
concerns us most with respect to the cases proceeding
to the pre-trial phase are the steps being taken to
reconcile the requirements of the completion strategy
with the demands of presenting cases in a way that
fully reflects the gravity and scope of the crimes
committed. We hope that, in their final stages, the
Tribunals will move towards meeting those demands
first and foremost, as well as meeting the requirements
of the completion strategy.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is still facing a large
number of cases that remain to be prosecuted. We
believe that there can be no meaningful peace and
reconciliation without justice. We therefore once again
underline that all those responsible for war crimes must
be brought to justice. Furthermore, we fully agree that
cooperation between the countries in the region is
highly important, and that every effort should be made
towards improving and enhancing cooperation through
numerous bilateral agreements that will address
possible deficiencies.
Finally, as the mandate of my country in the
Security Council comes to a close, we are particularly
pleased to be able to participate in such an important
chapter of the Tribunals’ history. With the adoption of
resolution 1966 (2010) and the creation of the Residual
Mechanism, we ensured that their legacy of
groundbreaking
contributions
to
international
jurisprudence and the international justice system will
be permanently preserved. It is our sincere hope that
this legacy will ensure that atrocities such as those

22

committed in our country and Rwanda will never be
repeated.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): We
wish to thank Tribunal Presidents Khan and Meron and
Prosecutors Jallow and Brammertz for their briefings
today. We also wish to congratulate President Meron
on his recent re-election as President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and wish him much success. In
addition, we thank former President Robinson for his
valuable service at that Tribunal.
Since we last addressed the Council on the
Tribunals (see S/PV.6545), shortly after the arrest of
Ratko Mladić, the last remaining fugitive under ICTY
indictment, Goran Hadžić, was captured. We mark their
capture, arrest and transfer as one step, albeit a
significant one, on the path to justice and
reconciliation, but we understand that that is only one
step on a long road to peace and justice. Even as the
ICTY is completing its mandate, and even as we look
forward to the start of the Residual Mechanism, the
ICTY is extremely busy with proceedings in 15 cases
against 35 persons. We are confident that President
Meron and the Tribunal as a whole can meet the
challenge of concluding those trials fairly and
efficiently while also coordinating the transfer of key
functions from the Tribunal to the Residual
Mechanism.
The ICTY recently held a conference to discuss
what kind of legacy it is leaving for future generations.
Among other things, the ICTY has shown that the
international community can establish an effective
judicial institution that will bring to justice those who
perpetrate atrocities. The ICTY has in large part been a
success because of the hard day-to-day work of its
judges, prosecutors and staff, who are committed to
their core mission of being an effective court and
dispensing justice. The ICTY has shown that it can
provide fair trials, that war crimes fugitives cannot
escape justice, and that victims can now expect that
those who commit crimes against civilians will be held
to account.
Again, we note with appreciation the progress
that the Tribunal has made in ensuring that its
procedures are both expeditious and fair, including
doubling up on staff and judges, such that they work on
more than one trial at a time. We note with
appreciation the measures that President Meron has

11-62592

S/PV.6678

outlined here today, and welcome his continued efforts
to improve the work of the Tribunal.
The United States continues to call on States of
the former Yugoslavia to cooperate fully with the
ICTY. We encourage the Government of Serbia to
continue its efforts to determine how Ratko Mladić and
Goran Hadžić were able to avoid justice for so many
years, and to take appropriate measures against their
support networks. We also look forward to cooperation
from the relevant countries in the region on the
apprehension of Radovan Stanković, who escaped in
2007 from prison in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In
addition, we note the Government of Croatia’s record
of cooperation with the ICTY, and urge it to work to
support the ICTY and to continue to cooperate with the
prosecution.
Turning to the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), the United States welcomes the
24 June judgement in the case against the former
Minister of Family and Women’s Development and
five others. The conviction of the former Minister of
Family and Women’s Development is a significant
milestone, because it demonstrates that rape is a crime
of violence that has been used as a tool of war by men
and women alike. The United States also welcomes the
17 November 2011 judgement in the case against the
former mayor of Kivumu, who had authority over the
local police yet failed to prevent the massacre of more
than 1,500 people.
When we last addressed these issues in the
Council in June, the United States welcomed the then
recent apprehension of fugitive Bernard Munyagishari
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Now, 190
days after his arrest, the United States is discouraged
that nine remaining fugitives remain at large. Ensuring
completion of the work of the Tribunal and smooth and
efficient transition to the Residual Mechanism is not
the work of the Tribunal alone; every Member State
has an obligation to apprehend the remaining fugitives.
The United States, along with many others, is making a
concerted effort to assist other nations in bringing these
fugitives to justice. We ask all States to redouble their
efforts and to cooperate fully with the ICTR to locate
and apprehend the remaining fugitives.
On behalf of the United States, let me thank the
United Nations Office of Legal Affairs for its
dedication and service to the Tribunals. Let me again
also thank the Tribunal Presidents, Prosecutors,

11-62592

Registrars and their staffs for all that they do to
promote justice under international law for the victims
of war crimes and mass atrocities.
Due to the hard work of the Office of the ICTY
Prosecutor and the Serbian authorities, all of the
fugitives indicted by the ICTY have been apprehended.
We now hope that all parties will make the necessary
but difficult decisions to actively encourage interethnic reconciliation by speaking to their communities
of the rewards of peace. With the ICTR, the situation is
slightly different, since so many indictees remain at
large. We pledge our assistance in bringing the
remaining ICTR fugitive indictees to justice as quickly
as possible, and our doors are always open for
consultation with the ICTR.
Since the end of the Second World War, the
United States Government has viewed justice for
victims of war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide as an essential element for peace and
stability. We take this opportunity to reaffirm those
convictions and to applaud all those who contribute to
that important task.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.
At the outset, we would like to thank the
Presidents and Prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) for their reports. We congratulate Mr. Theodor
Meron on his election to the post of President of the
ICTY, and we look forward to the ICTY at last
beginning to really effectively implement resolution
1966 (2010).
We note the efforts of the Tribunals to ensure the
timely and full implementation of their mandates,
while strictly complying with that resolution. The
recent successes of the Tribunals were made largely
possible by the excellent cooperation between them
and the States in their respective regions. In that
regard, we note in particular Serbia’s excellent
cooperation with the ICTY. Our Serbian colleagues
have gone even further by launching a national
investigation into the reasons why some of the accused
remained in Serbia for so long. We understand and
welcome Serbia’s desire to undertake such an
investigation. Given that only Serbia has the
jurisdiction to undertake such an investigation, we do

23

S/PV.6678

not understand why the ICTY is allowing itself to be
distracted from its numerous tasks by focusing on it.
The Tribunals certainly continue to face wellknown problems in their work. The attrition of
qualified staff continues and is more rapid than we
would wish. Here, it is necessary to bear in mind that,
in accordance with the completion strategy, the number
of Tribunal staff should gradually be reduced.
Nonetheless, we, together with other delegations, are
ready to consider ways of helping the Tribunals to
resolve that issue.
Despite all the difficulties of the Tribunals’ work,
our top priority is the winding up of the Tribunals, in
full compliance with resolution 1966 (2010). In that
regard, unfortunately, we again see problems, in
particular with the ICTY. The documents and tables
show that, as was frequently the case in the past, the
intention is to exceed the deadlines established by
resolution 1966 (2010). The reasons for the delays are
not completely clear to us. For example, we do not
understand why the first instance trials of the Mladić
and Hadžić cases are due to start only in November
2012 and January 2013, respectively. The necessary
pre-trial work on those cases has to a large extent been
completed. We see no obstacle to completing the first
instance trial of the Karadžić case on time.
Particular attention should be paid to the
notorious case of Šešelj. He has been in detention for
nine years now. Moreover, there has still not been a
first instance judgement. Furthermore, we hear
worrying reports of Mr. Šešelj’s state of health and the
problems that he has encountered in enjoying his
procedural rights. We would be grateful if the ICTY
leadership could include the developments of that case
and the general condition of Mr. Šešelj in its next
report to the Security Council.
We cannot fail to be concerned about the situation
of appeals to the ICTY on the Prlić, Šešelj and Tolimir
cases. It is surprising that the ICTY report has not set
specific dates in the tables on the appeals. If we read
the tables correctly, the ICTY intends to consider those
appeals up to the middle of 2016. That is not in
compliance with resolution 1966 (2010).
We wish to recall that the parameters for the
Residual Mechanism and for closing the Tribunals
were formulated by members of the Security Council
on the basis of the timetables for the completion of
cases submitted by the Tribunals themselves last year.

24

Thus, we have every reason to insist that the heads of
both Tribunals make every effort to properly
implement resolution 1966 (2010). In that connection,
we welcome the intention of the President of the ICTY,
Mr. Meron, to take significant administrative measures
to increase the efficiency of the trials.
In addition to the steps mentioned by the
President of the ICTY, we believe that it would also be
appropriate to try to find a way to shorten trials by
reducing the length of judgements and, accordingly, the
time spent by judges in drawing them up and by
translators in translating them. We do not understand
why the length of judgements ranges from 2,000 to
some 4,000 pages. We recall that The Forsyte Saga, for
example, is only 1,500 pages long. The reports of the
Secretary-General on the most complex issues do not
exceed 100 pages.
An excellent practice in drawing up judgements
is demonstrated by the International Court of Justice. I
believe it significant that it is difficult not only for the
accused, but for other people who have not had
adequate training and for lawyers themselves, to
understand lengthy judgements. Furthermore, the ICTY
founding document does not establish any formal
requirements with regard to the length of the Tribunal’s
judgements. We do not deny that different legal
systems have different approaches to drawing up
judgements. For example, in the Anglo-Saxon legal
system, whose representatives had a decisive influence
on establishing the practices of the ICTY, in particular
in the initial phase of its work, it is customary to draw
up lengthy rulings.
However, the Tribunals should represent all legal
systems. Most of them have the practice of drawing up
shorter judgements. In the current difficult
circumstances, we see no obstacle to the ICTY
adopting more concise forms of national practice in
that regard.
I have one further point. On 16 December, we are
due to elect judges for the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. We attach great
importance to those elections.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Starčević (Serbia): At the outset, let me
express the satisfaction of the Republic of Serbia with

11-62592

S/PV.6678

the efforts of the President and the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge Theodor Meron and Mr.
Serge Brammertz, with regard to Serbia’s cooperation
with the Tribunal. I would like to thank Judge Patrick
Robinson for his distinguished service as President of
the Tribunal and to congratulate Judge Meron on the
assumption of the presidency of the ICTY. Also, allow
me to use this occasion to pay my respects to the
President and the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), Ms. Khalida
Rachid Khan and Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow.
Concerning Serbia’s cooperation with the ICTY,
it is my pleasure to say that Serbia, once again, shares
the Prosecutor’s assessment on all aspects of
cooperation. The last two fugitives before the Tribunal
have been arrested and transferred to The Hague by
Serbian authorities, and my Government is in
accordance with the Prosecutor that “these arrests are
milestones to remember” (S/2011/716, annex II,
para. 47).
With regard to the other aspects of cooperation
pertaining to access to documents, archives and
witnesses, I would like to add that such cooperation
between Serbia and the Tribunal has been impeccable
for a long time and that the high level of cooperation
was successfully maintained during the reporting
period. New requests for assistance are received on a
daily basis and are considered without delay.
With the transfer of the last two indictees to the
Tribunal and the fact that there are no outstanding
ICTY requests for assistance regarding the ongoing
proceedings before the Tribunal, Serbia believes that it
has now, undoubtedly, fully cooperated with the
Tribunal. Serbia is confident that the level of
cooperation achieved will continue in the coming
period and that it will secure a smooth transition to
future cooperation with the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
With that chapter of cooperation with the ICTY
closed and following the total fulfilment of
international obligations in good faith, Serbia is at long
last in a position to assign its capacities to issues
concerning the future prosperity and reconciliation of
the region.
Taking all the above into consideration, it is
evident that Serbia, as well as the whole region, has
greatly changed since the Secretary-General, in his

11-62592

report to the Security Council of 3 May 1993
(S/25704), stated that he is of the view that the
enforcement of sentences should take place outside the
territory of the former Yugoslavia. Therefore, the
Republic of Serbia is ready to share responsibility with
other countries in regard to that issue and will pursue
its initiative whereby Serbia and other countries of the
former Yugoslavia willing to do the same are allowed
to sign agreements with the Tribunal on the
enforcement of sentences. Serbia expects that the
Security Council will pay attention to that initiative.
Serbia is also willing to continue to cooperate
with the Security Council Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals on issues related to the archives
of the Tribunal. Serbia maintains its position as
submitted to the Security Council in October 2008 and
March 2009, and reiterates its readiness to actively
participate in all future discussions on those issues.
Our successful cooperation with the Tribunal
gives us a moral right to continue to call for an
effective investigation into alleged crimes involving
murder for the purpose of organ trafficking committed
by the so-called Kosovo Liberation Army. Serbia
expects that the ongoing investigation into those war
crimes allegations, as detailed in the 7 January report
of the Special Rapporteur of the Council of Europe will
be conducted professionally, impartially and efficiently
in order to establish the truth and bring the perpetrators
to justice.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
mutual goals of Serbia and the Tribunal have proven to
be identical and feasible. We hope that the fulfilment of
those goals have contributed to the achievement of
international justice, the further normalization of the
situation and the improvement of relations among the
States of the Balkans. Through its efforts and the
results achieved, Serbia has made a significant
contribution to the ICTY completion strategy and, at
the same time, to the process of building confidence in
the work of national and international institutions.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of December. I would like to
commend Judge Theodor Meron, the new President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and, through him, the outgoing

25

S/PV.6678

President, Judge Patrick Robinson, as well as Judge
Khalida Rachid Khan, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), for their reports
on the completion strategies of their respective
Tribunals (see S/2011/716 and S/2011/731). I also
thank the Prosecutors of the respective Tribunals,
Mr. Serge Brammertz and Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow.
As the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda enters its final year, Rwanda reaffirms its
unwavering support for, and cooperation with, the
Tribunal and readiness to facilitate the trials of the
remaining cases by mid-2012, as outlined in the ICTR
report. Through the Rwanda Witness Protection
Service, we will continue to provide security and
access to witnesses from both sides and assist their
movement to and from Arusha. As usual, my
Government will also extend support to investigations
and make available all relevant documents.
The Government of Rwanda welcomes the
referral decision of 28 June delivered by the ICTR in
the case of Jean-Bosco Uwinkindi, and expects that the
pending application for the referral of the Bernard
Munyagishari case will also be granted. Rwanda also
welcomes the 27 October ruling of the European Court
of Human Rights on the extradition of Silvère
Ahorugeze, who is accused of war crimes and genocide
and was arrested in Sweden. The Court conclusively
determined that the extradition would not violate the
relevant provisions of the European Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms, in particular article 3, which prohibits
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and
article 6, which establishes the right to a fair trial.
That ruling will facilitate decisions by the ICTR
on referral applications and alleviate the burden of the
Tribunal in the final phase of its completion strategy.
In that regard, Rwanda calls upon all European Union
member States to arrest and/or extradite all genocide
fugitives and suspects living within their territory in
order to assist in the fight against impunity for the
most serious crimes. That is a prerequisite for any
reconciliation.
The ICTR tracking unit should be recognized for
its tremendous efforts, together with those of various
United Nations Member States, to arrest numerous
fugitives over the years. Rwanda will continue to urge
all Governments to cooperate with the Tribunal in
arresting the remaining fugitives, including one of the

26

masterminds and financiers of the genocide, Félicien
Kabuga, and in facilitating their transfer to Arusha or
Rwanda.
The ICTR has done a commendable job in the
fight against impunity and in ensuring accountability
for the most serious crimes. However, as the ad hoc
Tribunals are temporary and transitional, at some point
the transition must come to an end. Rwanda has
expressed concerns regarding the relevance of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, which it feels would unnecessarily prolong
the transition, rather than focus on empowering
national jurisdictions, particularly in countries that
suffered from those crimes. It is therefore imperative
that the term of the Residual Mechanism be strictly
limited and that strong emphasis be placed on
transferring cases to permanent and national
jurisdictions.
I conclude by again expressing my gratitude for
the opportunity to take part in this important
discussion, and reiterate my Government’s continued
commitment to supporting and expediting the work of
the ICTR and the Residual Mechanism.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): At the outset, I should like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. We are confident that, under your able
guidance, the Council will successfully undertake its
many duties and responsibilities during this final
month of what has been an astonishing year in many
respects.
Allow me to also express my appreciation to
Presidents Robinson and Khan and Prosecutors
Brammertz and Jallow for their detailed reports on the
work of the Tribunals (S/2011/716 and S/2011/731)
and on the progress achieved and challenges faced in
the implementation of their completion strategies.
Furthermore, we thank Judge Patrick Robinson
for his distinguished service as President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and welcome Judge Theodor Meron
as its new President. Having known Judge Meron for a
long time, we express full confidence in his ability to
successfully master the many challenging tasks ahead
of him.
Croatia strongly supports the efforts of the
Tribunals to undertake all measures within their power

11-62592

S/PV.6678

to expedite their proceedings as part of the
implementation of the completion strategy for the
finalization of their work and their transition to the
Residual Mechanisms. At the same time, that transition
must not in any way affect the Tribunals’ mandates or
the due process standards on which their procedure is
based.

saying that “Croatia has given timely and adequate
responses and provided access to witnesses and
evidence as required” (ibid., para. 55). We also count
on the cooperation of all relevant United Nations
bodies in the search for the sought documentation, in
line with the testimony given by United Nations
military observers in The Hague.

Croatia closely follows the possible emergence of
new jurisprudence founded on the Tribunal’s
judgements, as well as the lively academic debate
about its possible effects on and consequences for
future criteria for the legitimate use of force in
preserving international peace and security. In that
respect, we would like to stress the importance of a
thorough analysis of this complex matter. As a nation
that contributes troops to United Nations- and NATOled operations, we care about and pay close attention to
any possible new jurisprudence that could jeopardize
the ability to wage legitimate and effective military
actions aimed at preserving or fostering international
security.

Croatia is deeply committed to the process of
reconciliation in the former Yugoslavia and firmly
believes that the prosecution of all those responsible
for violations of international humanitarian law is a
necessary precondition to achieving that goal.
However, such prosecutions cannot come at the
expense of the historical facts. Subversion of the facts
only leads to further division, further tension and the
creation of additional grievances.

Croatia also welcomes the fact that Ratko Mladić
and Goran Hadžić, indicted for the worst atrocities
committed in Europe since the Second World War,
have been brought to justice necessary Hadžić during
this reporting period. That represents a great
achievement not only for the Tribunal but also for
international justice in general. It is powerful
testimony to the fact that impunity for grave breaches
of international humanitarian and human rights law
will not be tolerated.
The European Parliament’s acceptance on
1 December of Croatia’s request to become a member
of the European Union (EU), the subsequent decision
of the European Council to welcome Croatia to the EU
and the upcoming signature of the accession treaty by
the Republic of Croatia all testify to Croatia’s
readiness and ability to fully and unconditionally fulfil
all of its international obligations and commitments. In
that context, Croatia continues its unwavering
cooperation with the Tribunal, as is confirmed by the
report before us today (see S/2011/716).
With regard to the request by the Office of the
Prosecutor for missing documents, let me stress that
Croatia fully complies with the Trial Chamber’s
decision on this matter. We are pleased that Prosecutor
Brammertz has recognized Croatia’s cooperation
regarding the remaining cases before the ICTY by

11-62592

With regard to Prosecutor Brammertz’s oral
assessment earlier in this meeting, in which he claims
that “State officials at the highest level in Croatia
continue to glorify illegal wartime conduct and
question the impartiality of ICTY judgements”, Croatia
categorically rejects those characterizations as
unfounded and unacceptable. At the same time, expert
opinion on this issue should be freely expressed and by
no means be seen as questioning the impartiality of
ICTY judgements.
Croatia therefore fully supports regional
cooperation in the area of war crimes. We are confident
that such cooperation should be carried out on wellestablished principles of international criminal law and
in full observance of respective national jurisdictions
and competences. Likewise, cooperation should be
based on full compliance with the basic principles of
legitimate procedure and on the implementation of
internationally recognized methods for the collection
of evidence.
Finally, let me conclude by stressing that my
country has thoroughly developed its cooperation with
the Tribunal in all vital areas, and we are determined to
continue that cooperation until the fulfilment of the
Tribunal’s mandate.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

27
