United Nations

S/PV.5351

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-first year

5351

st meeting
Monday, 23 January 2006, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mahiga . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (United Republic of Tanzania)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Wang Guangya
Mr. Okio
Mr. Faaborg-Andersen
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Tachie-Menson
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Oshima
Mr. De Rivero
Mr. Al-Nasser
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Burian
Mr. Thomson
Mr. Brencick

Agenda
The situation in Timor-Leste
Progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste (S/2006/24)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

06-21738 (E)

*0621738*

S/PV.5351

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Timor-Leste
Progress report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Office in Timor-Leste
(S/2006/24)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Austria, Brazil, Indonesia,
Portugal and Timor-Leste, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I request the Chief of Protocol to escort His
Excellency Mr. Kay Rala Xanana Gusmão, President of
Timor-Leste, to a seat at the Council table.
Mr. Kay Rala Xanana Gusmão, President of
Timor-Leste, was escorted to a seat at the
Council table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to the President of TimorLeste.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Timor-Leste and Head of Mission of the
United Nations Office in Timor-Leste.
It is so decided.

2

I invite Mr. Hasegawa to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/24, which contains the progress
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste.
I wish to draw the attention of the members to
document S/2006/39, containing the text of a letter
dated 20 January 2006 from the Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste addressed to the
Secretary-General.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for TimorLeste and Head of Mission of the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Hasegawa: It is a pleasure for me to address
the Security Council on the progress made during the
five months since the Council last met on this item, in
August 2005. Today, I feel particularly privileged to
address the Council in the presence of His Excellency
President Kay Rala Xanana Gusmão and Foreign
Minister José Ramos-Horta, along with Ambassador
José Guterres of Timor-Leste.
The past five months have turned out to be a
productive period for the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) in implementing the three
mandated programmes and in preparing for the transfer
of capacity-building functions to United Nations
agencies and other development partners, as called for
in Security Council resolution 1599 (2005).
Let me start with the first component of the
UNOTIL mandate implementation, that is, support to
critical State institutions. Since 2002, international
advisers provided by the United Nations and bilateral
development partners have achieved a great deal of
progress in building the capacity of the Timorese to
administer their public institutions. As a result, the
number of international advisers provided by the
United Nations system has declined from nearly 300
three years ago to about 100 at the end of last year.

S/PV.5351

I am pleased to note that, during the past five
months, UNOTIL civilian advisers accelerated their
efforts to transfer skills and knowledge, and that their
Timorese counterparts are now demonstrating
increased ability and willingness to carry out their
duties. Yet national capacities in highly technical areas,
such as justice and finance, remain extremely weak,
and it has become evident that international advisory
support, especially in those two areas, will be required
for some years to come.
In the justice sector, eight international judges
have continued to provide training, as well as to
perform line functions in court, including the handling
of serious criminal cases. The presence of international
judges has greatly contributed to the efficient
disposition of the cases and has reduced the time for
completing trials to five months. Nonetheless, it will
take a few more years for the national judges to
become self-sufficient, as they are still undergoing
basic judicial training.
President Gusmão recently expressed his concern
about the capacity of public prosecutors to deal
adequately with as many as 3,000 pending civil and
criminal cases. This situation needs urgent attention
indeed, as all the national prosecutors commenced
specialized training in January and will not be able to
attend to their responsibilities. Additional international
prosecutors are, therefore, required. The recent
inauguration of the law faculty of the National
University of Timor Lorosa’e will provide a long-term
sustainable solution to the lack of adequate national
legal expertise.
In the finance sector, a great deal of progress has
been made in building national expertise. As a result,
the number of United Nations-funded advisers was
dramatically reduced from nearly 70 three and a half
years ago, to less than 10, along with several bilateral
advisers, by the end of last year. Currently, six
UNOTIL civilian advisers are supporting the Ministry
of Planning and Finance. The World Bank has shown
its readiness to implement a technical assistance
programme. However, the Government is requesting
the United Nations to continue providing such advisers
to maintain the critically important financial functions.
As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2006/24)
indicates, of the 45 adviser positions, several posts will
be taken over by national institutions by 20 May. The
remaining functions will be looked after by the

appropriate United Nations agencies,
institutions and other development partners.

financial

Let me now turn to the second UNOTIL mandate:
to provide support for the observance of democratic
governance and human rights. We have assigned
human rights officers to Government ministries and
State institutions, with the aim of strengthening their
capacity to protect and promote human rights. In that
connection, it is commendable that the Office of the
Provedor for Human Rights and Justice has indeed
made great progress in drafting a strategic plan and
establishing
a
complaint-handling
system
in
preparation for the opening of the Office to the public
in March 2006. Beyond May, human rights activities
will need continued attention by the international
community. I am pleased to inform the Security
Council that the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights is fully committed to
providing the necessary assistance and sending a needs
assessment mission next month for the purpose of
clearly identifying post-UNOTIL requirements.
Under the leadership of Foreign Minister José
Ramos-Horta, Timor-Leste has demonstrated a
remarkable commitment to establishing a normative
international human rights framework through its early
ratification of the full range of the core human rights
treaties in 2003 and 2004. Timor-Leste is about to
complete its final initial human rights reports under the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women, with the support of
United Nations agencies and human rights officers.
I am pleased that the Commission for Reception,
Truth and Reconciliation has just completed its report,
and that the President handed it to the SecretaryGeneral last Friday. As President Gusmão will report,
the Commission has covered a wide range of issues and
made several specific recommendations that require
careful consideration.
I shall now turn to the third component of
UNOTIL’s mandate, namely, support to the national
police, and particularly to the Border Patrol Unit,
through the provision of 60 police and 15 military
training advisers.
UNOTIL police training advisers and their
Timorese counterparts have conducted a joint capacity
assessment of each unit and formulated a strategic plan
for their further development. Military training

3

S/PV.5351

advisers have now completed the initial phase of the
transfer of border management skills and entered into
the validation phase, so as to ensure that the Border
Patrol Unit has the capacity to interact with its
Indonesian army counterparts as equal and professional
partners.
However,
the
need
to
accelerate
the
implementation of those training programmes became
quite evident on 6 January, when an incident took place
during which three people were shot dead at the border
by the Timorese police. I commend the decision made
immediately by the two countries, Timor-Leste and
Indonesia, to undertake a joint investigation into the
incident. The incident has prompted UNOTIL, for our
part, to refocus our attention on the specific need to
enhance the professionalism of the Border Patrol Unit.
In that regard, I have instructed UNOTIL police and
military training advisers to review and redesign the
training programme by placing greater emphasis on the
minimum use of force during arrests and detentions, in
order to avoid the recurrence of incidents of that
nature.
Meanwhile, as noted in the report of the
Secretary-General, Timor-Leste’s relationship with
Indonesia continues to improve. That improvement has
been characterized by an exchange of visits at the
highest level, by President Gusmão and President
Yudhoyono, as well as by frequent consultations
carried out by Foreign Ministers Ramos-Horta and
Hassan Wirajuda. The bilateral relationship has also
been strengthened by cooperation between the two
sides in many other areas.
In that connection, I would like to commend
Timor-Leste and Indonesia for making significant
progress during the last few weeks towards resolving
technical issues concerning the demarcation of the
common border. I am confident that a final agreement
can be achieved on the remaining 1 per cent, in order
to soon conclude the task of delineating the entire
border.
Timor-Leste’s relationship with Australia has also
been strengthened. On 12 January, the Foreign
Ministers of the two countries signed an agreement to
share revenues derived from the Greater Sunrise oil
and natural gas field. Timor-Leste will receive 50 per
cent of the upstream revenues, which will no doubt
facilitate the economic and social development of the
country.

4

Timor-Leste has made major progress in
peacebuilding, but peace remains fragile. Presidential
and parliamentary elections will take place next year,
for the first time since the restoration of independence.
Remembering what happened in 1975, Timorese
leaders have reminded us that those elections will
constitute a critical test for the nascent democratic
State of Timor-Leste. An electoral needs assessment
mission fielded in November 2005 concluded that, for
the elections to be free and fair, Timor-Leste needs the
assistance of the international community and a strong
political presence. Following the recommendations of
the mission, UNOTIL is already in the process of
recruiting three technical advisers to assist in drafting
electoral laws, planning electoral administrative
processes and establishing a voter database. I invite the
members of the Council to refer to the letter that Prime
Minister Mari Alkatiri just sent to the SecretaryGeneral
(S/2006/39,
annex),
requesting
the
establishment of a special political office. I recommend
that the Security Council carefully examine the
Government’s request, taking into account the newly
emerging political and security situation.
Finally, I wish to thank President Xanana
Gusmão and other leaders of Timor-Leste for having
maintained close dialogue and consultations with us in
building peace and the capacities of Timorese
institutions, as mandated by the Security Council. For
the last six years, the United Nations has been able to
carry out successful peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations in Timor-Leste thanks in great part to the
determination of the leaders and people of Timor-Leste
to benefit wisely from the assistance that United
Nations missions can provide.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Kay Rala Xanana Gusmão, President of TimorLeste, to make a statement.
President Gusmão: I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for inviting me to speak to this body
today. I ask the indulgence of the members of the
Security Council in offering special thanks. On my
own behalf and on behalf of the people of Timor-Leste,
I wish to convey to you, Mr. President, and to the
people of Tanzania, our profound gratitude for the
strong support you have given us, beginning in
December of 1975, when Mr. José Ramos-Horta, our
Minister for Foreign Affairs, arrived here for the first
time to seek the assistance of the Security Council. He
was literally met at the front door by Mr. Salim Ahmed

S/PV.5351

Salim, who looked after him. I express our deepest
gratitude to the late President of Tanzania, Mr. Julius
Nyerere, Father of the Nation. In the 1980s, when I
was still in the mountains of Timor-Leste leading the
FALINTIL guerrilla army, I was informed that
President Nyerere had raised the issue of Timor-Leste’s
self-determination during a visit to Indonesia. Words
cannot do justice to the feelings we experienced or to
the way our spirits soared when we received the news
of that.
In the interest of time, my presentation will be an
abridged version of the statement that has been
circulated in the Chamber. I will address three issues:
my thoughts on the report of our Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation, current
developments and challenges, and our ongoing needs
and expectations vis-à-vis the international community.
On 31 October 2005, Mr. Aniceto Guterres,
Chairman of the Commission, handed to me the
Commission’s final report, pursuant to regulation
No. 2001/10 of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) as amended
by our National Parliament. Abiding by the law and in
an effort to expedite the process, I handed the report
over to the National Parliament on 28 November, and
thereafter to the Government. On 20 January 2006, the
Secretary-General was gracious enough to receive me.
On that occasion, I presented him with a copy of the
Commission’s report.
When I addressed our National Parliament on
28 November, I said that, upon learning about the
contents of the report, I concluded that both Minister
Ramos-Horta and I were right in saying that true
justice for the East Timorese was the recognition by
the international community of the right of the people
of
Timor-Leste
to
self-determination
and
independence. That understanding is crucial to our
analysis and conclusions. Therefore, if we consider that
the previous 24 years were years of injustice —
injustice in which part of the international community
was implicated — then the collective actions taken by
the United Nations in 1999 in freeing our people, and
in assisting us since, are acts of redemption and of
superior justice.
The following excerpt can be read in the report
handed to me on 31 October 2005:
“The Commission is of the opinion that it is
not possible to achieve long-lasting reconciliation

without establishing the truth, obtaining justice
and providing compensation to the victims.”
Before the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation was established, the National Council of
Timorese Resistance, with the support of the
International Organization for Migration, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor, was engaged in meetings at the border
involving victims and perpetrators in an effort to
encourage the Timorese who had fled to West Timor to
return home. Those meetings were also aimed at
fostering genuine reconciliation among the people, and
genuine reconciliation means the way that people
accept each other without sentiments of revenge and
hatred.
We need not evaluate the report of the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation
solely from the incomplete perspective of exposing the
truth regarding violations of human rights. I
acknowledge that the Commission’s mandate was the
pivotal element leading to all other activities. We all
acknowledge the merit that the Commission has earned
in the search for truth. Further, we all acknowledge that
truth is seminal to the quest for justice for the victims.
Reconciliation, however, has been a longstanding process for the people of Timor-Leste. It is as
a result of our efforts at reconciliation that there has
not been a single revenge killing of suspected elements
implicated in the occupation of our country. If the
elections of August 2001 for the Constituent Assembly
represented a great moment of civic behaviour on the
part of the citizens of Timor-Leste, and if the elections
of April 2002 for the President of the Republic were
held in a commendable climate free from violence,
they should be seen as a reflection of the profound
consciousness of our people of the need never, ever
again to allow any space in Timor-Leste for political
violence. That is why we are living in an environment
of political stability and social harmony.
The investigations of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation can be grouped
into two main areas: the international dimension,
pertaining to the way the international community
positioned itself in relation to the question of TimorLeste, and the internal dimension, which dealt with
acts committed against the Timorese.

5

S/PV.5351

Regarding responsibility for the acts committed
by us Timorese since the 1980s, we acknowledge that
such violations of human rights took place. We knew
that the report of the Commission would suffer from a
lack of impartiality and objectivity unless the human
rights abuses committed by Timorese against Timorese
were addressed as well.
Some of the report’s recommendations with
respect to justice are very ambitious. What, after all, is
the objective of justice? It is promoted mostly as
retribution — punishing those who act outside the rule
of law. Retributive justice is found in the legal systems
of all countries, yet we know that justice has a
deterrent component and that most countries
incorporate that aspect of justice into their legal
systems.
The report of the Commission for Reception,
Truth and Reconciliation states that “the absence of
justice … is a fundamental obstacle in the process of
building a democratic society”. My reply to that would
be: “Not necessarily”. Justice cannot be abstracted, and
I would say that the building of a democratic society is
very much dependent upon the context in which we
apply that concept. Our own process in building
tolerance and reconciliation as the bases for a
democratic participation of the people is applying
restorative justice.
What also concern me are the report’s
recommendations pertaining to reparations for the
victims and further prosecutions. The report asks the
permanent members of the Security Council, the
Governments that sold weapons to Indonesia and
supported Indonesia’s policy, as well as the Portuguese
and Indonesian Governments, to pay reparations to the
victims.
In regard to the responsibilities of those who,
during the 24 years from 1975 to 1999, by indifference
and inaction or by direct participation enabled an
unjust situation to persist for so long, I can only
express my deepest gratitude for what the countries
mentioned in the Commission’s report and many others
have done to free us and to rebuild our country. There
are not enough words to express the gratitude of our
people.
The prosecution’s recommendation suggests, on
the one hand, the establishment of an international
tribunal and, on the other, that the contracts of the
international judges who served on the Special Panels

6

for Serious Crimes be renewed and that the resources
allocated to the investigation and trial of all crimes
committed between 1975 and 1999 be enhanced. That
recommendation does not take into account the
situation of political anarchy and social chaos that
could easily erupt if we should decide to bring people
to court for every crime committed by ourselves since
1975.
Finally, the report of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation also deals with the
Commission for Truth and Friendship, considered as
the opposite of punitive justice. While there have been
many national truth commissions, there has never been
one jointly initiated by two countries, and we regret
that the United Nations has so far not shown much
interest in or support for that novel initiative. The
establishment of the Commission for Truth and
Friendship was an undertaking of the State. The State
of Timor-Leste works on the principle that truth-telling
is a way of achieving justice, which, under the current
circumstances, is the best approach to the democratic
development of both countries — Timor-Leste and
Indonesia. In our perception, it is not easy for anyone
to accept the truth. The acceptance of the truth is
therefore the acknowledgement of responsibility.
On the way here, I came across an article by
Nobel Peace laureate Archbishop Desmond Tutu on the
very issue on which I am reflecting. For members’
benefit, I have attached to my speech a copy of that
timely article, entitled “Justice is Reconciliation”, but
allow me to read out some salient parts that speak to
our situation as much as any other can.
“In our case neither, the apartheid
Government nor the liberation movement could
defeat each other. We had a military deadlock.
Moreover, in the case of Nuremberg, the
prosecutors and judges could pack up their bags
after the trial and leave Germany for their homes.
We had to make our homes in this, our common
motherland, and learn to live with one another ...
Such trials probably would have gone on nearly
forever, leaving gaping wounds open.”
Whilst we do not share a common motherland
with Indonesia; we do share a border; we do share
history; we do have citizens of Timor-Leste living,
working and studying in Indonesia; we are both
nascent democracies struggling to put behind us years
of conflict; and our fates are in many ways conjoined.

S/PV.5351

Timor-Leste is not a conquering nation and Indonesia
is not a conquered one.

past, let us not forget that it all happened only a few
years ago.

I have had to ask myself if it would be in our
national interest — which must include social
harmony — to begin a process that, I am told by some
friends, will bring justice, and have this process go on
for years, possibly setting back the democratic
consolidation that is being undertaken in Timor-Leste
and in Indonesia, respectively. The answer that I came
to, after wide consultation with the people, was that it
would not be.

Yet in this short time span much has happened
and much has changed for the better — so much so that
our people, despite the fact that many are still trying to
come to terms with their personal suffering, are happy
that we are at peace with ourselves and with our
neighbours and that we are living in a free and
democratic country. We would not have achieved this
without the Council’s steady and generous assistance.

Archbishop Tutu spoke at length on this issue,
and what is most telling is that he mentioned both the
necessity and desirability of adopting a restorative
justice model. He said:
“So it was a mercy that our country chose
this way to go the way of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission — granting amnesty
in exchange for the truth. This was ultimately
based on the principles of restorative justice and
ubuntu.... It sets high store by healing.... Justice
as retribution often ignores the victim, and the
system is usually impersonal and cold.
Restorative justice is hopeful.”
We, too, are hopeful, and it is important that we,
too, follow the path of restorative justice, in step with
our needs.
Finally, what should be the true lesson learned
from this report?
There are many valuable recommendations that
deserve in-depth study by Timorese society and
particularly by the political forces of our nation. The
commitment that we should all undertake is not to
allow, under any circumstances, a recurrence of
political violence in our beloved homeland.
Allow me now to turn to current developments in
Timor-Leste and to speak of the achievements and
challenges.
As we are nearing the end of the mandate of the
United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL),
allow me to express in this forum the collective and
sincere gratitude of the people of Timor-Leste to the
Council for the critical role that this body has played in
the recent history of our country. Though it might
sometimes seem to us that 1999’s dark days of
senseless violence and destruction are a thing of the

In the short period of time that has elapsed since
the transfer of sovereignty in May 2002, our new
nation, building on the impressive through basic and
precarious institutions left by UNTAET, has made
some strong progress.
The Secretary-General’s report provides a good
overview of the achievements made and the challenges
my country still faces. To add to the SecretaryGeneral’s positive assessment of the situation in the
country, Council members might wish to read another
recent, positive report — this one by the World Bank.
As head of State, I am fully aware of the
criticisms levelled at our security forces, namely the
national police. One need only listen directly to those
on the receiving end of the abuses or read our media
reports to conclude that there have been too many
unacceptable breaches of our own laws and of
international obligations.
However, I believe also that, compared with the
situation that prevailed only two years ago, there has
been a marked improvement in the overall conduct of
our police force. We are very grateful to those
countries that have made such an important
contribution to the development of our police force.
Unfortunately, our shortcomings and failings are
not confined to one area alone. We are conscious of our
shortcomings in the justice sector — as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Hasegawa, stated earlier — which are the result of an
extreme shortage of trained and experienced judges,
prosecutors, public defenders and court clerks.
Although the situation has improved somewhat with
the recruitment of a number of competent foreign
jurists, the reality is that, for a long time to come,
Timor-Leste will continue to require international
assistance in that sector if we are to offer our people an

7

S/PV.5351

independent and professional judiciary
fundamental to our democratic process.

that

is

Our relations with our two closest neighbours
continue to develop on a sound basis. The high point of
our relationship with Indonesia came last year, when
President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono visited our
country. Despite a series of incidents involving
repeated incursions into our territory, in the Oecussi
district in September and October 2005, by civilian
elements that destroyed private property and a police
post, the overall situation has been very calm.
On 6 January, an incident occurred when three
indicted persons based in West Timor entered our
territory. In the ensuing scuffle, the three were shot
dead. We must await the results of the investigation, to
be undertaken by a joint commission of investigation
agreed by the two sides, before we can be certain of the
facts surrounding the incident. Nevertheless, regardless
of the facts that emerge, any loss of life is regrettable.
With our other neighbour, Australia, we have
taken another significant step. On 12 January the two
foreign ministers signed an agreement that provides for
a 50-50 sharing of oil and gas resources in the Greater
Sunrise area, one of the richest in the entire AsiaPacific region, and a 50-year moratorium on our
maritime boundary, without prejudice to our sovereign
claims.
In the course of this year, we will see heightened
political activities in Timor-Leste as we approach the
2007 general elections for the national parliament and
the presidency. As head of State, it is my duty, under
the Constitution, to set the dates for the elections.
In that regard, I have found very useful the report
of the United Nations Electoral Assistance Division of
the Department of Political Affairs assessment mission
that visited Timor-Leste in December 2005 to evaluate
our needs in regard to the electoral process.

I would propose that the Security Council consider the
establishment of a special political office in TimorLeste with the following components, as outlined in the
Prime Minister’s request.
First, electoral assistance is needed to provide the
Government with technical and logistical support.
Secondly, civilian advisers are required. As
members are aware, while we have made continuing
progress during UNOTIL’s mandate, there are critical
areas that remain in need of secure and steady
assistance, specifically in the justice and finance
sectors.
Thirdly, Timor-Leste continues to require support
in police training. Although we have had an excellent
bilateral assistance programme funded by Australia and
the United Kingdom, we believe it is important to
maintain a degree of United Nations involvement in
police training.
And finally, in view of the forthcoming elections
in 2007 and the need to ensure enhanced dialogue and
cooperation between East Timorese and Indonesian
security elements in order to prevent tension and
conflict along the border, we believe that the
deployment of some 15 to 20 military liaison personnel
as part of the special political office would be of
crucial importance.
In the meantime, we are planning a celebratory
event on 19 and 20 May 2006 to say farewell to the
United Nations and our friends and to thank them as
the current United Nations mission comes to a close
after nearly six years. We hope that Council members
will honour us with their presence on that occasion.

Against that backdrop, it is my duty to appeal to
the international community to continue to assist us in
meeting some of our most critical needs. Prime
Minister Mari Alkatiri has written to the SecretaryGeneral conveying our needs and our request for
assistance. That letter was also sent to the President of
the Security Council.

Last but not least, as this might be the final time I
address this body in my current capacity before the
formal closure of the United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions in my country, allow me to
thank each and every member of the United Nations
family for playing a role in securing peace, security
and progress in my country. I wish to thank all
countries that have contributed troops to the
International Force, East Timor, and in particular
Australia for its decisive leadership in 1999, which
made possible the landing of peace enforcers in our
country.

While we agree that UNOTIL should come to an
end, and with that I must say that we should close the
United Nations presence in our country on a high note,

I wish to pay tribute to our dear friend the late
Sergio Vieira de Mello, a unique human being and one
of the best-ever servants of the United Nations and its

8

S/PV.5351

highest ideals. I wish also to thank his immediate
predecessor, Ian Martin, head of the United Nations
Mission in East Timor, which paved the way for what
followed. I wish further to pay tribute to Kamalesh
Sharma, head of the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor, and to our friend Sukehiro Hasegawa,
head of UNOTIL, who has been in Timor-Leste since
2002, displaying admirable energy and dedication in
his mission. To him I say, “Arigato, Sukehiro-san”.
Through them I pay tribute to all their immediate
staff and to the peacekeeping forces, police and civilian
personnel and United Nations Volunteers under their
command, from so many nationalities. We owe them
all a great deal.
We might not have too many virtues, but we
possess one quality that makes up for any lack, and that
is our sense of gratitude to anyone who has done good
to us. We have learned a great deal from them all,
through both good and bad, and I hope they have
learned something from us: some good and some bad,
but all part of life’s wonderful learning experience.
The President: I thank the President of the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste for the kind
words he spoke about my country, and in particular
about the late President Nyerere, the founder of the
Tanzanian nation, and about my compatriot
Ambassador Salim Ahmed Salim, who was President
of the Security Council exactly 30 years ago, in
January 1976, a month after he received East Timor’s
Foreign Minister in December 1975.
Mr. Tachie-Menson (Ghana): I wish first of all
to welcome the President of Timor-Leste, His
Excellency Mr. Xanana Gusmão. We are very grateful
to him for his address to the Council. Our thanks go
also to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing.
My delegation is impressed by what has been
achieved with regard to national reconstruction in
Timor-Leste since the election of the President in 2002.
Timor-Leste was a country that lost an estimated
100,000 to 180,000 people in the brutal internal
conflict that took place between 1975 and 1999. From
the ashes of that conflict has arisen a new State with an
accountable Government, which, in partnership with
the international community, is gradually building
State institutions from the local to the national levels.
Criminal law and civil procedures are being
strengthened through the enactment of new legislation.

Various capacity-building programmes are in place to
revitalize the bureaucracy and the institutions
responsible for governance and human rights. The
police services are also being rebuilt. Those
institutional reforms and renewal programmes need to
be continued.
The present situation of calm and stability is a
manifestation of the effectiveness of the existing
partnership. What is happening in Timor-Leste is a
shining example of what can be achieved through postconflict peacebuilding. In that regard, we wish to
recommend an increase in assistance for the legislative
and judicial sectors in view of the critical role that
institutions in those spheres have to play in the
entrenchment and sustainability of good governance
and the rule of law. Similarly, we align ourselves with
the recommendation made by the Secretary-General in
his report (S/2006/24) regarding the request for support
from the international community for the general
elections to be held in 2007, which will be an
important milestone in the consolidation of the system
of democratic governance.
That Timor-Leste has taken its proper place and
role in the international community is a tribute not only
to the resilience and determination of the Government
and the people of Timor-Leste but also to the efforts of
the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL)
and to the international donor community, including
the financial institutions. On that point, my delegation
is of the opinion that an international presence and
international support are necessary to sustain the
process of nation-building. We therefore support the
request of the Government of Timor-Leste that the
United Nations consider establishing a political office
to continue the work of UNOTIL after the expiration of
its mandate.
While noting the achievements that have been
made so far, we cannot overlook a very sensitive issue
confronting not only the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste but also the international community at
large: the report of the Commission for Reception,
Truth and Reconciliation. My delegation condemns
violence and gross violations of human rights. We feel,
however, that, in pursuing justice, the Government of
Timor-Leste and the Government of Indonesia should
be encouraged to engage in constructive dialogue to
find a way forward on this issue.

9

S/PV.5351

Mr. Faaborg-Andersen (Denmark): I should like
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, for his briefing and
President Gusmão for his important statement and for
his presence here today.
Denmark associates itself fully with the statement
to be made shortly by the representative of Austria on
behalf of the European Union.
The situation in Timor-Leste has improved much
in recent years. The security situation remains
generally calm and stable. Local elections have
recently been held in a peaceful manner and with a
high voter turnout. The capacity of the Timorese
Government institutions and security forces has
improved. In addition, the stage is being set for the
smooth transfer from the United Nations Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) to a sustainable development
framework. The next major step will be the upcoming
parliamentary and presidential elections.
However, the situation in Timor-Leste, a nascent
democracy, remains fragile, and the country continues
to rely on international support. As a result, we support
Timor-Leste’s request for a continued political United
Nations presence — although the presence should be
small, so as to leave the Timorese in the driver’s seat.
We welcome the presentation by President
Gusmão of the report of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation to the SecretaryGeneral last Friday. It is our hope that the report will
soon be officially published so as to help the Timorese
people to gain clarity about their past. The scars of the
past will not completely heal until the truth has been
revealed and all of those responsible for past atrocities
have been brought to justice. Impunity must not be an
option. In this regard, Denmark is concerned about the
provisions on amnesty contained in the statute of the
bilateral Commission on Truth and Friendship. In
addition, the safety and security of victims and
witnesses who have testified in the past must be
protected at all times.
We look forward to the Secretary-General’s
report on the issue of justice and reconciliation, taking
into account the report of the Commission of Experts,
as well as the views expressed by Indonesia and TimorLeste. The report should also benefit from the report of
the
Commission
for
Reception,
Truth
and
Reconciliation and could provide useful guidance to
the Council for the post-UNOTIL period.

10

Finally, we welcome the signing on 12 January of
an oil and gas deal between Australia and Timor-Leste,
which will provide a financial boost to Timor-Leste’s
development efforts. In view of their traumatic past,
the Timorese people certainly deserve the fruits of
development and democracy, and we wish President
Gusmão and the Timorese people every success in
continuing to move the country forward.
Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like, first of all, to welcome the President of
Timor-Leste, Mr. Xanana Gusmão, and the Foreign
Minister of that country, our friend Mr. José RamosHorta, to the Council. We would like to thank President
Gusmão for his important briefing, of which we have
taken careful note. We assure him that Argentina will
take into account the position of his Government
during the forthcoming negotiations on matters relating
to his country and in the Security Council, in particular
with regard to the establishment of a United Nations
political office in Timor-Leste.
I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, for his introduction of the most recent
report of the Secretary-General on the question. We
would like to commend Mr. Hasegawa and the entire
team of the United Nations Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNOTIL) for their work. We welcome the fact that
UNOTIL has continued to help to strengthen the
Timorese institutions and to transfer expertise with a
view to the development of endogenous capacity in the
areas of public administration, justice, human rights,
policing and other matters. We believe that those
advances will help to ensure the smooth transition to a
framework of assistance for sustainable development in
Timor-Leste.
In spite of all of the progress that has been made,
we should note that Timor-Leste still requires
assistance. It remains a poor country, and there are still
a number of areas with regard to which it will continue
to require international assistance beyond May 2006.
Although certain international agencies and bilateral
donors have been identified with a view to providing
support in some of those areas, as the SecretaryGeneral notes in his report (S/2006/24), some key
aspects have not been covered. My country believes
that we must keep all options open until May, since if
we cannot identify bilateral or multilateral donors to
assist Timor-Leste, the United Nations will have to do
so directly.

S/PV.5351

The question of international assistance for
parliamentary and presidential elections in 2007 is also
very important in that connection. In this regard, we
take note of the letter from Prime Minister Alkatiri
concerning the establishment of a special political
office. In principle, by delegation supports that. We
hope that in his next report the Secretary-General will
present specific proposals for the mandate and
composition of such an office.
We welcome the fact that relations between
Timor-Leste and Indonesia have continued to improve
and that the parties have made progress in the
demarcation of the land border. We hope that progress
will continue in that area and that a border
management agreement will be concluded as soon as
possible.
We also welcome the signing of an agreement
between Timor-Leste and Australia concerning the
sharing of resources from the Timor Sea. We hope that
it will be implemented for the benefit of the Timorese
people.
Lastly, we would like to emphasize that, as is
well known, we attach great importance to human
rights issues. President Gusmão has transmitted to the
Secretary-General the report of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation, which concerns
abuses committed between 1974 and 1999. We would
like to know what sort of action is envisaged in
response to the conclusions and recommendations of
the report and whether there are areas in which the
United Nations could assist. We also take note of the
activities undertaken by the bilateral Commission for
Truth and Friendship established by Timor-Leste and
Indonesia, and we hope that the utmost efforts will be
made in that regard to establish the truth about human
rights violations. In that context, we look forward to
receiving a report from the Secretary-General soon so
that we can consider practical ways and means of
administering justice that properly take into account
the rights of the victims of human rights violations and
of their family members.
Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I should like, first of all, to express
condolences to the people and the Government of
Guatemala in the light of the report, which we received
this morning, about the deaths of Guatemalan
peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. That tragic event reaffirms that we need to help

countries to resolve conflict in that region and
elsewhere. We must pay constant attention to the safety
and security of all United Nations peacekeepers.
The
Russian
delegation
welcomes
the
participation in this Council meeting of the President
and of the Foreign Minister of Timor-Leste. We were
pleased to hear the statement made by President
Xanana Gusmão. We would also like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Hasegawa, for introducing the progress report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste (UNOTIL). We thank him for his
informative briefing on developments in the country.
Russia welcomes the steady progress made in
building Timor-Leste’s statehood. We are pleased at the
successful holding of local elections, the strengthening
of the country’s legislative framework and the
enhancement of the professional skills of members of
the law enforcement services. We welcome the
attention that Timor-Leste is devoting to resolving the
problems that still exist in that area. However, we
realize that the capacity of the State’s organs is not yet
strong enough and that the country remains somewhat
dependent in that regard. Timor-Leste still requires
effective international assistance to provide security,
stability and sustainable development; indeed, that
point was made today by Mr. Gusmão.
We view as positive the development of
cooperation between Timor-Leste and Indonesia and
Australia, and we welcome the progress made in
resolving the issue of delineating the border between
Timor-Leste and Indonesia. We take note of the great
importance of the bilateral Commission for Truth and
Friendship. We hope that the Commission will
successfully carry out its duties and that it will help to
further strengthen the relationship between Indonesia
and Timor-Leste, including in the area of resolving
issues related to human rights violations in TimorLeste.
We believe that the activities of UNOTIL are
important, and we commend its staff for their efforts.
We are sure that the Office’s mandate will be fully
carried out by May 2006. However, given the need to
ensure the successful organization of presidential and
parliamentary elections in 2007, the Russian delegation
is prepared to engage in a constructive Security
Council discussion of possible ways to provide the
Timorese with appropriate United Nations support

11

S/PV.5351

following the completion of UNOTIL’s mandate, on 20
May this year.
We have taken careful note of the wishes
expressed here by the President of Timor-Leste.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to take this opportunity to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Kay Rala Xanana Gusmão, President of
the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, to this
Security Council meeting and to thank Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Timor-Leste and Head of Mission of the
United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL), for
his important briefing. I thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive progress report on the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste for the period 16 August
2005 to 13 January 2006 (S/2006/24).
I congratulate the people and the Government of
Timor-Leste on the progress they have made in
achieving peace and stability and on their dedicated
efforts to strengthen democracy and build Government
institutions in order to bring about justice and promote
respect for human rights. In addition, I congratulate the
State of Timor-Leste and its neighbour Indonesia on
their serious efforts to normalize their relations — a
process being carried out with distinction through a
mutual demonstration of good faith. We salute the two
countries’ courageous decision to establish the bilateral
Commission for Truth and Friendship and to sign The
Provisional Agreement on the Borderline between
Timor-Leste and Indonesia; a ceremony held at the
border village of Mota’ain marked the placement of the
first marker along their common land border. We hope
that efforts will continue to demarcate the 96 per cent
of the land border agreed to in the Provisional
Agreement on the Borderline, signed by the Foreign
Ministers of the two countries in April 2005.
Because of that development, the general
situation has remained calm, except for a few isolated
instances of a kind that could normally occur along any
stretch of common land border between States. We
note with appreciation the quick response by the
Timorese national police following incursions by
members of former militias, which led to a number of
arrests. That response was reassuring to the Timorese
living near border areas.
We pay tribute to Timor-Leste and commend the
progress it has made to date. In addition, we cannot fail
to commend the Security Council for the resolutions it

12

has adopted to support the State in its efforts. Among
those resolutions, one stands out: resolution 1599
(2005) of 28 April 2005, which established the United
Nations political mission — UNOTIL — with a clear
and enabling mandate for one year, ending on 20 May
2006. Here, we recall that it is essential that TimorLeste have a permanent, high-level United Nations
presence in the form of an office that will plan for the
smooth transition to a sustainable framework for
development assistance. Through such a framework,
the United Nations will assist the country in its
development efforts, in establishing general policies
and in coordinating assistance from the donor
community. Special attention will be devoted to
building the State’s institutional capacity and to
promoting interaction among the State, civil society
organizations and the private sector in the fields of
education, health and human resources development.
We note with satisfaction that local elections
were held in a peaceful and orderly manner and that
several political parties participated in them by fielding
candidates, thus enabling democracy to take root in the
country. We also note with interest that presidential and
parliamentary elections will be held in 2007 and that
Timor-Leste is looking to the United Nations and the
international community for effective assistance in that
area.
The Timorese are resolved to build a solid
democracy and truly believe in good governance, the
rule of law, transparency and accountability. We hope
that the United Nations and its system of organizations,
including the specialized agencies, as well as the
Bretton Woods institutions and the international
community, will be able to support Timor-Leste’s
efforts and to provide the country with the necessary
financial, human and logistical assistance. Given that
presidential and parliamentary elections will be held
for the first time since Timor-Leste assumed
independence, and that the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor was downsized to become a
United Nations special political mission, we hope that
every effort will be made to organize the elections in a
competent, fair and efficient manner.
In conclusion, we commend Timor-Leste and
Indonesia for the wisdom that they both demonstrated
when they agreed to establish the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation, which worked
uninterruptedly for more than five years. The
Commission submitted its report to President Gusmão,

S/PV.5351

who in turn submitted it to the National Parliament on
28 November 2005 and to Prime Minister Alkatiri on
30 November. The State of Qatar welcomes the fact
that the report was officially submitted to TimorLeste’s National Parliament and subsequently to the
Secretary-General. We agree with the SecretaryGeneral that it is an important milestone in the search
for truth and reconciliation. If national reconciliation is
to be achieved, the truth must be brought out.
Mr. Burian (Slovakia): First of all, I would like
to
thank
Mr.
Sukehiro
Hasegawa,
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for TimorLeste, for his comprehensive briefing. I join other
Council members in welcoming His Excellency
Mr. Xanana Gusmão, President of the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste, to our meeting.
Slovakia highly values President Gusmão’s
personal contribution to the process of rebuilding and
reconciliation and of healing the wounds of TimorLeste after his nation suffered some of the worst
atrocities of modern times. I can assure him of our
continued commitment and our support for the
successful transition of Timor-Leste.
We share the evaluation of the situation and the
observations contained in the progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste
(UNOTIL)
(S/2006/24).
In
that
connection, we are pleased to note that Timor-Leste is
making steady and tangible achievements in
reconstruction and State-building.
Despite remarkable progress in the establishment
of democratic institutions, there are still formidable
challenges and tasks that need to be addressed in order
to assist the country in its recovery from conflict and in
developing its capacities to achieve sustainable peace
and development. During the past three years, the
Government of Timor-Leste has proved that it is
capable of assuming ownership and responsibility for
resolving problems of transition. The lack of human
and financial resources, as well as insufficient
infrastructure and administrative capacities at this
stage, however, require the continued engagement and
assistance of the international community. In that
context, we commend UNOTIL for its activities in
supporting the development of critical State institutions
in Timor-Leste, including the police and the judiciary.
There is no doubt that the key milestone on the
road of transition will be the presidential and

parliamentary elections scheduled for May 2007. We
believe that the establishment of a solid legal
framework governing the elections will play a crucial
role in providing a level playing field for all and in
ensuring a transparent and credible outcome. We
support the Secretary-General’s recommendation that
an international political presence be retained in
Timor-Leste until the end of the electoral process in
order to better provide all the guidelines and support
necessary for the preparation and successful outcome
of the elections. In that connection, we think that the
proposal made by the President of Timor-Leste,
explained in detail in the letter from the Prime Minister
of Timor-Leste addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2006/39), to create a smaller special United Nations
political office after the mandate of UNOTIL expires in
May 2006, deserves further serious consideration.
Recent incidents on the border with Indonesia
underline the necessity to address the issues of proper
training for border police and of finalizing the process
of border demarcation. We urge both Timor-Leste and
Indonesia to continue working out measures for
strengthening confidence in the border area. In that
connection, we welcome the development of contacts
between the Border Patrol Unit in Timor-Leste and its
Indonesian counterpart.
We welcome the efforts of the Governments of
Timor-Leste and Indonesia to develop goodneighbourly relations between their countries and to
build stability and confidence through a process of
reconciliation. We commend the establishment of the
bilateral Commission for Truth and Friendship, which
is trying to achieve reconciliation and to define ways to
overcome the burden of the past.
At the same time, reconciliation must not in any
way mean that those who committed the most serious
crimes of rape and murder escape unpunished. In our
view, by overlooking the wrongs of the past in this
area, the international community would set a very
dangerous precedent. It would also send the wrong
signal to those who are committing or planning
atrocities in other parts of the world. We must break
the cycle of impunity and bring the perpetrators to
justice. The former United Nations Serious Crimes
Unit and the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation documented thousands of instances of
torture, rape and execution, which must be fully
investigated and appropriately prosecuted.

13

S/PV.5351

In conclusion, I would like to express
our appreciation for the excellent work done by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Hasegawa, and the UNOTIL personnel. We highly
commend them for their commitment and for the
progress made in implementing the key tasks mandated
by the Security Council. We are convinced that the
time is approaching when the issue of Timor-Leste will
graduate from the agenda of the Security Council and
will instead be transferred, as a successful case of a
resolved conflict, to the Peacebuilding Commission
and other United Nations institutions to further and
more appropriately assist the Government of TimorLeste in completing the process of peacebuilding and
transition.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French):
I, too, would first wish to welcome the President of
Timor-Leste, without whom none of the spectacular
progress we are witnessing today in Timor-Leste would
have been possible.
The Permanent Representative of Austria will
soon be making a statement on behalf of the presidency
of the European Union, and I fully associate myself
with that statement. I, would like to make a few brief
comments.
First, I am delighted at the impressive progress
made by Timor-Leste four years after it gained
independence. State institutions have been created and
continue to gain strength. Democracy is taking root.
Observance of human rights is increasing. The country
is developing its cooperation and enhancing its
international outreach, particularly in Asia and in the
South Pacific. That success belongs first and foremost
to the Timorese. It is also the outcome of the
commitment of the international community and, in
particular, of the United Nations. Here, I should like to
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa.
Secondly, I should also like to note with
satisfaction the strengthening ties between Timor-Leste
and its neighbours, particularly Indonesia. The
settlement of border issues seems to be on track,
despite some incidents, which would be of concern if
they recur. This situation, in any event, requires
continued vigilance.
Thirdly, stabilization is today well under way. But
we believe that major efforts are still needed to make
this stabilization durable in the run-up to the general

14

elections scheduled for 2007. As the Secretary-General
has emphasized, major bilateral and multilateral efforts
will still be necessary following the completion of the
mandate of the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste
(UNOTIL), which expires in May 2006. We encourage
the handover of some UNOTIL activities to competent
United Nations agencies or to other organizations that
are present in the field, as well as to bilateral donors.
We have taken note of the request of the
Timorese authorities that a United Nations political
structure be maintained following the end of
UNOTIL’s mandate. It seems to us that, given the
newness of Timorese institutions and the persistence of
fragility in some elements of the stabilization process,
that request is perfectly legitimate. The structure, in
any event, needs to be appropriate and functional. We
would be grateful to the Secretary-General if he could
make some proposals about this in his next report.
We would also like to stress the importance of
national reconciliation for the stabilization of TimorLeste and its importance as an example for the entire
region. This reconciliation should not be based on
impunity, since justice alone can make it possible to
establish lasting peace. We note here that President
Gusmão has submitted to the Secretary-General the
report of the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation on human rights violations in TimorLeste between 1974 and 1999.
We also note that the Commission of Experts
appointed by the Secretary-General has identified
deficiencies in the manner that prosecutions have been
conducted to date against those who committed serious
violations of human rights in 1999. We therefore look
forward to the Secretary-General’s recommendations
on that matter, especially his recommendations
concerning the bilateral Commission for Truth and
Friendship, on the basis of the report of the
Commission of Experts and the views expressed by
Indonesia and Timor-Leste.
Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Like others, I too would
like to welcome the presence among us of the President
of Timor-Leste. I would also like to thank him for his
thoughtful statement, which I think should make others
think as well. I would also like to thank Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa for his introduction of the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2006/24) and for his briefing.
Greece fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered shortly by the Permanent Representative of

S/PV.5351

Austria on behalf of the European Union. I shall
therefore limit myself to some additional comments.
We are all encouraged by the significant positive
developments described in the report of the SecretaryGeneral. It seems that sufficient progress has been
made towards further developing the capacity of
Timor-Leste’s democratic State institutions in the
justice, human rights and national police sectors. The
report of the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation, which President Gusmão presented to
the Secretary-General last Friday, is just one such
example of that progress.
The successful holding and completion of local
elections, the preparations for the presidential and
parliamentary elections to be held in 2007 and the
adoption of key legislation demonstrate that the
process of creating a functioning democracy is on the
right track, in a country that gained its independence
just a few years ago.
In addition, we very much appreciate the
improving relations between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia, which led to the establishment of the
bilateral Commission for Truth and Friendship, as well
as the progress made in the negotiations to finalize the
delineation of the remaining 4 per cent of the land
border between the two countries. That is a very good
example that should also be taken into consideration in
other conflict areas. The establishment and work of the
Commission for Truth and Friendship indicate the
resolve of both countries to achieve accountability for
crimes and human rights violations committed in 1999.
We recognize the significance of the entire endeavour
and hope to see tangible results in the fight against
impunity for those serious crimes, something that is of
the utmost importance for the Timorese people.
We hope that the report of the Secretary-General
on justice and reconciliation for Timor-Leste, including
a practical and feasible approach as requested by the
Security Council, will be an important additional
contribution to that end. It is to be hoped that the entire
process will allow the two peoples both to face the
crimes of the past and to promote reconciliation, which
will pave the way to a better future for them and for the
entire area.
Greece welcomes the signing, a few days ago, of
the agreement with Australia on equally sharing
revenues from the natural resources of the Timor Sea.
We consider that the agreement will greatly contribute

to much-needed sustainable economic development
and that it will enable Timor-Leste to attain the
Millennium Development Goals. There are of course
still major challenges to be addressed, especially as
regards the difficult economic situation in the country.
In that respect, the work of various United Nations
specialized agencies — such as the World Bank, the
United Nations Development Programme and the
International Monetary Fund — must also be
commended.
The assistance of the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) to the Government and people
of Timor-Leste has been invaluable. UNOTIL advisers
have demonstrated ability, dedication and effectiveness
in transferring knowledge and skills, coordinating
various activities and settling border incidents by
facilitating communication and contacts between
Timorese and Indonesian border-patrol forces.
The mandate of UNOTIL will end on 20 May
2006. We are pleased to note that the SecretaryGeneral’s report refers to the preparations under way
for the successful transfer of certain tasks to other
international development actors. The SecretaryGeneral has also identified a number of serious
remaining challenges in the areas of justice, finance
and border control. To those one could add the
preparations for and holding of the 2007 presidential
and parliamentary elections.
In that context, the recent request made of the
Secretary-General by Timor-Leste’s Prime Minister to
establish a special United Nations political office
deserves our particular attention. We believe that
providing further United Nations assistance through
that well-coordinated format is suitable in the current
circumstances. We ought to consolidate the
achievements in Timor-Leste, and not compromise
their success, at this crucial stage. We will favourably
examine the proposals to be submitted by the
Secretary-General.
I also wish to join previous speakers who have
called upon the United Nations and the international
community to continue their presence and to assist
Timor-Leste in achieving full self-reliance in the near
future. Greece will continue to actively participate in
all relevant bilateral and European Union efforts and
activities.
Finally, I should like to extend to the President of
Timor-Leste my Government’s best wishes for the

15

S/PV.5351

speedy fulfilment of all the goals of the Timorese
people for the stable and prosperous future they
deserve.
Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): My delegation
fully subscribes to the statement to be delivered shortly
by the representative of Austria.
We are delighted to join our Council colleagues
in welcoming President Gusmão and Foreign Minister
Ramos-Horta to the Security Council today. Their
presence provides us an opportunity to pay tribute to
them personally, and through them to the people of
Timor-Leste, for all their remarkable achievements
over the past few years in building a stable, peaceful
and democratic Timor-Leste.
My delegation recognizes too the very important
role that has been played over the past few years by the
United Nations — most recently by the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) under the leadership
of Sukehiro Hasegawa. We offer our thanks to him and
his team for their efforts. We also thank him for his
briefing to us today.
In the final few months of UNOTIL’s mandate,
we hope to see a concerted effort to fulfil UNOTIL’s
remit — for example, in the training of, and assistance
to, the Border Patrol Unit.
We welcome the advances that have been
achieved during the current reporting period. We are
encouraged that progress has been made in establishing
effective democratic governance, in adopting key
legislation and in security matters — for example, in
the negotiations on the unresolved border with
Indonesia.
We are also pleased to see the completion of the
work of the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation through the submission of its report to
the President and now to the Secretary-General. The
Commission has done important and innovative work
in revealing the truth of past human rights abuses and
in fostering reconciliation. In that context, we look
forward to receiving the Secretary-General’s report on
justice and reconciliation for Timor-Leste.
But of course, further progress remains essential
in key areas, in particular the establishment of
sustainable, robust democracy and the rule of law. The
presidential elections in 2007 will be a major challenge
and a key process for embedding democratic processes
and ensuring the country’s future stability. Clearly, the

16

continuing support of the international community will
be crucial. We need to consider carefully the most
appropriate means of providing that support in the
various sectors where it is still required. The Timorese
people and Government also, of course, must take
responsibility as far as is possible.
That said, it appears that there could be a case for
a small United Nations political mission with a clearly
defined role to follow on from UNOTIL to help the
Timorese address the gaps and coordinate international
assistance. It would be helpful if the Secretariat could
do some early thinking and produce proposals for us
before the end of UNOTIL’s mandate on what might be
most appropriate. We are meanwhile carefully studying
the proposals in Prime Minister Alkatiri’s letter of 17
January to the Secretary-General.
Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
country welcomes the President of Timor-Leste, Mr.
Xanana Gusmão, and Foreign Minister José RamosHorta, and thanks President Gusmão for his
comprehensive and, above all, candid briefing on the
situation in his country.
We also thank Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Timor-Leste, for his important work at the head of the
United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL).
In 2005, Timor-Leste continued to progress
towards effective democratic governance in spite of
difficulties in the judicial and financial spheres. Local
elections took place with broad civic participation and
the rule of law was strengthened through Parliament’s
adoption of the penal code, the civil procedure code
and other important legislation. Furthermore,
preparations are now under way for parliamentary and
presidential elections scheduled for 2007.
In the area of international relations, Timor-Leste
ratified important human rights agreements and made
significant progress in the demarcation of its land
border with Indonesia. The bilateral Commission for
Truth and Friendship established with Indonesia has
now begun its work. Timor-Leste also signed an
agreement with Australia on the sharing of natural
resources from the Timor Sea, which will provide
resources to improve its fragile socio-economic
situation.
Despite such domestic and external political
progress, there are still few prospects for the economic

S/PV.5351

and financial viability of Timor-Leste, which continues
to have one of the lowest per capita incomes — some
$400 a year — in the world. That is why the most
important undertaking for the future is to make TimorLeste’s economy viable. Every effort must be made to
find more development partners for Timor-Leste and to
ensure that the conference of partners in April secures
greater resources.
We note with appreciation the transmission by
President Gusmão to the Secretary-General on
20 January of the report of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation on the violence
and human rights violations perpetrated in Timor-Leste
between 1974 and 1999. We hope that the SecretaryGeneral will issue an opinion, bearing especially in
mind the statement made by an eminent university
professor, human rights champion and scholar of truth
commissions to the effect that the purpose of such
commissions is not to uncover the entire truth — which
is virtually impossible, given human nature — but to
bring to light that which was kept hidden from our
knowledge in order to ensure justice and reconciliation.
I hope that the Secretary-General will approach this
matter in that spirit.
Moreover, we also note with appreciation the
activities undertaken since August 2005 of the bilateral
Commission for Truth and Friendship established by
Timor-Leste and Indonesia.
Peru agrees that UNOTIL’s mandate should be
extended beyond May. We urge Timor-Leste’s
development partners to do their utmost to ensure that
the new Government to be elected democratically in
2007 will inherit an economically viable country that
can sustain Timor-Leste’s progress towards becoming
an increasingly democratic society.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): Let me first express our
thanks to you, Sir, for convening this public meeting
on Timor-Leste at an important juncture, as the end of
the mandate of the United Nations Office in TimorLeste (UNOTIL) draws near in a few months time. We
thank Special Representative Hasegawa for his
comprehensive briefing on the latest developments in
the country. My delegation highly appreciates the
presence in the Chamber of President Xanana Gusmão
and Foreign Minister José Ramos-Horta, and
particularly thanks President Gusmão for his
significant statement.

Japan notes with satisfaction the tangible
achievements and encouraging progress that continue
to be made in Timor-Leste in its peace-building and
nation-building
efforts,
especially
in
the
implementation of the three programmes mandated by
the Security Council: the development of critical State
institutions, the development of police, and training in
the field of democratic governance and human rights.
We also welcome the progress being made in the
preparations for the transfer of the functions of
UNOTIL to the Government of Timor-Leste and
various development partners as the country moves
towards the phase of sustainable development.
We commend Special Representative Hasegawa
and his team for their hard work and pay tribute to
those advisers and experts working on the ground and
the many organizations and groups involved for all the
valuable contributions they have made, working in
close partnership with the Timor-Leste Government, its
institutions and its people. We have high expectations
that they will push on with their efforts as the mission’s
mandate approaches its end in May, so that those gains
will be consolidated and made sustainable to the
maximum extent possible.
I would like, in passing, to note just one thing in
that connection. The Secretary-General’s report
mentions, in reference to programme II of UNOTIL’s
support for the development of the Timor-Leste police,
the fact that 10 Timorese national police officers have
recently been deployed to the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo. I consider this a
remarkable thing, which shows the degree of success
of this programme. At the same time, the fact that, in
our world, a nation assisted in times of need can in turn
participate in assisting others in their time of need
demonstrates the true international cooperative spirit.
This is just a small episode, but I think that its
significance is, nevertheless, remarkable.
We are also encouraged to see steady, remarkable
improvements in Timor-Leste’s relations with
neighbouring countries. Occasional incidents along the
border with Indonesia are resolved through dialogue,
backed up by the improved bilateral relationship
between the two countries. We hope that the remaining
work involved in the delineation of the land border
with Indonesia will be completed soon.
We also welcome the recent agreement reached
between Timor-Leste and Australia over the sharing of

17

S/PV.5351

the revenues from oil and gas development in the
Timor Sea. With the Petroleum Fund established to
ensure the prudent and wise use of income from natural
resources, we hope that this will provide an important
boost to the development of the Timorese economy and
society.

Government is of the view that the spirit that prompted
the joint establishment of the Commission of Truth and
Friendship by Timor-Leste and Indonesia should be
respected, and we hope that the Commission will
produce results that meet its own aims as well as the
expectations of the international community.

Japan underscores the necessity of ensuring that
the United Nations and the international community
continue to provide the appropriate and timely support
which is still needed in Timor-Leste and of adapting
that support to the country’s changing needs and
requirements. Timor-Leste has moved from conflict to
peacekeeping to peacebuilding, and, as the country has
gone through those phases, the United Nations
presence and assistance to Timor-Leste has evolved
from the United Nations Mission in East Timor
(UNAMET) to the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) to the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), and finally to UNOTIL, to meet the
changing needs of the country, and it has done so, on
the whole, quite successfully. We owe it to ourselves,
as well as to the Government and the people of TimorLeste, to see to it that the record of this success story
remains a cause for pride in the annals of United
Nations history.

The Security Council requested the SecretaryGeneral last September to provide his views on justice
and reconciliation for Timor-Leste, adopting a
practical, realistic approach to this issue and taking
into account the views of the two countries. We believe
that this issue can be resolved through the productive
engagement of all parties concerned. The statement we
heard from the President this morning on this very
issue should be an important guide in the handling of
this matter.

With that in mind, and with regard to the question
of the future engagement of the United Nations after
the mandate of UNOTIL expires, my Government has
taken note of the request of the Timor-Leste
Government to retain a United Nations political
presence for a certain period of time, particularly the
request for international assistance in connection with
the upcoming general elections in 2007 and the
retention of some civilian advisers. In making that
decision,
we
should
study
carefully
the
recommendations of the United Nations electoral
assistance needs assessment mission.
My delegation will certainly study carefully the
request made by the Timor-Leste Government in
considering the modalities of United Nations assistance
in the post-UNOTIL period, with an objective
assessment of the situation on the ground, including in
the area of security, while also taking into account the
views of UNOTIL, other actors on the ground and the
key countries concerned.
Finally, the issue of the serious crimes that took
place in Timor-Leste must also be addressed. My

18

Before concluding, my delegation wishes to pay
high tribute to the leadership of the Timor-Leste
Government, to President Gusmão and Foreign
Minister Ramos-Horta, which has enabled the country
to make the sort of progress towards peace, security
and development that we have seen so far.
As a friend of Timor-Leste in the region, Japan
has actively participated in international efforts to help
Timor-Leste maintain peace and consolidate the gains
of peace, through UNMISET and UNOTIL as well as
through other multilateral and bilateral frameworks.
The introduction of the “koban”, or police mini-station,
system to the police system of Timor-Leste, and the
transfer of skills related to the disposal of undetonated
bombs are recent examples of our assistance efforts.
Japan will spare no effort in continuing its support for
Timor-Leste’s future endeavours aimed at nationbuilding and sustainable development.
Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation bids a warm welcome to
President Xanana Gusmão, and we welcome his
important statement. We would also like to thank Mr.
Hasegawa, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his presence at this meeting and for his
briefing.
China is very pleased to note that, thanks to the
outstanding leadership of the President of Timor-Leste,
the situation in the country has remained calm; that the
Government has, step by step, strengthened its capacity
to run the country; that the rule of law has also been
gradually strengthened; and that Timor-Leste’s

S/PV.5351

relations with neighbouring States have also been
enhanced.

admiration and appreciation, and we appeal for the
support and respect of the international community.

Here we would like warmly to congratulate the
Timorese Government and people on the achievements
they have made in their nation-building undertakings. I
should like to express our appreciation to the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) for its work
in that respect. At the same time, we should realize
also that Timor-Leste, as one of the poorest countries
in the world, has little infrastructure to start with and
that the road towards nation-building has not been
easy. The question of how to continue with the success
story of Timor-Leste is not only the unshirkable
responsibility of the international community but also
merits serious consideration by the Council.

In conclusion, I urge donors, the United Nations
system and international financial institutions to
continue to devote attention to Timor-Leste and to
provide it with generous help, so that it can embark on
the path of sustainable development. China will, as
always, support the country in its efforts related to
independence and nation-building. We will develop
trade and economic cooperation with it and continue
our help to the extent of our ability.

In that respect, I believe that, first, UNOTIL
should, within its remaining mandate, focus more
closely on the transfer of skills and knowledge, with a
view to enhancing capacity-building in the country, and
that it should also continue to cooperate with
international and bilateral partners in the process of
making adequate and careful arrangements aimed at
ensuring the continued functioning of State institutions
following UNOTIL’s withdrawal.

Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by welcoming His Excellency Mr. Xanana
Gusmão, hero of the independence of Timor-Leste,
President of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste. I
remind him that my country, through its permanent
representation in New York, took part in the
celebrations of the first hours of dearly bought
independence, sharing the joy of the Timorese nation.
We still cherish the memory of that jubilant crowd.
Thus, we have listened with great attention to President
Gusmão’s briefing to the Council, and we appreciate
all that has been achieved in slightly less than four
years.

Secondly, the Secretary-General points out in his
report that the presidential and parliamentary elections
in 2007 will represent a major challenge to the country.
In that respect, the Timorese Government has asked the
United Nations to consider the establishment of a
special political office to help ensure the successful
holding of the elections.

My delegation also listened with interest to the
briefing by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, concerning the
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste for the period 16 August
2005 to 13 January 2006 (S/2006/24). The report
struck my delegation in the following respects.

China expresses its understanding of and
agreement with such a request, and we call on the
Council seriously to consider that request and reach
agreement on the relevant arrangements in a timely
manner so as to ensure the lasting stability and
development of the country.

My delegation notes with satisfaction that despite
some residual insecurity, the overall situation in TimorLeste has improved, thanks to the progress made in
establishing effective democracy in the country. That
progress is marked by the successful holding of local
elections, together with the strengthening of the
juridical framework through the adoption of key
provisions and greater respect for human rights on the
part of the police.

Thirdly, properly addressing the outstanding
problems with the country’s neighbours will not only
create a positive environment for its long-term
development but also contribute significantly to
regional peace and stability.
In that respect, the Timorese leadership under
President Gusmão has demonstrated exceptional
political wisdom and courage by taking strategic
decisions with foresight. We would stress our

My delegation believes that what is occurring in
Timor-Leste is a hopeful and encouraging sign. That
was attested to by the presentation to President Xanana
Gusmão on 31 October 2005 — after only five years of
work — of the final report of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation, which was
responsible for considering violations of human rights
in Timor-Leste between 1974 and 1999. That report, a

19

S/PV.5351

copy of which was transmitted to the SecretaryGeneral last Friday, will, we hope, make it possible to
establish the truth of that grim chapter of the history of
Timor-Leste in order to assist with national
reconciliation while ensuring that the perpetrators of
atrocities are punished and that reparation is granted to
the victims.
Moreover, the preparation of legislation
concerning veterans — which would, among other
things, determine who could claim the status of former
combatant and what rights and benefits would be given
to veterans — together with its current consideration
by a special national parliamentary commission, also
reflects the resolve to settle the accounts of the past.
My delegation therefore is anxious to see the final
adoption of that legislation.
My delegation also notes with satisfaction the
improvement in the good neighbourly relations
between Timor-Leste and its neighbours Indonesia and
Australia. The settlement of the border dispute with
Indonesia is most welcome. However, my delegation
would urge the two parties to complete negotiations on
the demarcation on the one per cent of the border that
is unresolved so that a final agreement can be reached.
We note the commencement in August 2005 of
the Commission for Truth and Friendship set up by
those two countries, and we expect that Commission to
resolve the outstanding disputes of the past in order to
strengthen the ties of friendship and cooperation. To
that end, a basis for trust must be established between
the two countries. For that reason, we stress that the
incident of 6 January 2006 — on a border that can
rightly be considered sensitive — which caused the
deaths of three persons, should be investigated
promptly. We understand the difficulties on the ground
involving control in a young nation, but we encourage
the Timorese Government to see that the investigation
is rapidly concluded.
My delegation also welcomes the signing on
12 January 2006 of an agreement between Timor-Leste
and Australia on the sharing of revenues derived from
the exploitation of natural resources in the Timor Sea.
All of the progress has been made possible
through the resolve of the local authorities, thanks to
the determined support of the United Nations and the
effective work of the United Nations Office in TimorLeste (UNOTIL) in carrying out the three programmes
mandated by the Security Council. Those programmes

20

involve support for the establishment of essential State
institutions, for the development of the police force
and strengthening the Border Patrol Unit, and for
respect for the rules of democratic governance and
human rights.
My delegation believes that much has been
achieved in the country, thanks to the support of the
international community. But we must not flag in those
efforts because, like a child taking its first steps,
Timor-Leste still needs the support of the international
community. It is thus the responsibility of the United
Nations and other bilateral and multilateral partners to
continue to support Timor-Leste in all areas so that it
may commit itself with determination to the path
towards progress.
Timor-Leste still faces some challenges,
including the holding in 2007 of presidential and
parliamentary elections, for the first time in the country
since independence. My delegation thus calls for the
United Nations and various bilateral and multilateral
partners with proven experience in the preparation and
conduct of elections to provide support to help the
country build on its achievements, some of which still
remain somewhat fragile.
Another challenge is strengthening capacity in all
areas aimed at sustainable development, which will
enable the country to lay a firm basis for political,
economic and social stability, not forgetting the
establishment of a genuine democracy concerned with
human rights.
We believe that great progress has been made in
Timor-Leste, but there is still a need to build on those
achievements. The problem that arises today, in light of
what we have heard, is not whether the international
community is doing enough, but how to continue to act
to greater effect.
Congo therefore hopes that the Council will
consider the best way to respond to the expectations of
the Timorese people and that it will continue to be
attentive to their requests, including for a continued
United Nations presence after the expiry of UNOTIL’s
mandate at the end of May 2006 through the presence
of a special political office, as has been noted here
today.
Mr. Brencick (United States of America): The
delegation of the United States welcomes the
participation of His Excellency President Gusmão and

S/PV.5351

Foreign Minister Ramos-Horta in today’s important
meeting. We thank the President for his presentation as
well as his efforts to consolidate democracy, peace and
justice in his country. We also thank Special
Representative Hasegawa for his report and for his
personal efforts to consolidate peace and stability in
East Timor. He and his colleagues in the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) are doing
excellent work in East Timor.
As other members have noted, the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2006/24), along with the
recommendations of the recent United Nations
electoral assistance needs assessment mission for East
Timor, underline the significant strides that have been
made by the Government and the people. We
congratulate them on their achievements.
The various United Nations missions to East
Timor have been good models for peacekeeping and
for post-conflict peacebuilding efforts. They have
come in when they were needed, performed what they
were set up to do and ended when the need for them
had passed. UNOTIL is scheduled to complete the job
it was created to do, and we believe it should end when
its mandate expires in May 2006.
We recognize, however, that formidable
challenges for East Timor remain. Ending UNOTIL
does not mean, and should not mean, ending assistance
to Timor, since the United Nations Development
Programme, the World Bank and a variety of bilateral
donors can and should continue to provide advice and
assistance to the Government of East Timor. We will be
working to ensure that such international assistance is
continued, to help East Timor in its process of nationbuilding and reconciliation.
The United Nations recommendations for
assistance to East Timor’s first post-independence
elections, expected to be held next year, illustrate how
the United Nations can continue to be helpful while
fully respecting East Timor’s sovereignty. We fully
support the provision of such assistance by the United
Nations Electoral Assistance Division to help the
Government of East Timor set the stage for free and
fair elections and to further advance a young nation’s
democratic development.
We strongly support a credible process to
determine accountability for the crimes against
humanity committed in East Timor in 1999. We share
the hope expressed by other members that the

Secretariat will soon brief Council members on the
comprehensive report prepared last June by the United
Nations Commission of Experts.
Finally, we are encouraged by the seriousness and
diligence with which members of the bilateral
Commission for Truth and Friendship have begun their
work. We look forward to further progress and are
hopeful that the Commission will pursue its work in a
way that generates full confidence in its conclusions’
and is transparent, holding public hearings, naming the
names
of
perpetrators,
protecting
witness
confidentiality and involving the international
community.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United
Republic of Tanzania.
I would like to thank the President of the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, His Excellency
Kay Rala Xanana Gusmão, for having addressed the
Security Council. I acknowledge the presence in the
Council Chamber of the Foreign Minister of TimorLeste, Mr. Ramos-Horta. I would also like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, and commend him for his
presentation of the progress report on the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL).
We are encouraged by the many positive
developments that have been recorded by UNOTIL,
including the completion of the final rounds of local
elections in a peaceful and orderly manner, with a huge
voter turnout; the strengthening of the country’s legal
system and the submission of the report on human
rights abuses, marking an important milestone in the
search for truth and reconciliation in Timor-Leste; the
progress that has been made on border demarcation
between Timor-Leste and Indonesia; the prevailing
environment of good-neighbourly relations, as
manifested by the recent signing of an agreement
between Timor-Leste and Australia on sharing national
resources and revenue from the Timor Sea; and the
timely move to start preparations for parliamentary and
presidential elections in 2007.
We note, however, that, despite the remarkable
progress so far achieved, many institutions in TimorLeste are still young and fragile, calling for United
Nations agencies and other development agencies to
provide support for consolidating the pillars of

21

S/PV.5351

statehood: democratic governance,
sustainable development.

security

and

As the UNOTIL mandate expires, we believe that
Timor-Leste would benefit from a small United
Nations presence in the form of a special political
office to help it to complete the unfinished work,
including by providing electoral assistance covering
technical and logistical support for the upcoming
elections for the national parliament and the
presidency, and by making available civil advisers in
critical areas that require assistance, including the
justice and finance sectors, police training and
capacity-building in the security sector. We fully
support those modest requests.
We are mindful of the issues of human rights that
need to be addressed, and we commend the
Government for the way in which it has handled them
so far. It is our expectation that human rights issues in
Timor-Leste will be dealt with so that justice can be
rendered among the Timorese population and so that
reconciliation can be achieved, in cooperation with
Indonesia, in a manner that will meet the expectations
of the international community.
Finally, I wish to express my appreciation to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Sukehiro Hasegawa, and all UNOTIL staff, for their
dedication and outstanding performance, which is an
excellent example of cooperation between the United
Nations and a Government. East Timor is, indeed, one
of the success stories of United Nations missions.
I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Austria.
Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I feel privileged to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) in the
presence of the distinguished President of Timor-Leste.
The acceding countries Bulgaria and Romania, the
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Serbia and Montenegro, and the European Free Trade
Association countries Iceland and Norway, members of
the European Economic Area, as well as Ukraine and
the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with this
statement.

22

It is now eight months since the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) took over the job of
assisting the Government in the capacity-development
of critical State institutions with the aim of further
strengthening democratic governance and building
peace in Timor-Leste. As the EU stressed in its
statement in the open debate on this subject in May
2005 (see S/PV.5180), we very much appreciate the
invaluable work of the United Nations in peacebuilding
in Timor-Leste, through its various missions since
1999. We welcome the fact that there was a high
degree of continuity between the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor and UNOTIL, which
facilitated the seamless takeover by UNOTIL of the
Mission’s functions. We commend the commitment and
contributions of UNOTIL personnel under the
continued leadership of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa.
Since voting overwhelmingly in favour of
independence in 1999, Timor-Leste has come a long
way and has achieved remarkable progress in
reconstruction and State-building. It is in the context of
consolidating those gains that the question of the future
presence, after the end of the mandate of UNOTIL on
20 May 2006, arises. We understand that, with the
recent appointment of a new United Nations
Development Programme Resident Coordinator, the
transition to the regular United Nations and
multilateral development framework is well on track.
However, we agree with President Gusmão that, given
the remaining challenges in other fields, a small, timelimited political United Nations presence beyond 20
May 2006 might be useful.
The main task ahead in the months and years to
come will be to secure the long-term success of the
State-building process in Timor-Leste. In this regard,
the preparations for and conduct of the presidential and
parliamentary elections scheduled for May 2007 are
crucial. Those elections will be a test for the maturity
of the young democracy in Timor-Leste. Fair, correct
and open conduct of the election process and the way
in which the election results are handled will be
essential to the success of the electoral process. The
EU therefore believes that the process leading to the
elections — including the elaboration of new election
legislation — must be managed in an inclusive and
transparent manner, involving all political forces and
civil society.

S/PV.5351

Of equal importance for the long-term stability of
Timor-Leste is sustainable economic progress. In that
regard, the European Union welcomes the recent
signing, on 12 January, of the agreement between
Australia and Timor-Leste dividing equally between
the two countries the revenues derived from the oil and
gas fields in the Timor Sea. We regard that as a very
positive development that will guarantee a steady
source of clearly needed income for the Government of
Timor-Leste. At the same time, as past examples have
shown, oil revenues can be a mixed blessing if not
managed properly. It is in that context that we stress
the importance of establishing clear and transparent
mechanisms — including oversight mechanisms — for
the management of those resources to benefit
reconstruction and development in Timor-Leste.
As the European Union has stressed repeatedly,
we are convinced that justice must be done for the
serious human rights violations in Timor-Leste in
1999. In that regard, the EU welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General’s
Commission
of
Experts
(S/2005/458, annex II), which was published in July
2005. We note the Security Council’s September 2005
request to the Secretary-General to submit a report on a
practical and feasible approach to justice and
reconciliation for Timor-Leste. We are looking forward
to tangible progress in that area.
Regarding the Commission for Truth and
Friendship established by the Governments of
Indonesia and Timor-Leste in November 2004, we
remain concerned about the amnesty provisions
contained in its statute and urge the two Governments
to revisit that issue. Tackling impunity by holding to
account those responsible for serious human rights
violations is crucial for Timor-Leste’s long-term
development as part of a process that also seeks peace
and reconciliation, as well as the strengthening of the
rule of law.
Since 1999, the European Union and its member
States have consistently expressed their support for
Timor-Leste’s peaceful development and economic
viability. From the outset, the EU and its member
States have lived up to their promises, contributing
more than €700 million in support of Timor-Leste’s
development. That accounts for half of all the external
assistance the country has received. With TimorLeste’s full membership in the framework of the EU’s
Africa, Caribbean and Pacific cooperation agreement,
Timor-Leste will also be eligible to benefit from

support under the European Development Fund. That
will ensure continued, reliable and predictable
financial support from the European Union for TimorLeste.
I would like to conclude by assuring the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste of the
European Union’s continued commitment to support
them in their objective of securing the long-term,
sustainable stability and development of their young
country. To that end, we will continue to work closely
with all bilateral and multilateral donors. The European
Union has confidence in the responsible leadership of
the Government of Timor-Leste and the determination
of its people that the country will continue to be
regarded as one of the true success stories of United
Nations peacebuilding and as an example for the
Peacebuilding Commission.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Lisson (Australia): Thank you, Mr.
President, for this opportunity to address the Security
Council.
I wish to begin by expressing our thanks to the
Secretary-General for his progress report on the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) (S/2006/24)
and to the Special Representative for Timor-Leste,
Sukehiro Hasegawa, for his work leading the United
Nations mission. I would also like to acknowledge the
very welcome presence here today of President
Gusmão.
Australia welcomes the contribution of the United
Nations mission in Timor-Leste to establishing
effective democratic governance, as outlined in the
report, and congratulates Timor-Leste on the
remarkable progress made since 1999. As members
know, Australia has been at the forefront of
international efforts to support Timor-Leste’s transition
to an independent and secure State. We have
contributed to all United Nations missions in TimorLeste — INTERFET, the International Force for East
Timor; UNTAET, the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor; and UNMISET, the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor —
and are currently contributing three military liaison
officers and four civilian police advisers to UNOTIL.
Australia has also provided more than US$ 330 million
in official development assistance to Timor-Leste since
1999.

23

S/PV.5351

Over the past six years, the United Nations has
played a critical role in the transition to a democratic
and peaceful Timor-Leste. The United Nations and the
broader
international
community
should
be
congratulated for their contribution to Timor-Leste’s
successes.

building in the areas of economic governance, police
and justice — for example, through a four-and-a-halfyear, $23 million police development programme in
partnership with the British Government. Australia also
maintains a significant $6 million-per-annum defence
cooperation programme with Timor-Leste.

However, the important work of the United
Nations should not overshadow the indispensable
efforts of the people and the Government of TimorLeste to create a new nation, and the positive spirit in
which both Indonesia and Timor-Leste have set about
developing productive bilateral relations. In particular,
we commend the efforts of the Governments of TimorLeste and Indonesia for their cooperative approach to
border management issues, notably the progress made
in demarcating almost all of their mutual border and
the commitment by both countries to resolving the
border incidents noted in the Secretary-General’s
report. We encourage Timor-Leste and Indonesia to
continue to work together to improve their border
management arrangements.

The move from the short-term adviser placements
currently supporting Timor-Leste’s Government to
long-term institutional strengthening supported by
conventional bilateral and multilateral agencies will be
a challenge. Australia is planning to provide ongoing
support to the World Bank and to the specialized
United Nations development agencies in priority areas,
including law and justice and political and economic
governance, together with a $50 million commitment
over 10 years to help build public sector capacity in
Timor-Leste. We encourage other international
supporters of Timor-Leste to maintain their bilateral
assistance after UNOTIL’s mandate ends to help meet
those needs and to ensure a smooth transition to a
sustainable development framework.

Clearly, the situation in Timor-Leste, through the
country’s own efforts and those of its neighbours and
the international community, is in transition from the
challenge of post-crisis management to one in which
the priority is longer-term development. The twentieth
of May this year marks the end of the mission
established by the Security Council in resolution 1599
(2005), and UNOTIL must continue to focus on
preparing for the end of its mandate. More than ever,
the United Nations needs to consider what UNOTIL
will leave behind in terms of solid and sustainable
indigenous capacity in civil administration, policing,
law and justice and defence.

The Secretary-General’s report highlights the
2007 elections in Timor-Leste. United Nations support,
including appropriate technical assistance, for those
elections will be important, as will support from the
international community to Timor-Leste through
electoral capacity building, voter education and
monitoring assistance.

There is clearly more to be done to assist TimorLeste after the end of UNOTIL’s mandate. Timor-Leste
will require ongoing support, particularly in capacitybuilding and poverty alleviation. The international
community has made a considerable investment in
Timor-Leste’s success, and continuing challenges must
be addressed by its development partners if the country
is to remain a successful example of the international
community’s involvement in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding.
Australia has been and will remain one of the
largest bilateral donors to Timor-Leste. Our bilateral
aid programme is estimated at more than $30 million
for 2005-2006 and includes substantial capacity-

24

Finally, I should also note here a milestone event
in Australia’s bilateral relations with Timor-Leste that
occurred on 12 January, when our two countries signed
a treaty on maritime arrangements in the Timor Sea.
The treaty will raise Timor-Leste’s share of upstream
revenues from the Greater Sunrise gas field from
18 per cent to 50 per cent and could lead to TimorLeste receiving additional revenue of up to $4 billion
over the life of the project.
Much has been achieved in Timor-Leste in a short
time, which is a credit to the people of Timor-Leste, to
the United Nations and to the international community.
We must all remain committed to supporting TimorLeste in its transition to secure and self-reliant
statehood. Australia, for its part, can be relied upon to
contribute to these efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.

S/PV.5351

Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): Mr. President, I would
like first to thank President Xanana Gusmão and
Foreign Minister Ramos-Horta. I also wish to express
my appreciation for President Gusmão’s most valuable
contribution to this debate.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his latest report on the situation of Timor-Leste and to
thank Special Representative Hasegawa for his
excellent presentation. I take this opportunity to praise
the dedicated efforts of the civilian, military and police
components of the United Nations Office in TimorLeste (UNOTIL) and to congratulate them on their
many achievements in Timor-Leste.
Portugal subscribes to the statement made by the
representative of Austria on behalf of the European
Union. Therefore, I will only add a few comments of
our own.
First, we agree with the evaluation by the United
Nations of the situation of Timor-Leste and that the
successful conclusion of local elections, the
strengthening of the legal framework through the
adoption of key legislation and the improved
observance of human rights by the police are good
examples of progress. We share the view that the
overall situation in Timor-Leste remains stable, except
for a few incidents involving the incursion of former
militias into Timor-Leste and a serious border incident
a few weeks ago that resulted in the death of three
infiltrators. In that context, I would like to emphasize
that even relatively low-level incidents could have —
we hope not — a significant impact on and
consequences for the stability of Timor-Leste.
My second point is a direct consequence of this
perception. Timor-Leste is in a critical period of its
peacebuilding process, and the report of the SecretaryGeneral clearly outlines a number of areas that are in
need of international assistance beyond the mandate of
UNOTIL, namely, justice, finance, police training and
border management. Another challenge facing TimorLeste will be the preparations for and conduct of the
presidential and parliamentary elections scheduled for
2007 — the first since the country assumed
independence in 2002.
While the future of the country rests first and
foremost with the Timorese people and their
Government, under the present circumstances Portugal
supports the Secretary-General’s proposal that the
international community should remain engaged in

Timor-Leste beyond 20 May 2006, when UNOTIL’s
mandate expires. Portugal believes that we must
determine what kind of international presence will be
appropriate to assist Timor-Leste on its way to longterm stability and development and in the tasks in
which the Timorese Government finds it more urgently
needs United Nations support.
We welcome the steady and positive development
in the relationship of Timor-Leste and its neighbour,
Indonesia. An example is the effort to finalize the
demarcation of the remaining 1 per cent of the border,
which is the result of the consistent commitment by the
leadership of both countries.
Portugal also welcomes the recent signing of the
agreement between Australia and Timor-Leste, which
will provide much-needed resources to sustain the
economic progress of this new country. We
congratulate the Government of Timor-Leste for its
initiative in creating a mechanism to ensure
transparency in the management of those resources.
We must acknowledge the importance of
continuing bilateral assistance and underline the
responsibility of the international community in
relation to Timor-Leste. I would just like to point out
that last week Portugal signed an assistance plan with
the Timorese Government wherein it committed $32.6
million in development assistance to Timor-Leste for
2006.
My final remarks relate to the responsibility of
the international community and of the Security
Council in relation to Timor-Leste. In that regard, we
reiterate our support for the report of the SecretaryGeneral’s Commission of Experts, and we note the
request of the Security Council that the SecretaryGeneral submit a report on justice and reconciliation
for Timor-Leste with a practically feasible approach, so
that the expectations of the people are met.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): At the outset I would
like to pay tribute to the President of the sister country
Timor-Leste, Xanana Gusmão, and praise his heartfelt
commitment to the full empowerment and development
of the Timorese people. Likewise, I welcome Foreign
Minister Ramos-Horta to the Security Council.
This is the first time I take the floor since the
completion of Brazil’s term as a non-permanent

25

S/PV.5351

member of the Security Council last December. It
pleases me to do so, Mr. President, when the Council is
addressing the important issue of Timor-Leste under
your highly skilful presidency.
I wish to express our thanks to Ambassador
Jones-Parry and to the members of the delegation of
the United Kingdom for their competent work in the
presidency last month. Finally, I thank Special
Representative Hasegawa for the presentation of the
Secretary-General’s report and for the tireless and
effective work he has carried out in Timor-Leste as
head of the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste
(UNOTIL).
Brazil is one of the partners of Timor-Leste. In
close collaboration with the United Nations
Development Programme, my country is supporting the
justice sector, and we are also engaged in efforts to
increase bilateral cooperation in the areas of education,
health and professional training. Now we are also
exploring possibilities of further cooperation with the
National Parliament of Timor-Leste.
As stated by Mr. Hasegawa, other bilateral and
international partners are likewise coming forward
with their contribution, mainly with a view to assisting
in the consolidation of Timorese institutions. Among
the members of the Community of PortugueseSpeaking Countries, in addition to Brazil, I recall the
support given by Cape Verde and Portugal.
However, despite the outstanding efforts made by
the Timorese people and their Government and the fact
that progress has been achieved in establishing
democratic governance in the country, international
cooperation remains essential to sustain core
administrative structures, which are critical to the
viability and political stability of Timor-Leste.
The main challenge goes beyond maintaining
current levels of performance. That performance has
already helped to ensure the successful conclusion of
local elections, the strengthening of the legal
framework through the adoption of key legislation and
the improvement in the observance of human rights by
the police. The challenge consists of proceeding with
the work of building national and local institutions,
which are not now self-sufficient and which will have
an uncertain future if partnerships to train their
personnel and enhance their means and capacities are
not made available. Timor-Leste relies on international

26

assistance to consolidate its newly independent State,
whose first Government was sworn in only 3 years ago.
The Security Council will soon face an important
decision regarding the overall future of Timor-Leste.
My delegation understands that the smooth transition
to a sustainable development framework, as stressed in
resolution 1559 (2005), is still to be fully implemented,
with the assistance of bilateral and multilateral donors,
regional mechanisms, non-governmental organizations,
the private sector and other interested actors. Brazil
expects that the Council will duly take that into
consideration during its deliberations on the issue of
the needs of the Government of Timor-Leste, in order
to consolidate the success story of United Nations
involvement in that country since 1999.
It is our view that the international community
will have to remain engaged in Timor-Leste beyond
May 2006, when UNOTIL’s mandate expires, and for
as long as necessary to secure a stable and selfsufficient institutional governmental structure for that
country. In that regard, my delegation firmly supports
the statement made by President Xanana Gusmão in the
Council, and requests Council members to consider the
possibility of adopting a strategy to phase out the
presence of the special political mission in Timor-Leste
while replacing its advisers and personnel with reliable
assistance to be provided by other equally committed
partners as needed.
In conclusion, I would also like to welcome the
improvement in Timor-Leste’s relations with
neighbouring countries, particularly with Indonesia and
Australia. Sensitive issues such as those pertaining to
border disputes and the exploration of shared natural
resources are being successfully dealt with, thereby
contributing significantly to the focusing of all efforts
on the agenda of peace and development for TimorLeste.
The President: I thank the representative of
Brazil for his kind words addressed to me.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Indonesia.
Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on the excellent way in which
you have carried the duties of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of January. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his progress
report (S/2006/24) on the United Nations Office in

S/PV.5351

Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) for the period 16 August 2005
to 13 January 2006. My delegation also appreciates the
comprehensive briefing by Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Timor-Leste. We thank him for his leadership in the
implementation of UNOTIL’s mandate.

progress in various fields, including those pertaining to
border issues; legal matters; trade, investment and
finance; health; transport and communications; and the
social, educational and cultural fields. That progress
also includes assistance to Timor-Leste in various areas
of institutional capacity-building.

Before proceeding, allow me to join previous
speakers in welcoming Yang Mulia Bapak, President
Kay Rala Xanana Gusmão of Timor-Leste and Foreign
Minister José Ramos-Horta. President Gusmão has
highlighted his perspective on the issue of justice visà-vis the people of Timor-Leste in dealing with the
past. The wisdom, leadership and statesmanship of
President Xanana Gusmão in bringing his people out of
the difficult past and into a healthier and more
prosperous future are inspiring. His strong
determination to foster reconciliation among Timorese
is also admirable. Among other things, that
determination was reflected in his attempt last
December, which my Government was pleased to
facilitate, to once again reach out to fellow Timorese
residing in West Timor. My delegation also wishes to
commend his lucid presentation on the current
developments in his country, the challenges that the
Timorese people face today, their ongoing needs and
expectation as regards the international community,
which we believe deserve positive consideration by the
Council.

The maturity of our bilateral ties has allowed our
two countries to deal comfortably and effectively with
any common issue and problem that may arise on a
bilateral basis, including matters relating to the
difficult episode of our shared history as well as border
issues. As pointed out earlier by President Gusmão, our
two countries have reached agreement on 99 per cent
of our common land border, with the remaining 1 per
cent to be resolved in the very near future.

My delegation is pleased that the Government of
Timor-Leste, as recognized in the report of the
Secretary-General, has made further progress in
establishing effective democratic governance in the
country. Thanks to its wise and brave leaders, that new
State has become a peaceful, stable and politically
dynamic nation.
We are also gratified at the equally important fact
that, as President Gusmão also stated earlier, the
relationship between Timor-Leste and Indonesia has
continued to grow. In that regard, allow me to stress
that, as Timor-Leste remains a major priority in
Indonesia’s foreign policy, those excellent bilateral ties
continue to be marked by a close rapport at the highest
level between leaders of the two countries.
In that connection, we affirm that bilateral
cooperation has further deepened and expanded. Under
the mechanism of the annual meetings of the
Indonesia-Timor-Leste Joint Ministerial Commission
for Bilateral Cooperation, we continue to make

Notwithstanding that progress, it is deeply
regrettable that border incidents — such as the one
that, as mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report,
took place on 6 January, which resulted in the deaths of
three people — continue to take place. As the joint
commission of investigation is moving towards
establishing the facts surrounding the incident, we
should refrain from making prejudicial conclusions.
The two countries indeed agree that those were isolated
incidents that do not in any way affect our excellent
bilateral relations. We also agree that those incidents
underline the need to strengthen cooperation and
coordination between the border authorities of both
countries, in order that such incidents not occur again.
In that regard, we look forward to the completion of a
new border-management framework in the near future.
My delegation notes with interest that, as the
report of the Secretary-General points out and pursuant
to Security Council resolution 1599 (2005), UNOTIL
continues to focus on the coordination of donor
assistance, to encourage the implementation of projects
towards sustainable and long-term development in
Timor-Leste and ensure a smooth transition from
UNOTIL to a development assistance framework.
Some progress has been made during the period under
review, including UNOTIL’s efforts to hand over
responsibility to the Government and to development
partners. As of October 2005, UNOTIL’s Civilian
Support Group and the United Nations Development
Programme’s Institutional Capacity Building Support
Programme have been fully integrated within the
Government’s Capacity Development Coordination
Unit, under the Office of the Prime Minister. We agree
that the latter will facilitate the eventual takeover by

27

S/PV.5351

the Government of all functions related to the
management
and
coordination
of
assistance
programmes. In that regard, we hope that the
appointment of a new United Nations resident
coordinator in Dili, who will assume his duties next
month, will further facilitate the process.

and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.

Another important development is the planned
Development Partners’ Conference in April. It will
provide an important opportunity for the international
community to demonstrate its continued commitment
to Timor-Leste and for commitments already made to
be translated soon into concrete action.

The President: I invite the representative of
Papua New Guinea to take the floor.

We really look forward to a successful conclusion
of UNOTIL’s mandate on 20 May. However, we share
the Secretary-General’s assessment, as contained in his
report, that, while the future of the country rests with
the Timorese people and their Government, the
international community should remain engaged in
Timor-Leste beyond 20 May, when UNOTIL’s mandate
expires.
The forthcoming presidential and parliamentary
elections, which will take place for the first time in
Timor-Leste in 2007, constitute a major challenge
facing the country in the near future. It is important
that the international community continue to assist
Timor-Leste to face the challenge and to meet some of
its needs in critical areas, as set out by President
Gusmão earlier, inter alia in the justice and finance
sectors, as well as in police training.
For its part, Indonesia will fulfil its bilateral
support on the basis of the forward-looking and
reconciliatory principles established by the leaders of
both nations. We have always applauded the role of the
international community in helping the process of
development in Timor-Leste, recognizing at the same
time that, as the only nation that shares a land border
and has specific historical ties with Timor-Leste, we
have a special obligation to discharge.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Papua New Guinea, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite that representative to participate
in the consideration without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter

28

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Aisi (Papua
New Guinea) took a seat at the Council table.

Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): May I join others
in welcoming President Gusmão and Foreign Minister
Ramos-Horta to the United Nations.
I also congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council and thank the United
Kingdom for its sterling efforts in December.
I take pleasure in speaking today on behalf of the
Pacific Islands Forum member countries Australia, the
Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, the
Marshall Islands, Palau, Nauru, New Zealand, Samoa,
Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and my own
country, Papua New Guinea, along with the observer
members.
Especially pleasing is the fact that Timor-Leste is
currently an observer member of the Pacific Islands
Forum.
To date, many of the participants in the military
and civilian police personnel have come from Pacific
Islands Forum countries, namely, Australia, New
Zealand, Fiji, Palau, Samoa and Vanuatu. Other
countries, such as Papua New Guinea, have also made
small contributions in other areas.
As alluded to by my colleagues previously, much
has been achieved and much more needs to be done.
We commend the work of the Special Representative,
Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa. We also encourage the good
work that continues to be carried out by the United
Nations agencies.
We recognize the efforts of President Gusmão’s
Government and the people of Timor-Leste to
consolidate peace on their road to achieving
development and prosperity.
In closing, we wish the Government and people
of Timor-Leste well and look forward to seeing further
consolidated the good progress being made. We agree
with our colleagues — especially, in this case,
Australia — that we must all remain committed to

S/PV.5351

supporting Timor-Leste in its transition to secure and
self-reliant statehood.
The President: I shall now give the floor to Mr.
Hasegawa to respond to the comments made and
questions raised.
Mr. Hasegawa: In view of the brief time
available, I will respond to just two issues that have
been raised by the members of the Security Council
and other interested countries.
The first is that of pursuing justice and
reconciliation. Ambassador Faaborg-Andersen of
Denmark started the discussion by referring to the need
to pursue that subject, and it was touched upon by the
representatives of France, Greece, Japan, the United
States, Austria on behalf of the European Union,
Portugal and Brazil.
We have indeed taken note of the request made to
the Secretary-General by the President of the Security
Council in his letter of 28 September 2005 to formulate
a report on justice and reconciliation, with particular
emphasis on comments made by the Commission of
Experts, and on the need to produce a practical and
feasible approach, taking into account the views of
Timor-Leste and Indonesia.

Secondly, a number of speakers touched upon the
continued need for assistance in the period after the
United Nations Office in Timor-Leste. The
representatives of Argentina, Greece, Portugal, Brazil,
China, Ghana, Peru and Russia all spoke in favour of
providing continued international assistance, with
emphasis on the transfer of responsibilities, as much as
possible, to a sustainable assistance framework. At the
same time, many speakers referred to the need for
continued United Nations engagement in support of
preparations for the presidential and parliamentary
elections to be held in 2007. I have taken note of those
statements, and in particular of the requests made by
Ambassador Thomson of the United Kingdom for a
clearly defined role for the United Nations special
office and by Ambassador Oshima of Japan for the
modalities of the United Nations assistance to be
provided.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
I want to thank President Gusmão again for his
presence and for his interventions.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

29
