S/PV.7112

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7112th meeting

Friday, 14 February 2014, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Linkevičius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Lithuania)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
European Union

14-23491 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1423491*

S/PV.7112

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.

including through liaison offices, joint envoys and
cooperation agreements. Joint mediation deployments
have become more common, allowing the international
community to present a united front.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
European Union
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Baroness Catherine Ashton, High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy of the European
Union, to participate in the meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I warmly welcome Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
to whom I give the floor.
The Secretary-General: I commend you,
Mr. President, and the Government of Lithuania for
having convened this timely discussion on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
focusing in particular on the European Union (EU).
We are honoured to welcome High Representative
Lady Ashton.
The principle of establishing stronger partnerships
with regional organizations is embedded in the
very DNA of the United Nations. With great vision
and foresight, Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations lays out the critical role of regional
organizations in maintaining international peace and
security.
Today, we know more than ever before that the
effectiveness of the United Nations rests in large measure
on our cooperation with regional bodies. We draw on
their expertise. We maximize impact by coordinating
our efforts. Pooling resources and pursuing a common
approach are not only efficient but also essential.
Conflict prevention, mediation, crisis management,
peacekeeping, conflict resolution and peacebuilding are
complex endeavours. No single country or organization
can possibly meet such challenges alone.
That is why we have strengthened relationships
with regional bodies, both to facilitate a swift response
when crises erupt and to allow for long-term joint
engagement. We have made important progress,

2/26

14/02/2014

Our cooperation with the African Union (AU) has
made a difference in places such as the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mali and Somalia. The United
Nations is keen to deepen the partnership with the AU
Peace and Security Architecture. I also commend the
mediation efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development in South Sudan.
In Asia, United Nations cooperation with the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) has
grown significantly since we signed a memorandum of
understanding in 2007. We look forward to working with
the new ASEAN Institute for Peace and Reconciliation,
launched in December.
We are engaging in extensive collaboration with
the Organization of American States in areas such as
mediation and dialogue, as well as the fight against
illicit trafficking. The partnership with the League of
Arab States has been essential to our efforts to support
inclusive political processes in the Middle East and
North Africa and to work for peace in Syria.
And, of course, our cooperation with the European
Union stretches across our agenda and around the
world. Throughout its history, the European Union
has taken pioneering, forward-looking steps in
promoting cooperation among nations, both within and,
increasingly, beyond its borders. The EU’s many and
generous contributions to the United Nations embody
the kind of multidimensional approach that is needed to
foster sustainable peace and development. The United
Nations and the European Union increasingly work
side-by-side on the ground in peacekeeping and civilian
crisis-management operations, and through preventive
diplomacy. The European Union has also been a valuable
partner to the Peacebuilding Commission, a champion
of human rights and a steadfast partner in promoting
the Millennium Development Goals, advancing gender
equality and tackling climate change.
The topic of today’s debate could not be more
timely. The United Nations and its regional partners
face an urgent test. The dark clouds of mass atrocities
and sectarian cleansing loom over the Central African
Republic. Public lynchings, mutilations and other
horrendous acts of violence are spreading mayhem and
fear. All Central Africans have been victims, Muslims

14-23491

14/02/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

and Christian communities alike. Most recently, there
have been large-scale attacks on Muslims in towns such
as Bouali, Boyali and Bossembélé, where peacekeepers
have not been able to deploy. I am deeply concerned
by the cycle of revenge and reprisals. Entire Muslim
communities are fleeing for their lives. Some have
called it an exodus of historic scale. António Guterres,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, was
in the Central African Republic this week and described
a humanitarian catastrophe of unspeakable proportions.
The local Red Cross reported finding a mass
grave in Bangui. Public records confirming identities
and land ownership are being deliberately destroyed.
Citizens and officials are fanning the flames through
hate speech. We must do our utmost to prevent further
atrocities and retaliatory violence, in particular the
widespread and coordinated targeting of Muslim
communities. And we must understand what else is at
risk. The very fabric of society, woven over generations,
is being ripped apart. Communities that have no history
of violent conflict are on a course that, if left unchecked,
could lead to decades of debilitating conflict. Peace,
security, human rights, development — everything that
we at the United Nations stand for and seeks to promote
is under assault. We must live up to the promises made
around this table to act swiftly and robustly in the face
of such bloodshed. We cannot claim to care about massatrocity crimes and then shrink from what it means
to actually prevent them. Our commitment to protect
civilians is only as meaningful as the political, military
and financial muscle deployed to defend them.
Our responsibility is clear: we must stand with the
people of the Central African Republic. I commend the
Economic Community of Central African States and
the African Union for their intensive efforts to address
the crisis and for the establishment of the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA). I pay tribute to the courage and
determination of the MISCA forces, who are doing
their utmost to stem the violence and protect civilians.
I appeal to the international community to urgently
provide MISCA with the support it so clearly needs
to save lives now. In that connection, I thank the
Government of France for deploying its forces, and I
look forward to the forthcoming military contributions
by the European Union, which are to be coordinated
with the MISCA operation. I am committed to doing
everything in my power to prevent further atrocities and
to reduce the risk of a de facto partition of the country.

S/PV.7112

Now we must act together, we must act decisively and
we must act now to prevent the worst.
As Secretary-General of the United Nations, I
am duty-bound to bring to the Council’s attention
my best possible advice on how to address threats to
international peace and security. I intend to return
to the Council on Tuesday with recommendations
for containing and ending that crisis. I look forward
to discussing with the Council what it will take to
urgently curtail the violence, save lives, protect human
rights, support the delivery of humanitarian assistance
and strengthen the command and control of the forces
on the ground. That will be a crucial opportunity for
us to fortify our collective efforts — a chance to show
that the cooperation among the United Nations, the AU,
the EU and others can help the people of the Central
African Republic in their time of need.
As we heighten our efforts to protect people, we must
also pursue accountability for human rights violations.
The international commission of inquiry mandated
by the Security Council will become operational this
month. I welcome the decision of the International
Criminal Court to open a preliminary investigation into
the violence. The international response is building
strength, but does not yet match what is required.
It is critical to do everything we can to support
the efforts of President Catherine Samba-Panza in her
courageous efforts to stabilize the situation, promote
dialogue and find political solutions. The international
community must work together with the national
authorities, religious leaders and all stakeholders to
strengthen reconciliation efforts in an inclusive and
transparent process.
Let us pledge here and now to ensure that the
people of the Central African Republic have the lifeline
of support and protection that they need. Let us commit
to the strongest possible cooperation and coordination
between the United Nations, the AU and the European
Union. Let us show what solidarity and concerted
action can achieve for the people of the Central Africa
Republic.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General very
much for his statement.
I now give the floor to Baroness Catherine Ashton.
Baroness Ashton: Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for inviting me to address the Security
Council today. Allow me to congratulate the Republic

14-234913/26

S/PV.7112

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

of Lithuania on its assumption of the presidency of
the Council and its membership of the Council — the
first time that it serves on this organ. I also wish to
congratulate Chad, Chile, Jordan and Nigeria on their
election to the Security Council.
Let me also pay tribute to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, a good friend and a good partner. The
European Union (EU) has always supported his
leadership, his efforts to reform the United Nations and
make it more effective and the use of his good offices
to mediate, engage and achieve progress in conflict and
crisis situations that are of concern to us all.
By doing that, I want to reiterate the strong
commitment of the European Union to support and
work for effective multilateralism, with the United
Nations at its core, in search of lasting solutions to
critical international peace and security challenges.
Our contribution is threefold: our direct involvement in
international negotiations on behalf of the international
community, our capacity to implement a comprehensive
approach and use a wide range of tools to solve crises
and our close work with our international and regional
partners, where only collective efforts can deliver
results.
In my role as High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy of the European Union, I
am responsible for leading on the Iranian nuclear issue.
Based on the mandate I received from the Security
Council and with the collaboration of the E3+3
Governments, we are engaging in intensive diplomatic
efforts to seek a negotiated solution that meets the
international community’s concerns about the Iranian
nuclear programme.
Our strength and credibility derives from the unity
of the E3+3/5+1 group, but also from the support received
from the international community. I am grateful for the
constant support of the Security Council, and I also
appreciate the progress that has been achieved between
Iran and the International Atomic Energy Agency.

14/02/2014

Historic progress was made in the normalization of
relations between the two sides. The Council had the
opportunity to hear Prime Minister Dačić and Prime
Minister Thaçi when they addressed it on Monday (see
S/PV.7108), and it knows from their statements how
important and positive that work has been for their
people and for the stability of the Western Balkans
region and for its European future. Since the beginning
of the dialogue, I have facilitated 22 meetings between
the Prime Ministers, meetings that have lasted in total
226 hours. The latest meeting took place just two days
ago. It has been a process with concrete results that
have changed people’s everyday lives on the ground.
The First Agreement of Principles Governing the
Normalization of Relations, reached last April, was
a turning point in their relations. Its implementation
included the successful holding of Kosovo-wide local
elections, including, for the first time, elections in
northern Kosovo, and the integration of all security
and justice structures into the Kosovo legal framework.
Because of that progress, the European Union was able
to respond by opening accession negotiations with
Serbia and launching negotiations for a atabilization
and association agreement with Kosovo. In future, the
dialogue will become more and more part of the EU
integration process for both parties.
But the message to Pristina and Belgrade today is
that it is crucial that the dialogue continue and that they
maintain the same commitment. The European Union’s
and my own commitment remain as strong as before.
Apart from the clear benefits for each side, we hope that
the dialogue can and will be an inspiration, as it should,
for positive changes and for a new momentum in other
parts of the Western Balkans. I think particularly of
events in Bosnia and Herzegovina today.

We are now implementing the joint plan of action
agreed in Geneva last November, which is the first
confidence-building step in addressing the most urgent
concerns about the Iranian nuclear programme. But it
is only the first step, and we will start discussions next
week in Vienna aimed at achieving a comprehensive
and final settlement.

A particular strength of the European Union
is its ability to use a broad toolbox of instruments
and policies that we — collectively with our States
members — have at our disposal. We strive to put
into practice, in close cooperation with international,
regional and local partners, our work on all phases of
conflict, from prevention and early warning to conflict
management, post-conflict transition and sustainable
development. That comprehensive approach has been
best exemplified in dealing with crises in Africa, where
our cooperation with the United Nations and the African
Union has been instrumental in achieving results.

I feel proud of our work last year aimed at
facilitating the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.

In Somalia, we work with our partners and make
use of a wide range of tools and resources in support

4/26

14-23491

14/02/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

of stability, security and development. With the help
of the EU Atalanta mission, piracy has dropped by
about 95 per cent in about three years. We are now
helping to build up maritime capacity and train Somali
security forces. We are deeply engaged diplomatically
and politically, and, as Somalia’s biggest donor, we
are a key partner for development assistance. The
“New Deal” that the European Union, Somalia and
partners set out in September 2013 forms the basis of
our engagement with the country so as to accompany
Somalia’s transition. We continue to be a steadfast
supporter of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia. I also urge everyone to continue to support
the African Union Mission in Somalia and the Somali
national armed forces as they step up their operations
against Al-Shabaab.
One thing is certain: as we seek to empower Somalia
politically, we must do so by empowering its institutions
and its people across the country. That means we have
to link together political processes, security and justice
systems, economic growth and service delivery, so that
we empower and enable the Somali Government to
carry out its sovereign functions.
I want to thank the Secretary-General for his
personal commitment to the Sahel region, and I welcome
the United Nations Sahel strategy. The SecretaryGeneral’s mission to Mali, in which my colleague,
EU Development Commissioner Andris Piebalgs, also
participated, was an important signal. So, of course,
was the visit of the Council earlier this month.
We have demonstrated, from the beginning of the
crisis, our willingness to help Mali and the countries in
the wider Sahel-Sahara region. We have provided up to
€550 million in humanitarian assistance to Mali in 2013
and 2014. We have pledged €1.28 billion in development
aid to the country, which has already started to be
committed.
Our two crisis-management missions in the Niger
and Mali have delivered encouraging results, but it
will take time and determination to build capacity. A
complementary civilian mission is under preparation
that will help to provide support to the internal security
forces of Mali as they fight terrorism and illegal
trafficking, while contributing to the reform of the
security sector at large.
As the Secretary-General has said, we remain
deeply concerned about the heavy civilian casualties,
massive displacements of people, human rights

S/PV.7112

violations and worsening of the humanitarian situation
in the Central African Republic. It is imperative for
the international community to act to enable a lasting
solution to be found. African countries and France
have responded swiftly through the deployment of the
forces of MISCA and Operation Sangaris. We will play
our part in helping the Central African Republic by
sending a crisis-management mission to contribute to
stability on the ground and the protection of civilians
in the Bangui area. Our aim must be to ensure that
humanitarian aid can reach those most in need.
To re-establish the rule of law, a gendarmerie
component will be embedded in the European force,
which will facilitate cooperation on the ground. In
parallel, we are setting up programmes aimed at the
swift reinstallation of the judiciary system, while
fully respecting local ownership. That is a crucial
component that will help us sustain local progress on
ending impunity for perpetrators of violations and on
enabling reconciliation.
I believe the task is immense. We will work very
closely with MISCA and the French forces and provide a
bridging operation towards a proposed hand-over to the
African Union, with which we have established good
continuing cooperation. Should the Council decide
that a full United Nations peacekeeping operation
is best suited to take on that task, we will be happy
to work with it in order to ensure a well-coordinated
international support operation. More and more, the
most difficult challenges to international peace and
security require that we join forces. We are therefore
working very closely with international, regional and
local partners.
The disastrous conflict in Syria continues. We
are determined to support the efforts to try and
find a way out of that terrible situation. The Geneva
negotiations — and I pay tribute to Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi — are a crucial first step if we are to see
confidence built around tangible results and relief
for the population. It will be challenging. As Valerie
Amos reminded the Council the day before yesterday
(see S/PV.7109), with 9.3 million Syrians in need of
assistance, half of them children, we are reaching the
limits of what the international community can do.
The neighbouring countries are sheltering close to
3 million refugees. We will continue to support them,
but the dangers for Lebanon and Jordan, as well as the
threats to the territorial integrity of Iraq, are real and
increasing.

14-234915/26

S/PV.7112

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

At the recent conference hosted by Kuwait, we
pledged an additional €550 million for the relief effort,
raising our overall contribution to €2.6 billion. Yet the
unprecedented fundraising appeal of the United Nations
to collect €6.5 billion — of which only a third has yet
been reached — clearly shows the urgency of settling
the conflict in order to move forward. We will persist
in our humanitarian efforts and continue to press all
the parties to allow the delivery of humanitarian aid
and medical care countrywide and to allow civilians to
evacuate.
We are deeply concerned that there are delays in the
transfer process of the chemical weapons out of Syria,
and we are strong supporters of the Secretary-General’s
efforts. We and our States members have provided
significant contributions to the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, with armoured
vehicles and contributions to the special trust fund.
Sustainable peace has often proved elusive in the
Middle East. We want to commend the leadership shown
by President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu,
and we fully support the tireless efforts of United
States Secretary of State John Kerry. We stand ready
to support and contribute substantially to postconflict arrangements to ensure the sustainability and
implementation of a peace agreement.
In December, the EU decided to offer an
unprecedented package of European political,
economic and security support to the Palestinians and
Israelis in the context of a final status agreement. That
includes the special privileged partnership with the
EU, aiming, among other things, to increase access to
European markets and to promote closer cultural and
scientific links, the facilitation of trade and investment
and stronger business relations — all in the event of
a final peace agreement. It is a genuine and tangible
European offer, and we look forward to a strengthened
relationship between ourselves and the two parties to
help to develop a positive interdependence and a new
mutually beneficial, peaceful relationship.
The role of other regional actors is essential. I want
to reiterate, in that connection, the strategic importance
of the Arab Peace Initiative in securing a wider peace.
However, for the negotiations to succeed, there needs
to be an increase in mutual trust between the parties.
Any violence must be avoided at all costs. Violence
in the occupied territory, continuous rocket fire into
Israel, the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Gaza
and incitement and actions that undermine the status
6/26

14/02/2014

quo of the holy sites push agreement further away. In
that context, I must of course deplore the continuing
Israeli expansion of settlements. They are illegal under
international law and constitute a significant obstacle
to peace.
There are many other issues of concern to the
European Union that may not be at the top of the
Council’s agenda but are at the top of mine, and I would
be remiss not to mention just a few of them here. At the
moment, we are especially worried about the situation
in our own neighbourhood, especially in Ukraine and
Egypt. We feel a special responsibility to help those
countries find a way out of their current difficulties.
I have been to Ukraine three times in the past two
months and have seen people who have been standing on
the streets of Kiev for the last 85 days in support of the
country’s modernization and progress. I commend the
peaceful nature of the demonstrations, and I strongly
condemn the expressions of violence that have occurred
and continue to occur in the country. Those who have
committed violence need to be brought to justice. Those
who carry the responsibility to protect the Ukrainian
people’s right to free speech and assembly need to
ensure that those rights are safeguarded, in compliance
with Ukraine’s own international commitments.
We hope that a negotiated way out of the current
political crisis can be found soon. The elements for
that are in place. We stand ready to work with all the
parties in Ukraine and with the relevant international
organizations to facilitate a solution. However, that has
to be a Ukrainian-owned and Ukrainian-led process.
Democracy-building in Egypt requires hard
work, commitment and compromise. The aim is to
achieve democratic, transparent and accountable
institutions that protect all the citizens of Egypt and
their fundamental rights. Three years have passed since
Egyptian women and men from all walks of life rose up
calling for freedom, human dignity, social justice and
better economic conditions. Throughout that period,
the European Union has stood by the Egyptian people.
We have followed with great concern the
violent events and loss of life before and during the
constitutional referendum and on the occasion of the
third anniversary of the Egyptian revolution. I have
condemned in the clearest possible terms all acts
of violence as well as terrorist attacks. I have also
condemned the disproportionate use of force and
supported the call for an investigation into such acts. We
are concerned about the detention of political dissidents
14-23491

14/02/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.7112

and journalists. Freedom of expression, assembly and
peaceful protest must be safeguarded.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania.

We believe that the ratification of the new
Constitution by the referendum is a positive step in
implementing the road map, especially the human
rights chapter, including freedom of expression and
assembly and women’s rights. The Constitution should
be applied in a way that ensures full civilian control
over the branches of Government. But the process was
flawed by the lack of a truly representative drafting
process and the lack of political space for dissenting
opinion.

I am happy to welcome Baroness Catherine
Ashton, High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, with whom
we had fantastic cooperation during Lithuania’s recent
presidency of the European Union (EU). I also thank
Baroness Ashton for her briefing today. And I wish to
sincerely thank the Secretary-General for his support
and contribution to the ever-expanding cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in general to prevent, manage and resolve crises.
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations is as
relevant today as ever, and this important debate today
is a vivid testimony to that.

We welcome the announcement of elections, which
should lead to a democratically elected President and
a fair representation of different political views in the
future parliament. We have been invited to observe
the upcoming elections, and a EU election observation
mission will be able to assess whether conditions
are conducive to inclusive, transparent and credible
elections.
We are also concerned about the deteriorating
economic situation in Egypt. Economic justice and
a better life for all Egyptians is a prerequisite for a
stable and prosperous country. We will continue to
provide socioeconomic support to the poorest and most
vulnerable groups of society, and we will assist Egypt’s
vibrant civil society. We stand ready to work with the
people of Egypt into the future.
This will possibly be the last time that I address
the Council as High Representative. I thank you very
much, Sir, for the honour of being able to do so. I am
very proud that we are a reliable partner of the United
Nations and of the Council.
The President: I thank Baroness Catherine Ashton
for her extremely interesting and valuable briefing.
The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject of
today’s meeting. I thank the Council members for their
valuable contributions to the statement.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among the members of the Council, I shall take it
that the members of the Security Council agree to the
statement, which will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2014/4.
It is so decided.

Today, both the United Nations and the EU operate
in an ever-changing global environment where the
multiple challenges can be addressed only collectively.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, terrorism
and violent extremism, horrendous violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law, transnational
organized crime, threats to cybersecurity, disputes over
energy and natural resources, and climate change are
but a few examples of global threats and risks. Yet they
often manifest specific regional and local dimensions.
For that reason, the knowledge of localized
perspectives and the contribution of regional and
subregional organizations are essential for the
international community to be able to effectively
tackle those challenges. The interaction and synergies
of the United Nations, the EU and other regional and
subregional organizations, first and foremost among
which is the African Union (AU), are critical in solving
conflicts. They are also key for prevention, as regional
organizations can be particularly helpful in the early
identification of potential crises and mediation. Over
recent years, EU/United Nations cooperation has grown
considerably in terms of both focus and scope. I will
therefore limit myself to just a few examples and issues
that define that mutually beneficial cooperation.
First, humanitarian action remains one of the key
areas of cooperation between the United Nations and
the EU. The EU is the world’s largest humanitarian
donor. By urgently responding to humanitarian crises
in close cooperation with the United Nations, the Union
has helped to save lives in numerous conflict and
natural disaster areas.

14-234917/26

S/PV.7112

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

For example, the Central African Republic
continues to suffer from the most horrendous crimes
that can befall a nation in conflict. In response, the
EU has taken it upon itself to maintain a regular
humanitarian air service to ferry aid workers and
emergency supplies to that strife-torn country. It thus
complements the efforts on the ground undertaken by
the United Nations, the AU and other actors.
The Sahel region is another area where the United
Nations and the EU are close partners in action. Earlier
in February this year, the European Commission
announced that it would provide €142 million in
humanitarian funds to the Sahel region in 2014.
Likewise, the EU has been supporting life-saving
activities in South Sudan, providing aid for internally
displaced persons and refugees.
Since the end of 2011, in direct response to the
Syrian crisis, more than €2 billion in aid has been
provided to Syria and neighbouring countries from the
EU budget and its member States. We call for full and
immediate implementation of the presidential statement
of 2 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15). The crisis is
testing the response capacity of the entire international
aid system, aid organizations and donors alike. Lessons
learned should serve a basis for our joint efforts to
improve the international humanitarian system even
further.
My country has been a consistent participant in
humanitarian efforts, both bilaterally and through joint
EU funding. Lithuania has made several contributions
to alleviating the humanitarian crisis in Syria, including
through aid to Palestinian refugees in Syria, as well as,
more recently, to the humanitarian crisis in the Central
African Republic.
A second area where United Nations-EU
cooperation continues to have an impact on the ground
is crisis management and early peacebuilding. At
present, the EU is preparing for the deployment of an
operation in the Central African Republic in support
of the African-led International Support Mission in
the Central African Republic and the French forces.
Lithuania is about to join the efforts of the international
community in the Central African Republic with an
initial contribution of air assets to Operation Sangaris.
My country is also contributing to EU operations
off the coast of Somalia and in Mali. Those operations
are being carried out in close coordination and
complementarity with United Nations efforts on the

8/26

14/02/2014

ground. It is particularly encouraging that, thanks to
such joint efforts, piracy off the East coast of Africa
has decreased to the lowest level in seven years. Also
in Mali, Lithuania is contributing to the EU training
mission. Our officers are part of the team that provides
training and advice for the Malian defence and
security forces. That mission will help build national
institutions, which will be essential for enabling Mali
to defend itself as terrorism, violent extremism and
international drug trafficking continue to pose serious
threats to the country on its path to recovery.
Both the United Nations and the EU continue to
work for a better future for the Afghan people. The
international community must stick to its commitments
in Afghanistan, with a special focus on supporting
regional cooperation between Afghanistan and its
neighbours, building the capacities of central and local
authorities and strengthening the rule of law and respect
for human rights, in particular the rights of women and
girls. In turn, Afghanistan must continue on the path of
comprehensive reform and democracy, for the sake of
the Afghan people’s future.
A third aspect that I would like to emphasize
is mediation. In that regard, I must personally
congratulate the High Representative on her tireless
efforts, skills and deep understanding of the situation
in the Balkan region, which have led to a breakthrough
in Serbia-Kosovo relations, which, in turn, represents
a veritable success for the entire region. Thanks to
that breakthrough, Serbia and Kosovo are today on the
path to European integration, as accession negotiations
with Serbia and negotiations on a stabilization and
association agreement with Kosovo are ongoing.
Another good example of EU-United Nations
cooperation in the field of mediation is the international
discussions in Geneva to address the consequences of
the 2008 war in Georgia. That process is very important
for strengthening security and stability in the region
and must continue.
The interim agreement reached during E3+3 and Iran
talks, chaired by Baroness Ashton, is another example
of well-coordinated and synergetic efforts based on
mediation. We commend the High Representative for
that achievement and hope that further efforts to reach a
comprehensive solution to the Iranian nuclear issue will
lead to greater stability and security in the entire region.
As we all know, human rights violations are
often the first sign of a bigger crisis to come. We

14-23491

14/02/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

can hope to break the cycle of recurring crises and
conflicts only by ensuring full respect for human
rights, justice, accountability, good governance and
the rule of law in particular. Lithuania stresses the
importance of the EU-United Nations partnership in
the area of strengthening the rule of law, as the rule
of law has tremendous potential in facilitating postconflict peacebuilding, preventing armed conflicts
and promoting progress towards sustainable peace and
development.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s “Rights
up front” initiative. Lithuania looks forward to the
continued work of the United Nations and the EU as
natural partners in seeking to ensure human dignity
and a safe and secure life for all.
We are convinced that the voice of the EU should
continue to speak clearly at the United Nations, and the
core United Nations objectives should remain at the
heart of EU foreign policy endeavours.
Let me assure the Secretary-General and the High
Representative of Lithuania’s continued support to the
ever-expanding cooperation, based on shared values,
between the EU and the United Nations in promoting
international peace and security.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to welcome you, Sir, and to congratulate
Lithuania on its election to the Council as a
non-permanent member, as well as to commend the
leadership of your country’s Mission to the United
Nations under Ambassador Raimonda Murmokaitė.
We welcome the initiative of Lithuania to hold the
present debate. In that context, I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his remarks and for the challenges to which
he drew our attention. We also welcome the remarks
of the High Representative of the European Union,
Baroness Catherine Ashton.
The present debate provides us an opportunity
to consider the various dimensions and functioning
of cooperation between regional and subregional
organizations and the United Nations in the maintenance
of international peace and security. That is a matter
to which my country attaches great importance.
During our presidency of the Council in August

S/PV.7112

2013, we held an open debate on this topic chaired by
President Cristina Fernández (see S/PV.7015).
The Security Council holds important and frequent
dialogues with the European Union. The European
Union was present at August’s open debate, as well
as at the meeting on the topic held in October by the
Azerbaijani presidency, which focused on strengthening
the partnership synergy between the United Nations
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (see
S/PV.7050). That marks a trend that we hope will
continue and extend to other regional and subregional
organizations, based on the understanding that such
organizations are equipped to contribute a more
comprehensive and effective understanding of specific
situations.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in matters
related to the maintenance of international peace and
security is an integral part of the collective security
envisioned in the Charter of the United Nations. The
role played by regional and subregional organizations
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts has grown
in importance and can be seen in a broad range of
situations since 1945. The contributions of regional and
subregional organizations complement the work of the
United Nations, bringing to bear, as they do, knowledge
of specific regional circumstances and an understanding
of the causes of conflicts — irreplaceable comparative
advantages that are invaluable in efforts to prevent
and resolve conflicts; establish and maintain peace;
uphold legal order; promote and protect human rights,
democracy and the rule of law; and fight impunity. The
United Nations, for its part, brings to bear its universal
membership and legitimacy, its broad experience and
its operational capacity in the area of international
peace and security.
Of particular note is the contribution made
by regional and subregional organizations to the
maintenance of international peace and security under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
through the deployment of peacekeeping operations
authorized by the Council. Regional and subregional
organizations can play an important role in prevention,
resolution and mediation processes, as well as in postconflict peacebuilding, recovery, reconstruction and
development. In that context, Argentina believes that it
is crucial for regional and subregional organizations to
work closely with the United Nations in the context of
the “Rights up front” initiative, which aims to protect

14-234919/26

S/PV.7112

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

and promote human rights and develop early-warning
mechanisms as a strategy for preventing unstable
situations from devolving into serious conflicts or mass
atrocities.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
the European Union is notable for its scope in terms
of both geography and content. Argentina welcomes
the contribution of the European Union to upholding
international peace and security in its own region and
outside Europe, in particular, though not exclusively, in
Africa, where several States members of the European
Union have maintained a presence and have a historical
responsibility. In recent years, that contribution has
been strengthened through the Union’s cooperation
with the United Nations in seeking solutions to conflicts
in the Middle East, Somalia, Mali, the Sahel and the
Balkans, inter alia. In particular, we should underscore
the European Union’s role in international negotiations
and mediation, its commitment to the maintenance and
strengthening of peace and the humanitarian assistance
and logistical support it has provided in various
situations.
In the context of an asymmetric negotiation such
as that between Israel and Palestine, the international
community must support those who promote
peace on the basis of a fair and lasting solution. We
therefore believe that the European Union, through its
participation in the Quartet, has played an important
role by supporting the talks currently under way, at
all times reaffirming the principles and parameters of
the two-State solution — a position that shared by the
overwhelming majority of the international community.
In that regard, we view the European Commission
guidelines adopted last July establishing that it would
provide subsidies only to Israeli institutions within
the 1967 borders, and the recent offer of an economic,
political and security assistance package in the context
of an agreement between the parties, as specific
examples of the international community’s contribution
and reaffirmation of the Union’s commitment to the
two-State solution.
With regard to Syria, we recognize the financial
contribution of the European Union in seeking to
alleviate the terrible humanitarian crisis that the country
is facing, the assistance to neighbouring countries and
its support to the joint mission of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the United
Nations. We also commend the European Union’s

10/26

14/02/2014

continued call for a political solution to the crisis
on the basis of the June 2012 Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex).
However, we can only regret the step to lift the
embargo that prohibits its members from exporting
weapons to Syria, thereby opening the way for a greater
militarization of the conflict, despite having expressed,
on several occasions, its concern about the increase in
arms flows to the country. Also, with regard to using
sanctions, we wish to reiterate our strong belief that
the universal nature of the United Nations makes it the
most appropriate forum competent to undertake and
monitor such measures.
Argentina encourages regional and subregional
organizations, including the European Union, to
step up their efforts and strengthen their capacity
for conflict prevention, crisis management and postconflict stabilization. We attach great importance to
interaction and cooperation between the Peacebuilding
Commission and regional and subregional organizations.
We encourage the European Commission to continue
working in close consultation with regional and
subregional organizations and arrangements in order
to ensure more consistent and integrated strategies for
peacebuilding and recovery in post-conflict situations.
All United Nations organs and bodies must adopt
preventive strategies and take measures in their
respective areas of competence so as to assist Member
States and regional and subregional organizations
to eradicate poverty, strengthen cooperation and
development aid and promote respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms.
Finally, justice and the rule of law are key to the
promotion and maintenance of peace, stability and
development. In that regard, it is essential to put an end
to impunity with regard to gross violations of human
rights in societies in conflict and post-conflict situations
in order to address severe violations of international
law, human rights and international humanitarian law
and to prevent serious crimes from being committed
in future.
We are convinced that regional and subregional
organizations and arrangements can help to achieve
accountability by supporting the capacity-building of
national legal systems and by cooperating with regional
mechanisms and international tribunals, including the
International Criminal Court.

14-23491

14/02/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I warmly welcome your
presence, Sir, in the Council today to preside over this
debate and thank both the Secretary-General and the
High Representative for their informative statements.
A reading of the history of the negotiations leading
to the Charter of the United Nations reveals that the
framing of Chapter VIII, on regional arrangements,
involved a particularly contentious debate. While the
Charter clearly needed to confer primacy with regard
to the maintenance of international peace and security
on the universal institution that it was creating, a clear
recognition of the important contribution that regional
organizations could make to collective security was
required, and the relationship between the United
Nations and regional organizations needed to be
defined. Discussions on those issues at Dumbarton
Oaks and San Francisco were particularly intense, and
Chapter VIII was the result. Drafted decades before
the emergence of transformative regional organizations
such as the European Union (EU) and the African
Union (AU), Chapter VIII has proven to be prescient
and utilitarian. As the Council recognized in its
presidential statement last August (S/PRST/2013/12),
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations is now an integral part
of the collective security provided for in the Charter.
The European Union is self-evidently a natural and
crucial partner for the United Nations. It is actively
engaged within its region and beyond in conflict
prevention, peacemaking and peacekeeping, as well as
in combating proliferation and terrorism, all of which
are key objectives of our collective endeavours, which
are also significantly underwritten by the backing that
the EU and its 28 States members together provide as
the single largest financial contributors to the United
Nations system. Such EU engagement contributes
directly and fundamentally to our collective efforts on
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and conflict prevention.
Since the Council was last briefed by High
Representative Ashton in February last year (see
S/PV.6919), significant security challenges have
emerged or persist in a number of countries in Africa.
The EU has significantly assisted both United Nations
and AU efforts to address those challenges. The EU
provision of capacity-building in Mali and Somalia and
its direct support for the AU peacekeeping Mission in
Somalia are playing an instrumental role in building
stability and sustainable peace in those countries.

S/PV.7112

As the Secretary-General said this morning, the
situation in the Central African Republic is of grave
concern. Strong support for the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic
(MISCA) is essential. Australia therefore welcomes the
EU’s support to MISCA and the establishment by the EU
of its military mission to the Central African Republic.
We welcome the strong commitment articulated this
morning to continuing that support.
Australia commends High Representative Ashton
for brokering the historic agreement in April 2013
between Serbia and Kosovo and for her continued
intense support for the high-level dialogue between the
parties to achieve full normalization of relations.
On Iran, the EU’s efforts have been pivotal in
facilitating the interim agreement with the 5+1 group.
The agreement provides a path towards a long-term
comprehensive solution. In the meantime, as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), Australia is working to ensure the effectiveness
of existing Security Council sanctions measures.
On Syria, Australia and the EU share the view that
the international community must support the efforts
led by Joint Special Representative Brahimi to build
a credible political framework to end the conflict. We
welcome the support of EU member States to the rapid
establishment of the joint United Nations/Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons mission in
Syria and their efforts to promote unhindered access for
humanitarian assistance to the affected people in Syria
and neighbouring countries, as well as their significant
contributions to the United Nations humanitarian and
refugee appeals for Syria. We look forward to their
support for the urgent adoption of a resolution on the
humanitarian crisis in Syria.
On the Middle East peace process, we commend
High Representative Ashton for her contribution
as a principal member of the Middle East Quartet.
We welcome the EU’s December announcement of
an unprecedented package of security, political and
economic support to Israel and the Palestinians in the
context of a final status agreement.
On Ukraine, we welcome the EU’s constructive
response to the ongoing protests and its calls for
dialogue between the parties. We acknowledge the
important role that High Representative Ashton herself
has played, including through her many recent visits to

14-2349111/26

S/PV.7112

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Ukraine. We encourage the EU to continue to promote
a peaceful and democratic resolution to that crisis.
In conclusion, given the number and complexity of
conflicts around the world, continued close cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
obviously remains crucial. The EU-United Nations
relationship shows the continued relevance and utility,
and importantly, adaptability of Chapter VIII of the
Charter.
Finally, I would like to thank the High
Representative for her own personal dedication during
her time in office towards efforts to enhance peace and
security.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): On behalf of my delegation, I
wish to thank the delegation of Lithuania for organizing
this briefing and to warmly welcome you, Foreign
Minister, to preside over this meeting.
I also thank your Permanent Representative to
the United Nations, Sir, for the leadership she has
provided during your delegation’s presidency of the
Security Council. Both our Missions are led by women
of considerable ability; perhaps that lends itself to the
close affinity and cooperation that we enjoy.
I should like to thank Her Excellency
Baroness Catherine Ashton, High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy of the European
Union, for her briefing today, as well as to inform her
of the very close cooperation that we have with the
delegation of the European Union (EU) in New York on
all matters in the General Assembly and the Security
Council. On behalf of my delegation, I also wish to
personally thank Baroness Ashton for the budget
adopted in 2013 for the Africa-EU strategic partnership
initiative, amounting to approximately €30.5 billion,
which her delegation kindly informed us about.
We wish also to thank His Excellency the SecretaryGeneral, with whom we enjoy a very close — almost
daily — relationship and contact, for his leadership in
consolidating and engaging the relationship between
the United Nations and regional organizations,
particularly his commitment to the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development and the African Union’s peace
and security initiatives.
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
was visionary as it laid the foundation for the United
Nations and regional organizations to work together
to prevent, manage and resolve crises. Indeed, many

12/26

14/02/2014

regional and subregional organizations have developed
strategies to effectively engage in conflict prevention
and mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, while
drawing on lessons learned from the efforts of the United
Nations in those areas. Cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
the maintenance of international peace and securiy
is a growing trend and a win-win partnership. It has
been demonstrated time and again that regional and
subregional organizations can contribute their usually
proximate understanding of local and regional conflicts
and their root causes, as well as their capacity to
respond.
The long-standing cooperation between the EU
and the United Nations now covers the entire spectrum
of response to international crises — from immediate
crisis reaction, humanitarian action, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding to development — even beyond the
European continent. It must also be acknowledged that
the EU is a committed partner that provides substantial
support in capacity-building for regional organizations.
We note the significant contributions of the EU to
economic development and the stabilization of the
Western Balkans region in order to further promote
democracy, economic prosperity, stability and regional
cooperation. We encourage the parties to deepen their
constructive engagement.
The EU remains an important partner, as the
African Union continues to develop the African Peace
and Security Architecture. In Somalia, for instance,
European initiatives such as Operation Atalanta
and EUCAP Nestor have contributed significantly
to improving security in the Horn of Africa. We
acknowledge the ongoing efforts of the EU in attempting
to stabilize conflict situations in Mali and the Central
African Republic. The provision of technical assistance,
expertise and capacity-building to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali is a clear demonstration of the EU’s commitment
to the security and development not only of Mali,
but of the broader Sahel region. The decision of the
EU to establish a temporary operation to support the
African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic in order to protect the civilian
population and aid in the provision of humanitarian
assistance is yet more evidence of the way in which
regional organizations can cooperate with each other in
the interest of peace and security.

14-23491

14/02/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The credentials of the EU also reflect the values,
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. Its support for the promotion of
security, development, good governance and human
rights across the world is well documented. The EU has
also been strident in supporting concerted international
action in the protection of civilians in situations of armed
conflict. Those and other humanitarian endeavours,
including its support for enhancing the role of women
in conflict resolution, demonstrate the capacity of the
EU for cooperation on a global scale.
I should also take this opportunity to underline
the importance of the cooperation that exists between
the United Nations and the African Union. In 2006,
the AU and the United Nations reached an agreement
on a 10-year capacity building programme for the
AU, which provides the main framework for United
Nations assistance to the AU. Under the programme,
the United Nations has supported the AU in areas such
as capacity-building for mediation, electoral assistance
and technical assistance to the AU’s Peace and Security
Council. The United Nations and the AU have also
worked for the maintenance of peace and security
through collaboration in peacekeeping operations on
the African continent. The Security Council and the AU
Peace and Security Council have, through their annual
consultations, held discussions on issues of common
interest, especially conflict situations in Africa. Those
consultations are mutually beneficial, as they allow for
close coordination of the actions of the AU and United
Nations in matters of peace and security. We believe
that the process could benefit from a strengthening
of the policy-level coordination between the two
organizations.
We would like to reiterate our strong support for the
engagement between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in line with Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations. We see the EU as
a good example of how that engagement can work for
the maintenance of international peace and security. As
reflected in S/PRST/2014/4, which was just adopted, we
would like to see that engagement strengthened.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke
in Arabic): I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting. I also welcome
you, Sir, as well as the High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy of the European Union,
Baroness Catherine Ashton. And I would like to thank
her and the Secretary-General for their presentations.

S/PV.7112

Jordan welcomes the partnership and cooperation
between the European Union (EU) and the African
Union. The EU enjoys great respect on the international
arena owing to its balanced role in different international
dossiers and because it is itself an example in terms
of regional progress and the establishment of peace.
We believe that cooperation between the United
Nations and the European Union on peacekeeping
and international security issues, pursuant to Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, will make
a significant contribution to improving collective
security. The European Union has major economic,
security and political resources that enable it to play
an effective role as part of international efforts in the
prevention and settlement of conflicts.
Allow me now to address certain aspects of
complementary cooperation between the United
Nations and the EU.
First of all, the EU is a true and effective partner
in the framework of the efforts designed to bring about
a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East based on a two-State solution. Jordan undertakes
to extend and strengthen the joint action with the
European Union to establish peace in our region. Jordan
agrees with the EU about the necessity of supporting
the efforts of the United States Secretary of State to
bolster direct negotiations between the Palestinians
and Israelis. We welcome the announcement made here
by the European Union that it will provide exceptional
support to the two parties if they reach an agreement, in
addition to its ongoing support of the European Union
for the Palestinian National Authority. We are also
pleased with the excellent and skilful role the European
Union plays in the Quartet, working with the United
Nations, the Russian Federation and the United States
of America.
Jordan also welcomes the speed and efficiency with
which the European Union reacted to the international
appeals with respect to the humanitarian crisis in
Syria and its repercussions in neighbouring States that
continue to host a growing number of Syrian refugees.
Jordan greatly appreciates the different forms of support
that the European Union is giving to the Syrian people
of Syrian and the peoples of neighbouring States.
Jordan supports the efficient role being played by
the European Union in the coordination of diplomatic
efforts aimed at achieving a peaceful and comprehensive
negotiated solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. Jordan

14-2349113/26

S/PV.7112

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

welcomes the agreement reached between the E3+3 and
Iran with respect to the joint plan of action, which we
consider to be step in the right direction.
Secondly, Jordan believes that the European Union
has a crucial role to play in the stability and economic
development of the Western Balkans. We specifically
welcome the personal efforts of Baroness Ashton to
strengthen the dialogue between the Republic of Serbia
and Kosovo in the framework of the historic First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations between them. The Agreement will not
only help to meet the challenges of the next phase
between the two parties, but it will also help to spread
the culture of dialogue and cooperation in the region as
a whole, thereby guaranteeing its stability and respect
for human rights.
Thirdly, Jordan welcomes the commitment of the
European Union to contributing to the establishment of
peace, security and development in Africa by playing
a crucial role in the international effort to confront the
constantly recurring threat of piracy. We also welcome
its contribution to the training of the Somali forces in
cooperation with African Union Mission in Somalia.
We also welcome the European Union’s efforts in
supporting the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and its
contribution in the deployment of the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic. In that regard, we call for the contribution
of all support needed to bring stability back to those
regions.
Fourthly, when addressing issues related to the
maintenance of international peace and security, which
are at the heart of the Security Council’s responsibilities
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
we would emphasize the fact that peacekeeping
operations are among the most efficient tools at the
disposal of the United Nations in assisting States on the
difficult road from conflict to peace. Jordan, as one of
the principal troop-contributing countries, believes that
the support for United Nations peacekeeping operations
is a collective international responsibility, particularly
because demand for such operations continues to
grow. While we appreciate the support provided by
the European Union to the budgets of peacekeeping
operations, we express the hope that the States members
of the European Union, which have vast capacities in
the area of peacekeeping, will increase their investment

14/26

14/02/2014

in terms of contributing troops and police to United
Nations operations.
In conclusion, we endorse the presidential statement
adopted earlier by the Council (S/PRST/2014/4).
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): Allow me first to
commend you, Mr. President, and your delegation for
the initiative you have taken in holding today’s debate.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and the High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Baroness
Catherine Ashton, for their respective statements.
As previously stated in the Council, debates of
this nature present opportunities to reflect on ways of
reinforcing cooperation in areas of common interest
to the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations and on how to strengthen cooperation
in maintaining international peace and security as
provided by Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union (EU) is one of the most advanced
cooperation schemes in place between the United
Nations and other regional organizations and it covers
the vast array of activities related to the maintenance
of peace and stability, including conflict prevention,
mediation,
crisis
management,
peacebuilding,
development, humanitarian relief, the promotion of the
rule of law, assistance and political cooperation.
There is no doubt that the EU has become an
important institution that promotes peace, security and
stability in all its aspects around the world, particularly
in Africa. We value the partnership between the
European Union and the African Union in various fields,
including logistical support and capacity-building. We
believe that the annual meetings between the AU Peace
and Security Council and the EU Political and Security
Committee are important tools in supporting AU efforts
in the areas of peace and security.
In Somalia, the EU is playing a very important role
in supporting the African Union Mission in Somalia and
stabilizing that country and in fighting the piracy off
the coast of the country. We particularly commend the
EU for organizing the donors conference on Somalia in
Brussels last year and we believe that the pledges made
at the conference will help Somalia to strengthen its
institutions.

14-23491

14/02/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

In the Central African Republic, Rwanda
welcomes the continued commitment of the EU to
protect civilians, as demonstrated by its decision to
deploy up to 1,000 troops in that country to assist
the African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic (MISCA), which includes
troops from Rwanda, and the 400 troops that France
has announced it is adding to strengthen Operation
Sangaris, in the ongoing effort to stabilize the Central
African Republic, which has been torn by horrendous
crimes and ethnic cleansing, mainly against the
Muslim community. We also welcome the EU decision
to allocate approximately €75 million as support to
MISCA. All of those contributions are clear indications
that the EU understands the concept of burden-sharing
between the United Nations and regional organization
in the maintenance of peace and stability.
Rwanda also acknowledges the EU’s involvement
in building State institutions in Mali, where about four
battalions of the Malian armed forces have already
received training through the EU training mission
in Mali. That training will certainly help the Malian
army to sustain peace and stability. We look forward
to seeing further support from the European Union in
that regard.
Outside the continent, we commend the European
Union for its important contribution in promoting the
rule of law in Kosovo through the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo and for its role in mediating
between Serbia and Kosovo. That mediation led to the
signing of the historic 19 April 2013 First Agreement on
normalization of Relations between Serbia and Kosovo.
We also acknowledge the critical role played by
the EU, including through the E3+3 Governments in
the breakthrough in the negotiations on the Iranian
nuclear problem, as well as its role in the Middle East,
the destruction of the Syrian chemical weapons and its
valuable contribution to humanitarian relief in Syria.
Despite those significant developments, like most
other regional organizations, cooperation between the
United Nations and the EU has yet to reach its full
potential. Increasingly, EU missions are deployed
where the United Nations is already engaged. Both
organizations are often deployed in the same countries,
but do not necessarily coordinate with each other,
which in some situations creates parallel or co-located
missions, where cooperation between the two
organizations is minimal or even non-existent. In that
regard, we can give the examples of Afghanistan, with

S/PV.7112

the European Union Police Mission in Afghanistan and
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan; the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, with the European
Union Advisory and Assistance Mission for Security
Reform in the Democratic Republic of Congo, the
European Union Police Mission in Kinshasa and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo; and Somalia,
with Operation Atalanta and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia.
We believe that enhancing cooperation between
the two organizations, as stressed by the presidential
statement that was just adopted (S/PRST/2014/4), will
increase efficiency and avoid the duplication of efforts.
It is only through enhanced cooperation with other
actors, both at Headquarters and on the ground, that
such cooperation will have great potential to achieve
success in the maintenance of international peace and
security.
I cannot conclude my statement without expressing
my country’s appreciation for the European Union’s
role in assisting many countries in addressing the
root causes of conflict in post-conflict reconstruction,
including its support for poverty alleviation, capacitybuilding, education, the promotion of the rule of law
and good governance. We believe, however, that mutual
accountability and respect will contribute to greater
effectiveness of development assistance and to stability
and development in recipient States and entities.
To conclude, as this is the last briefing to the
Security Council by the EU High Representative
in her current capacity, Rwanda would like to state
that it appreciates the personal role she has played in
promoting EU/United Nations cooperation and to peace
and security in various parts of the world, in particular
on the African continent.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome you, Mr. President, and congratulate you
and your delegation on having convened this meeting.
We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
statement, and the High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Baroness
Catherine Ashton, for her briefing.
As we have noted in previous statements to the
Council, Chile believes that collective action is crucial
for addressing the threats to international peace and
security, and that such action is enhanced by the
involvement of regional and subregional organizations.

14-2349115/26

S/PV.7112

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

That is the way in which my country interprets Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. That leads
us to promote efficient multilateralism that is endowed
with the ability to effectively include contributions by
regional and subregional organizations in order to face
crises and conflicts that may affect international peace
and security.
The presidential statement that we have just
adopted (S/PRST/2014/4) reflects the appropriate way
to make use of the potential of that Chapter’s provisions
and outlines the strategic alliance between the United
Nations and the European Union (EU). We therefore
welcome the strengthening of the work that the United
Nations has been carrying out with the European Union
in the interest of international peace and security.
Today’s presidential statement acknowledges the
growing and unique role of the EU as a major player
in the international system, especially with regard to
its contribution to the maintenance of international
peace and security. The work that that organization
performs in support of other regional and subregional
organizations is therefore particularly important, and
we believe that that interaction is positive and should
be continued in a collaborative and coordinated way in
each case.
As a country, we have found that to be true in the
active participation of Chilean troops in Operation
Althea, in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which has been
ongoing for 10 years now. The recent signing of the
framework agreement on crisis management, which
provides a legal basis for Chile’s participation in
civilian and military crisis management operations
led by the European Union, will allow for a deepening
of that cooperation and provide a concrete example of
our excellent relationship and collaboration in various
areas, the maturity of our bonds and our shared values.
Chile believes that it was important to have supported
the presidential statement, which acknowledges the
values and
​​
principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations that we share. It also highlights the
crosscutting issues of interest to the United Nations
that are supported by the European Union and in line
with the elements of Chile’s foreign policy, namely,
development cooperation, the promotion and protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms, the
protection of civilians and the participation of women
in the prevention and resolution of conflict and in
peacebuilding and peacekeeping.

16/26

14/02/2014

We also have common views on the relevance of
the rule of law in the promotion and maintenance of
peace, stability and development, including cooperation
with international justice mechanisms, inter alia the
International Criminal Court.
In its presidential statement of 6 August 2013
(S/PRST/2013/12), the Council recognized that regional
and subregional organizations were well placed to
understand the causes of armed conflicts, given their
knowledge of the region, which can help in the efforts
to prevent or resolve such conflicts. We fully agree with
that concept and believe that it reaffirms that actions
taken by regional and subregional organizations can
complement the work of United Nations on international
peace and security.
I conclude by thanking Baroness Ashton for her
personal commitment to the resolution and prevention
of conflicts, peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I
congratulate you, Mr. President, on Lithuania’s
presidency of the Security Council. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his remarks this morning, in
particular the forceful comments he made on the subject
of the Central African Republic.
The United States welcomes High Representative
Catherine Ashton back to the Council and thanks her
for elaborating on the European Union’s important
relationship with the United Nations. Allow me to say
that we appreciate her personal contributions and look
forward to working with her through the end of her
term. We also wish her well, of course, in her future
endeavours, but we hope and expect to achieve a great
deal more together on behalf of international peace and
security between now and the end of the year.
The Security Council’s resolutions and statements
on cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations emphasize the importance of developing
effective partnership. In that context, we fully
support the adoption of today’s presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/4). We share the EU’s conviction that,
in response to global challenges, the international
community requires an effective and efficient
multilateral system, and we appreciate the EU’s focus
on effective multilateralism as a key element of its
external action. The EU is an indispensable partner
to the United Nations and, of course, to the United
States as well. Allow me to highlight several areas
in particular where the EU is making an important

14-23491

14/02/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

contribution internationally to peace, security and
respect for human rights.
The European External Action Service is a young
organization, but it is already having a tremendous
impact in its neighbourhood. My Government
appreciates the EU’s role in promoting European
stability — in particular High Representative Ashton’s
ongoing leadership of the EU-facilitated dialogue
between Kosovo and Serbia, which led to the landmark
Agreement of April 2013 on normalizing relations.
I have had some experience in the region and would
have placed myself among the sceptics in the runup to the dialogue, but the High Representative’s
tireless efforts — as we heard today, 226 hours of
meetings — and the courageous leadership of Prime
Ministers Thaçi and Dačić have shown that, by sitting
face to face, hashing out differences and focusing on
the future, one-time rivals can achieve historic change.
They deserve our praise and our support so as to ensure
the full implementation of their pact. Much hard work
obviously lies ahead.
The EU’s contributions to the goals of the United
Nations extend well beyond Europe. From its role as
a member of the Quartet on Middle East peace to its
engagement on Iran, the EU is working closely with
its partners to foster stability and security. In that
connection, we welcome the EU’s announcement
in December that it will provide an unprecedented
package of political, economic and security support to
both the Israelis and the Palestinians in the context of a
final status agreement.
The EU role is especially welcome in Africa,
where the Council focuses a great deal of attention. My
Government commends the EU for its joint Africa-EU
strategy, which is striving to advance cooperation on a
range of issues, including peace, security, democratic
governance and the Millennium Development Goals.
We also applaud the EU’s commitment to enhancing
the African Union’s capacity through the African Peace
Facility to address conflict on the continent.
The Council saw the EU’s real-world impact during
its recent visit to Mali. We had the privilege of engaging
with the Commander of the EU training mission to Mali,
Brigadier-General Bruno Guibert, to discuss the EU’s
effort to rebuild the Malian army, which is critical to
lasting stability in the country. I was impressed by the
hard work of the 550 dedicated military personnel from
23 European countries, who are helping the Malian
armed forces to re-establish their ability to secure the

S/PV.7112

entirety of Mali and to implement needed and crucial
reforms that prioritize, among other things, the Malian
military’s adherence to human rights and international
law.
As is well known, the EU is actively engaged
in supporting stabilization in the Central African
Republic, providing approximately €200 million
in humanitarian and security assistance to help the
people of that country. We welcome the EU’s recent
announcement of an additional €25 million to assist the
African Union-led mission and its agreement to provide
up to 500 troops in support of that vital operation. We
are hopeful that those troops can be mobilized and
deployed very swiftly. In December, when I visited the
Central African Republic, I was deeply saddened and
struck by the terrible violence, which has spread along
religious lines and is fuelled by an almost total absence
of either security or accountability. We need urgently
to step up our support for the efforts of Christian and
Muslim leaders who are seeking to end the killing and
restore a basis for national unity. I applaud the EU for
its leadership at this critical time and look forward to a
continual dialogue with the EU, the African Union and
all the members of the Council regarding next steps.
We agree strongly with the Secretary-General that the
situation could not be more urgent.
My Government also shares the EU’s concerns over
the crises in South Sudan and in the broader Sahel. We
endorse the EU’s efforts to promote peaceful solutions
in the Sahel region, including its recent pledge of
€142 million in humanitarian aid this year to meet the
urgent needs of civilians.
The EU is also engaged on a variety of cross-border
issues, including combatting the scourge of piracy.
Accordingly, we welcome the EU’s chairmanship of
the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
established pursuant to resolution 1851 (2008). We
share the EU’s commitment to bringing the number
of piracy attacks and hostage-takings down to zero.
And we note the EU’s focus on prevention and regional
maritime capacity-building, its increased engagement
with the industry and its efforts to trace financial flows
resulting from piracy.
Finally, we welcome the EU’s commitment, as
expressed in the Foreign Affairs Council conclusions
issued on Monday, to remain a vocal advocate for
human rights at the United Nations. The United
States shares that dedication to promote and protect
fundamental freedoms by working to oppose the global

14-2349117/26

S/PV.7112

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

crackdown on civil society that is currently under
way, eliminate gender-based violence, speak out on
behalf of the human rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual
and transgender persons, and by fighting attempts to
restrict the freedom of expression. The United States
stands with the EU in upholding the values enshrined in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I should like
to welcome you, Sir, and to congratulate you on your
assumption of the Council presidency. I also thank the
presidency for having convened this morning’s meeting
on such an important topic, namely, cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations, specifically the European
Union, in maintaining international peace and security.
I thank the Secretary-General and Baroness Catherine
Ashton, High Representative of the European Union,
for their statements. I wish to commend the European
Union’s leadership in and its tireless commitment and
immense contribution to the promotion of international
peace and security.
Given the numerous serious conflicts and crises
taking place across the world, cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations is a matter of paramount importance.
Such cooperation is especially significant when it
involves a major regional actor such as the European
Union, given that organization’s weight, strengths and
increasingly important role in crisis management.
Chad recognizes the leading role entrusted by the
Charter of the United Nations to the Security Council
in maintaining international peace and security. At the
same time, the not-insignificant contributions made by
regional and subregional organizations to the United
Nations in that area must be underscored. In that
respect, the transfer of authority from the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali is an example of effective cooperation
between the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States and the United Nations.
Similarly, the close collaboration among the
United Nations, the African Union and the Economic
Community of Central African States in the resolution
of the crisis in the Central African Republic through
the deployment of the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic is
yet another example of complementarity and synergy

18/26

14/02/2014

in crisis management. The deployment of a contingent
of 500 soldiers of the European Union in the Central
African Republic, which was authorized by the Security
Council, has further strengthened that partnership and
reflects the spirit of solidarity in the international
community.
The United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations should further strengthen their
cooperation in the areas of early warning of crisis
situations, conflict prevention and peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The activities of
regional and subregional organizations in those areas
can effectively complement those carried out by the
Organization in accordance with Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations. Moreover, their
geographical proximity to and their understanding
of local situations mean that such organizations are
partners placed to better understand the causes of
conflict and to help resolve them.
The cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations should translate
into regional capacity-building and ownership in the
area of peacekeeping in order to promote regional
responsibility for crisis management. The United
Nations logistical support for the African Union Mission
in Somalia and the valuable financial and political
support of the European Union for that operation are
good examples of partnerships aimed at strengthening
regional capacities. It should also be underscored and
welcomed that the many instances of European Union
assistance to the African Union Peace and Security
Architecture meet that criterion. We encourage the
European Union to continue providing support to
the African Union and United Nations peacekeeping
operations in general.
Strengthening regional capacities in maintaining
international peace and security should have a holistic
focus, so as to enable regional and subregional
organizations to develop the skills needed to deal
with issues involving human rights, impunity and
the protection of children and women, which are an
integral part of peacekeeping operations. To that end,
they must have the appropriate funding. We call on the
United Nations and the European Union to provide their
expertise and financial support to the African Union in
such areas.
In conclusion, we would like to say that preventing,
managing and effectively resolving crises in the
world require close and ongoing cooperation between
14-23491

14/02/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.7112

the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations and concerted international action on
the basis of a pragmatic results-oriented approach,
while taking into account the relative advantages of
the various actors. The European Union is a leading
partner of the United Nations that can help to promote
such a partnership.

to be interested in developing a bilateral cooperation
agreement on the basis of the equal rights of both sides
in that area. The conclusion of such a document would
not only help to strengthen the capacity for security
cooperation between Russia and the European Union
but also significantly contribute to stepping up joint
capacities for crisis prevention and management.

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Mr. Minister,
as President of the Security Council. The briefings
by the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy of the European Union to the Security
Council have become a good tradition. We would like
to express our gratitude to Ms. Ashton for today’s
briefing.

We support the call of the Secretary-General to
strengthen international efforts to find a settlement to
the situation in the Central African Republic. In that
context, we trust that Brussels will pay due attention
to the recommendation that the EU should scale up its
peacekeeping presence in the Central African Republic,
including by accelerating the deployment of its mission
to that country. That is integral to the authority of the
Security Council, on the basis of which our European
Union partners so successfully and resolutely managed
to gain approval for its operation in the Central African
Republic prior to the African-led mission’s being
deployed.

The Russian Federation has consistently advocated
the development and strengthening of United
Nations cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations. That cooperation must be based on the
firm foundation of the Charter of the United Nations,
in particular Chapter VIII. On that basis, pursuant to
General Assembly resolution 65/276, of May 2011,
there should be cooperation arrangements between
the United Nations and the European Union (EU).
Objectively speaking, one can say that the European
Union is one of the key political and economic actors on
the international stage and contributes to strengthening
multilateralism, with the United Nations playing the
leading role in combating new threats and challenges,
guarding against the impact of natural disasters and
eradicating poverty.
We note the efforts of the European Union to find
a peaceful settlement to the situation surrounding the
Iranian nuclear programme. We are convinced that,
through joint constructive efforts, we can ensure that the
initial steps stemming from the Geneva arrangements
will continue to be successfully implemented, together
with the joint plan of action of the 5+1 group, dated
24 November 2013. That will help to remove some of the
most difficult concerns about Tehran’s nuclear activities
and to ensure that Iran can exercise all its rights as a
State party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, including its right to enrich uranium.
With regard to crisis management, the European
Union and its members should strictly abide by the
decisions of the Security Council. On that basis, Russia
remains open to establishing practical cooperation with
the European Union on crisis settlement. We continue

We will not conceal the fact that we were somewhat
surprised by reports that, to date, there is still no clarity
as to exactly which countries will provide peacekeepers
and that most of those countries may not be members
of the European Union. We are concerned that that may
have an impact on the management of the European
Union operation in an already chaotic situation in the
Central African Republic.
We share the approach of the European Union
to finding a settlement in the Middle East, and we
support reaching an acceptable final status agreement
for Palestinians and Israelis on the internationally
recognized basis of the Security Council resolutions,
the Madrid principles, the road map and the Arab Peace
Initiative. We intend to continue to constructively
cooperate with Brussels, within the Middle East
Quartet, in fully supporting the peace process by
involving with the parties to the conflict and regional
actors.
We acknowledge European Union efforts to provide
humanitarian assistance to the internally displaced
persons and refugees in Syria, but the positive effect
is largely being eroded by its unilateral sanctions on
that country, which only further exacerbate the already
difficult humanitarian situation there. Lifting those
sanctions would truly help to alleviate the suffering
of the Syrian people. In general, imposing unilateral

14-2349119/26

S/PV.7112

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

sanctions without Security Council authorization is
counterproductive.
Recognizing the importance of European Union
efforts to establish dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina, we would like to underscore that any
arrangements between the two sides should be reached
by the parties themselves without any pressure
and without undermining the United Nations role.
Resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully in force and is the
internationally legally recognized basis for a settlement
in Kosovo. With Security Council approval, the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo has
transferred to the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX) a number of powers that it cannot
support. Given that resolution 1244 (1999) remains
fully valid, those powers, in international legal terms,
remain within the competence of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and cannot
be transferred to a third party, particularly a selfproclaimed Pristina structure.
The Serbian leadership holds a similar view, as
stated in the Chamber as recently as 10 February (see
S/PV.7108) by the Prime Minister of Serbia. In that
connection, we are concerned about the mention of
plans to reconfigure or even draw down EULEX.
Ms. Ashton recently touched on the Ukrainian
issue. We share the view that a solution to the crisis
must be found by the Ukrainians themselves. We hope
that that position will be consistently maintained in
practice, without any threat of sanctions or competition
to promote the European values of external actors
with regard to who should be the ministers in a future
Ukrainian Government. We also believe that the
European Union could share its experience with regard
to how one should respond to street protests.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that,
despite the increasing need for effective mechanisms for
the division of labour between the United Nations and
regional organizations, including the European Union,
the primary role of the Security Council in maintaining
international peace and security remains unshakeable.
That is enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
and cannot be reviewed.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the Lithuanian initiative to convene this
meeting on cooperation between the United Nations
and the European Union in maintaining international
peace and security. China welcomes Foreign Minister

20/26

14/02/2014

Linkevičius presiding over today’s meeting. We thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Baroness Ashton,
High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy of the European Union, for their presence. We
have listened attentively to the briefings of SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and Baroness Ashton.
The United Nations lies at the core of international
collective security. The Security Council bears the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. Meanwhile, regional and subregional
organizations are playing an increasingly significant
role in maintaining peace and security and promoting
the economic development of their respective regions,
which represents a useful addition to United Nations
efforts.
At present, global and regional challenges are
steadily growing, and nations’ security interests are
interlocked. Further strengthening the cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations is conducive to the promotion
of multilateralism and to the consolidation and
strengthening of the international collective security
machinery.
China supports the efforts of the United Nations and
the Security Council, in accordance with the provisions
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
to deepen their cooperation with the European Union
and other regional and subregional organizations.
We believe that the cooperation between the United
Nations and such organizations needs to be focused on
the maintenance of the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and the norms governing
international relations. Attention needs to be paid to
coordination and harmonization so as to give full play
to each others comparative advantages in a joint effort
to maintain international and regional peace, security,
stability and development.
In recent years, the European Union has maintained
collaboration with the United Nations and the Security
Council, having participated and played a significant
role in the settlement of regional hotspot issues, such as
the Iranian nuclear programme, as well as situations in
the Middle East, Somalia, Mali and the Central African
Republic. In his briefing earlier this morning, SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon mentioned the situation in the
Central African Republic. Recently, the humanitarian
and security situation in the Central African Republic
has been steadily deteriorating. In particular, violent
conflict between different religious groups continues
14-23491

14/02/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

to grow. China finds that deeply troubling and hopes
that the international community will scale up its
efforts and take action as soon as possible to help the
new transitional Government of the Central African
Republic to stop the violence and restore normal social
order.
China encourages and supports the European
Union in its continued efforts to play a positive and
constructive role in maintaining international and
regional peace and security. It is our hope that, in its
cooperation with the United Nations and the Security
Council, the European Union will adhere to the basic
principles set out in the Charter of the United Nations,
such as sovereign equality and the peaceful settlement
of disputes, and remain committed to the settlement of
various regional hotspot issues through good offices,
mediation and other peaceful means. China also hopes
that the European Union will make use of its own
resources and comparative advantage to provide the
affected countries with development aid to build up
their own development capacity, thereby rooting out the
sources of conflict.
As pointed out by President Xi Jinping, China,
as the largest developing country, and the European
Union, as the largest union of developed States, are
two major forces for maintaining world peace. As the
two major economies, China and the European Union
are two major markets for the promotion of common
development, and as important birthplaces of Eastern
and Western cultures, respectively. China and the
European Union represent the two major civilizations
that promote human progress.
Towards the end of 2013, the sixteenth China-EU
summit was successfully convened in Beijing and issued
the China-EU 2020 Strategic Agenda for Cooperation,
charting the course for future China-EU cooperation.
China is ready to work with the European Union
to scale up its efforts to implement the consensus
reached by the leaders of the two sides to steadily
deepen the strategic mutual trust between China and
the EU, strengthen cooperation in the United Nations
and other multilateral forums, and jointly make further
contributions to the promotion of world peace, stability
and prosperity.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Lithuania for having organized
this meeting, and you, Mr. Minister, for your presence,
which gives it particular prominence.

S/PV.7112

I thank the Secretary-General for his statement. I
also wish to welcome to the Council Baroness Catherine
Ashton, High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy. Their statements
confirmed that the European Union has demonstrated
that it is a long-term partner of the United Nations at
the service of the values and objectives that the two
organizations share — respect for human rights, equal
rights between men and women, the sovereign equality
of all Member States and the rejection of war as a means
of resolving conflicts. Thanks to the instruments it has
developed in the areas of security, maintaining and
building peace, humanitarian action and development,
the European Union is particularly well placed to assist
the United Nations in responding to the complex crises
affecting the world.
We commend the close cooperation between the
Secretariat and the European External Action Service.
The support on the part of the European Union and
its member States for United Nations activities is also
demonstrated in their financial contributions, which
make up more than one third of the contributions of the
United Nations regular budget and the peacekeeping
budget.
For the first time, thanks to Lithuania’s initiative,
the Security Council has adopted presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/4, which recognizes the cooperation
between the United Nations and the European Union
in the service of international peace and security for
its true value. As a founding member, both of the
United Nations and the European Union, we can only
be pleased by this.
Since the last statement of the High Representative
to the Council (see S/PV.6919), almost a year ago to
the day, European diplomacy, as was recalled this
morning, has been able to achieve tangible results
on two sensitive issues, which are also on the agenda
of the Security Council. The first issue concerns
Kosovo. I congratulate the High Representative for
the skill and effectiveness with which she continues to
facilitate the high-level dialogue between Belgrade and
Priština. Her efforts led to the conclusion, on 19 April
2013, of the First Agreement of Principles Governing
the Normalization of Relations between Serbia and
Kosovo. Since then, the implementation of that historic
Agreement has continued at a good rate with the support
of the European Union on the ground. We fully support
the efforts to sustainably regularize relations between

14-2349121/26

S/PV.7112

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the two countries from the viewpoint of their shared
European future.
The second issue I wanted to bring up is the Iranian
nuclear programme. In that regard, we also commend
the energy and the work of the High Representative,
whose role in conducting negotiations between Iran
and the E3+3 Governments was central to reaching
the joint plan of action, agreed upon on 24 November
2013 in Geneva. We welcome the beginning of
the implementation of the plan, which began on
20 January. It is a first step on the path, and as the
High Representative said, an “important step”, which
should lead to the reestablishment of international
community’s confidence in the exclusively civilian and
peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union is particularly developed in Africa,
where it is carried out in partnership with the African
Union, subregional organizations and the countries
involved. Let me raise two examples: the Central African
Republic and Mali. In the Central African Republic, the
European Union actively contributes to the efforts of the
international community to settle the severe security
and humanitarian crisis. After the authorization
provided by the Council in resolution 2134 (2014), the
European Union decided, on 10 February, to establish
a military operation in the Central African Republic,
which will act in close cooperation with the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic and the French Sangaris Operation. We fully
share the Secretary-General’s views with regard to the
urgent necessity for the Council and, by extension, the
entire international community to redouble its efforts to
put an end to the violence and atrocities perpetrated in
the Central African Republic and assist that suffering
country and its entire population.

14/02/2014

Sahel. While the United Nations has developed its own
integrated strategy for the region, we now have a unique
opportunity to strengthen the partnership between the
international community and the countries of the Sahel.
We share the deep concern expressed by the High
Representative about the tragaic situation in Syria.
Nearly 10 million Syrians, half of whom are children,
need urgent humanitarian assistance. We welcome the
commitment shown by the European Union and its States
members in their pledge of an additional €550 million
at the donor conference held in Kuwait on 15 January.
Australia, Jordan and Luxembourg have taken the
initiative to submit a draft resolution calling on the
parties to the Syrian conflict to improve humanitarian
access and stop the violations of international
humanitarian law, including the use of starvation and
siege as weapons of war against civilians. We hope that
the Security Council will soon be in a position to adopt
a humanitarian resolution that will also have positive
impact on the negotiations currently taking place in
Geneva. We are convinced that it can.
Before concluding, I would like to address the
long-standing commitment of the European Union to
protecting children in the time of armed conflict. We
welcome the Union’s decision to donate the cash award
of its Nobel Peace Prize to projects to help children who
have been victims of conflict through the European
Union’s Children of Peace initiative, which served some
28,000 children last year. In December, Luxembourg
became the first country to join the initiative, with a
contribution of €500,000.

In Mali, the European Union continues its
efforts, in close cooperation with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, to support the new authorities of that country.
It has decided to extend its European Union training
mission in Mali for two years, which will make it
possible for Malians to have the means to eventually
ensure their own security.

In the same context, I would also like to mention
the campaign of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and
UNICEF called “Children — Not Soldiers”, which will
be launched on 6 March in New York in the presence
of the Minister for Foreign and European Affairs of
Luxembourg. That will be an opportunity to reaffirm
our commitment to all to protecting children affected
by armed conflict. On that issue as well as others, the
Council can count on the support of Luxembourg for
the development of cooperation between the European
Union and the United Nations in the service of effective
multilateralism.

As the High Representative stated, the European
Union is also preparing a civilian support mission for
the internal security forces in Mali. Those efforts are
part of the broader framework of support provided by
the European Union in its integrated strategy for the

Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the delegation of Lithuania for having organized
today’s debate, and its Minister for Foreign Affairs for
participating in it. Together with my colleague from
the United Kingdom, I note that today — Valentine’s

22/26

14-23491

14/02/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Day — happens to be the day when the United Nations
and the European Union get together. It is obviously a
sign.
I salute the High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy. The
European Union is endowed with original tools and a
proactive policy based on a comprehensive approach to
crisis resolution. It is more than ever in Africa, which
occupies nearly 70 per cent of the time and energy of
the Security Council, that the European Union plays
its role in promoting peace and security, most often in
cooperation with the United Nations.
In Mali, for example, the European Union has
given its support rebuilding the defence force, working
in perfect complementarity with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali. The deployment of the European Union
training mission in Mali to train the Malian armed
forces contributes to the same goal of restoring Malian
sovereignty as that of the Blue Helmets. The Security
Council was recently able to meet the Commander of
the training mission in Mali, and we took note of the
effectiveness of the Mission’s efforts.
Clearly, today it is the crisis in the Central African
Republic that compels our attention. Since December,
the international military presence has grown stronger
in the country. The size of the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic has
increased from 2,000 to 6,000 soldiers in a few weeks.
We are grateful to the African Union for that. The force
is supported, as members of the Council know, by the
1,600 French soldiers of Operation Sangaris. Earlier
today, the President of the French Republic decided to
strengthen those 1,600 on the ground with an additional
400 soldiers. It will soon receive the support of the
European Union force to the Central African Republic,
as was decided by European Foreign Ministers on
10 February. The operation will make an important
contribution to the efforts made to provide security
and protection of civilians in the region of Bangui. It
is crucial that the European force be in a position to
be deployed quickly and that States members of the
European Union go into action to help. The involvement
of the High Representative and the Secretary-General
in convincing still reluctant Member States to join in
is essential in that respect. Any delay by the European
Union would be difficult to understand.
Until now, thanks to the Africa force supported
by the French forces, many lives were saved and large

S/PV.7112

massacres avoided. We are nevertheless confronted
with a situation of general insecurity born of the
collapse of the Central African State. What do we need
today in the Central African Republic? First of all,
money is needed to put civil servants back to work, in
particular police and paramilitary police, followed by
international police units, because the challenge that
we must meet requires today police more than soldiers.
Soldiers cannot control crowds or protect individuals.
In all those priority areas, the United Nations,
through the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic, which needs to
be strengthened as the Security Council has requested,
and, as soon as possible, through a peacekeeping
operation, and the European Union, through the
significant cooperation that it is implementing
in the Central African Republic — all of those
organizations — have an essential role to play. They act
together and with Africans to allow Central Africans to
live again in peace.
We are at a turning point in the crisis management
in Central Africa. We have avoided the worst but we
still must put an end to the cycle of ethnic and religious
violence and prevent the country from descending into
chaos. But as the Secretary-General said, we must act
quickly — on the security front; on the political front,
by promoting national reconciliation, fighting impunity
and preparing for elections; and on the humanitarian
front. That requires the efforts of all, and the European
Union and the United Nations should do more. They
will have to do it swiftly and realistically and creatively.
We confidently expect to see the commitment of the
United Nations and the European Union fulfilled in a
crisis where values are at stake and where France is
doing its duty.
Beyond its deployment in the field, the European
Union is also a valuable partner of the United Nations
in the search for lasting solutions to international
crises. In Syria, despite the persistent impasse in the
Council, the European Union is firmly committed to a
democratic transition and has been very vocal on that
issue. Since May 2011, the European Union has imposed
a wide range of individual financial and trade sanctions
against the regime; they were necessary and we applaud
them. With more than €600 million in humanitarian
aid, the European Union and its States members are the
primary support of the Syrian population, including
in neighbouring countries. And the European Union
continues to make its presence felt in assisting with

14-2349123/26

S/PV.7112

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the dismantling of the Syrian chemical arsenal by
contributing to the trust funds that are financing the
joint mission of the United Nations and Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons created for
that purpose.
Similarly, on the Iranian nuclear issue, we thank
the High Representative for her exemplary commitment
in working with the E3+3 in order to keep the door
open for dialogue with Tehran. It is both the United
Nations sanctions and those of the European Union that
brought about the progress that we have seen recently.
With the adoption of a joint plan of action in November
2013, which began to be implemented in January, the
appropriateness of that approach is clear. The dialogue
is ongoing and the European Union will play its full
role in helping to define a long-term solution.
Finally, the ideal of peace that the European Union
is seeking today to extend beyond its borders is already
at work in its immediate environment. The European
Union plays its role at the heart of the European
continent: in the Balkans, a region once ravaged by war.
While disturbances marred recent days in a number of
cities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, it is for the Union to
continue its efforts to bring stabilization and economic
development to that country. Promoting bilateral
dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo, the European
Union offers them an opportunity to find their place in
a space that is beyond them. Only that perspective will
allow them to turn the page on conflict once and for all.
In addition, following a decision by the European
Council in December, the first intergovernmental
conference, which opened Serbia’s accession negotiations,
was held on 21 January. Serbia now has everything
it needs to join the European Union. Similarly, the
Commission was authorized to open talks with Kosovo
to negotiate a stabilization and association agreement.
I conclude by saying that this particular work by
the European Union resulted three years ago in the
adoption of General Assembly resolution 65/276, which
establishes the place of the European Union as a partner
and friend of the United Nations.
In paying tribute to the work of Baroness Catherine
Ashton over the past four years, I also want to emphasize
that the European Union is more than simply a regional
organization. It is the pillar of a coherent and effective
international system. It is a group of States that have
embarked upon an undertaking without precedent and
without parallel.

24/26

14/02/2014

Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
Baroness Catherine Ashton for their statements and
express our full support for the presidential statement
just adopted by the Council (S/PRST/2014/4). I would
also like to say hello to some friends from Brussels,
the city where my wife and I met: it is Valentine’s Day.
Today’s meeting is an opportunity to take stock.
The European Union (EU) and its States members have
a common set of objectives on matters of international
peace and security. Driven by the values that have
been central to European integration following the
Second World War, those objectives are also evident in
the cooperation between the European Union and the
United Nations. Today I want to focus on three themes,
namely, diplomatic engagement, responding to crises
and taking action.
First, regarding diplomatic engagement, at the
outset, I want to pay tribute Baroness Catherine Ashton
and to her wider team for the role they have played and
are playing on two critical dossiers: Iran and Kosovo.
On Iran, the United Kingdom welcomes the
agreement of the joint plan of action between the E3+3
Governments and Iran. Through the Office of the High
Representative, the European Union played a crucial
role in that process, and we look forward to the start
of negotiations on a comprehensive solution next week.
It is our firm belief that skilled diplomacy has worked
only because of the economic pressure brought to bear
on Iran through international sanctions. In order to
negotiate a comprehensive agreement that addresses
all our proliferation concerns, it is critical that that
pressure now be maintained.
On Kosovo, the European Union has played an
instrumental role in facilitating several rounds of talks
in Brussels between the Prime Ministers of Kosovo
and Serbia, which resulted in the historic 19 April
Agreement on Normalization of Relations between
the two countries. The Agreement was the result of
painstaking diplomacy, which Baroness Catherine
Ashton has just described, and will aid the irrevocable
progress of both countries towards the European
Union — a process that will have a profound and lasting
impact on the stability of the Western Balkans.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Foreign Secretary
and President of the Council has already expressed his
deep concern at the violence we saw in protests last

14-23491

14/02/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

week. The protests should be a wake-up call to all of
us. We need a major international effort to bring the
country closer to the European Union and to NATO and
to shore up its institutions and territorial integrity. The
United Kingdom is ready to play its part, and we are
proud of our military contribution to Operation Althea.
The recent protests demonstrate clearly that stability is
not yet fully entrenched in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the continued need for the safeguard that the European
Union-led peacekeeping force provides.
Secondly, I want to turn to the issue of crisis
response. The European Union has been a steadfast
supporter of United Nations efforts in response to a
number of humanitarian crises.
On Syria, the European Union has been working
closely with the United Nations to provide the financial
support and humanitarian assistance that is so necessary
today. A greater international effort is required, and we
urge others to increase the level of their contributions.
Aid is necessary, and more is needed. But the ability
to deliver that aid to those who need it is currently
undermined by a regime using blocking and stalling
tactics. For that reason, the United Kingdom, with
its partners in the Security Council, supports urgent
progress on agreeing on a draft resolution on the
humanitarian situation. More broadly, our position
remains clear on other aspects of the transition.
Al-Assad has no future in Syria. That is something the
European Union has also been very clear on.
On Somalia, the United Kingdom welcomes the
partnership between the European Union and the United
Nations. We are united in our support for a more stable
and prosperous Somalia, through our respective, direct
and indirect support to the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia and bilaterally. We should be proud
of our efforts. For the first time in nearly two decades
of extremism and poverty, Somalis have hope for a
better future.
But our partnership in Somalia extends even
further. AMISOM has been at the heart of efforts to
rid Somalis from the dark shadow of Al-Shabaab.
The European Union and United Nations support to
AMISOM has enabled it to make progress that even
five years ago seemed unimaginable. The United
Kingdom also welcomes the European Union training
mission in Somalia, which has now trained more than
3,000 Somali troops and continues to provide highlevel support to the Somali national forces. That is

S/PV.7112

vital, because it is only through supporting Somalia’s
own security forces that a long-term solution to one of
Africa’s saddest stories will have a happier future.
Thirdly and lastly, I want to look ahead to future
action. In that regard, I want to focus my remarks on
just one place, the Central African Republic, following
the Secretary-General’s remarks.
The imminent deployment of the EU mission will
help address the security and humanitarian situation in
the Bangui area and, as it works closely with the United
Nations, will help stop further deterioration. The
policing component that Baroness Catherine Ashton
described is a critical component of that, as is the
strong cooperation between the European Union and
the African Union on this issue and many others, which
the representatives of Nigeria and Chad both referred
to. The United Kingdom has worked closely with our
European partners to ensure that that was possible, and
I strongly align ourselves with the remarks that the
representative of France made about the need for both
creativity and realism in the next phase.
In conclusion, those examples are just a small part
of the significant and wide-ranging work the European
Union and the United Nations have delivered together
in the past year. It shows the effect we can have when
we act in concert and from the same values-based start
point. The United Kingdom will continue to play a full
role in both organizations as we seek to tackle threats
to international peace and security.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I shall read out
my statement as fast as I can, as this is Valentine’s Day
and I am the last speaker.
First, I would like to welcome you, Mr. President,
to the Security Council and thank you for convening
today’s briefing on this important issue. Our deep
appreciation also goes to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his statement earlier. We would also like to
welcome High Representative Catherine Ashton back
to the Council and to thank her for her statement.
The security challenges that confront us today
clearly illustrate that effective cooperation between
the United Nations and regional bodies is of crucial
significance in managing crises around the globe. In that
regard, the Republic of Korea highly appreciates that
the European Union (EU), as a reliable and responsible
partner, is making substantial contributions to the work
of the Security Council. The long experience of the
European Union in the field of mediation and conflict

14-2349125/26

S/PV.7112

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

management enables it to play an essential part in
maintaining international peace and security.
The EU’s role in bringing peace and security to
the Balkans is especially noteworthy. The historic
Agreement reached by Belgrade and Pristina in April
2013 was a strong testimony to the EU’s contribution to
the peace process in the region. We would like to thank
High Representative Ashton for her tireless efforts in
facilitating that process. Serbia and Kosovo are now at
a critical juncture on their path towards normalizing
relations. We look to both sides to step up their efforts
at consolidating their hard-won progress and we
encourage the EU to continue its active engagement on
that front.
Nuclear negotiations with Iran represent another
area where the European Union has played a pivotal
role. We commend the EU’s efforts in reaching and
implementing the interim agreement between the E3+3
Governments and Iran. We look forward to Iran seizing
that momentum and fully undertaking the measures set
out in the joint plan of action to comply with the relevant
Council resolutions. We also hope that the ongoing
progress will lead to the final resolution of the Iranian
nuclear issue and that it will have a positive influence
on other outstanding non-proliferation issues.
The constructive role of the EU is also notable in that
its contribution reaches beyond regional boundaries. In
the Central African Republic, the EU has once again
demonstrated its partnership with the United Nations
in addressing the serious crisis there. We welcome that
fact that last month the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the European Commission
co-organized a conference where donors pledged

26/26

14/02/2014

nearly $500 million towards humanitarian assistance
in the Central African Republic. We believe that the
deployment of EU troops under resolution 2134 (2014)
will further consolidate the joint efforts towards the
prompt stabilization of the Central African Republic.
We also value the EU’s role in the promotion of
peace and economic development in the Sahel region,
including Mali. In order to ensure progress towards
the effective implementation of the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel, close cooperation
between the EU and the United Nations will be
instrumental.
Likewise, with regard to Syria, we appreciate
the EU’s continued efforts to provide humanitarian
assistance to the Syrian people and to promote a
political solution to that crisis.
I would like to conclude by expressing Korea’s
support for the active role played by the European
Union in maintaining peace and security, and our hope
that the close partnership between the Council and the
European Union will continue.
The President: Once again, I would like to thank
Baroness Catherine Ashton for her presence here today.
As this is likely to be her last time briefing the Council,
let me thank her for her personal contribution to the
building of peace and security throughout the world,
and in particular for her efforts in cooperation with the
United Nations.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

14-23491
