Resolutions adopted on the report~ of the Third Committee

Declaration and of the purposes of the United Nations
set forth in the Charter.
All youth organizations should conform to the principles set forth in this Declaration.

Principle V 1
A major aim in educating the young shall be to
develop all their faculties and to train them to acquire
higher moral qualities, to be deeply attached to the
noble ideals of peace, liberty, the dignity and equality
of all men, and imbued with respect and love for
humanity and its creative achievements. To this end
the family has an important role to play.
. Y?~mg_ people must become conscious of their respons1b1ht1es m the world they will be called upon to manage
and should be inspired with confidence in a future of
happiness for mankind.
1390th plenary meeting,
7 December 1965.
2038 (XX). Dedication of United Nations Day,
1966, to the cause of refugees

The General Assenibly,
Considering the decision taken by a group of voluntary agencies to promote a fund-raising campaign from
24 to 31 October 1966, to benefit refugees mainly in
Africa and Asia,
Consideri'!'g the support given to this initiative by
the Executive Committee of the Programme of the
Unite1 Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the wish expressed by that Comrnittee 13 that in 1966
United Nations Day, 24 October, be dedicated to the
cause of refugees,
I. Expresses its keen satisfaction for the action thus
~mdertaken, as well as for the attachment shown by
its promoters to the ideals and objectives of the United
Nations in choosing 24 October as the launching date
for the campaign ;
2. Decides that, in 1966, United Nations Day will
be dedicated to the cause of refugees.
1390th plenary meeting,
7 December 1965.
2039 (XX). Reports of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees 14 and having heard
his statement, 15
Noting the increasingly universal character of refugee
problems,
Taking note of the difficulties encountered by the
High Commissioner in obtaining the funds required
to finance his programmes,
Considering that a greater effort could and should
be made by the international community to provide the
High Commissioner with the financial means required
by the tasks incumbent upon him,
13 .Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentieth
Ses.mm, Supplement No. llA (A/6011/Rev.l/Add.l), part
Two, para. 25 (5) (d) and (e).
14 Ibid., Nineteenth Session, Supplement No. 11 (A/5811/
~~v.1) and. Supple"!ent No. llA (A/5811/Rev.1/Add.I);
ibid., Twentieth Session, Supplement No. 11 (A/6011/Rev.l)
and Supplement No. llA (A/6011/Rev.l/Add.1).
15 lbid., Twentieth Session, Third Committee, 1359th meeting

41

l. Reqzu sts the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to pursue his efforts with a view to ensuri 11g an adequate international protection of refugees
and to providing satisfactory permanent solutions to
the problems affecting the various groups of refugees
within his competence;
2. lnvites States Members of the United Nations and
members of specialized agencies:
(a) To increase their support to the humanitarian
action of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and to continue to co-operate
with the High Commissioner in this respect;
( b) To make available to the High Commissioner
the financial means required to ensure the full implementation of liis p1 ogrammes.
1390th plenary meeting,
7 December 1965.

2040 (XX). Assistance to refugees in Africa

The General Assembly,
Having taken note of the fact that major refugee
problems continue to arise in various parts of Africa,
Realizing that substantial resources must be mobilized
iu order to provide the refugees with immediate assistance and constructive aid so that they can support
themselves in the host country until they can return
to their country of origin,
•
Noting with satisfaction that the African States are
showing a continuing interest in the problems of refugees by generously receiving refugees in a truly humanitarian spirit and by acceding in increasing numbers
to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees, 16
Having taken note with satisfaction of the efforts
rnade by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refug:ees, the World Food Programme, the specialized
agencies and many non-governmental organizations to
solve the problems of refugee~ in Africa,
Having regard to the need to provide the means
essential to uninterr11pted continuation of the work of
assisting refugees in Africa,
~ 1. ~-o"'!"'mends the Office of the United Nations High
Com1mss1oner for Refugees and the other inter-governmental and non-governmental organizations for their
untiring efforts on behalf of refugees in Africa;
2. lnvites States Members of the United Nations and
memb_ers of the specialized agencies to devote special
attent10n to the problems of refugees in Africa and to
co-operate actively with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees by placing the necessary means
at his disposal, particularly in the form of increased
financial contributions to the prograu1111es of the High
Commissioner's Office.
1390th plenary meeting,
7 December 1965.
2041 (XX). Expression of appreciation to the
United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees

The General Assembly,
Being informed rhat Mr. Felix Schnyder, the United
~ ati~ns 1_-ligh Commissioner for Refugees, will relm<Jmsh his post in the near future,
16 llnited

Nations, Treaty Si'l'i,·s, vol. 189 (1954), No. 2545.

42

General Assembly-Twentieth Session

Expresses its fincere appreciation to Mr. Schnyder
for his ~ork durmg the years he has served as United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
1390th plenary meeting,
7 December 1965.
2057 (XX). United Nations Children's Fund

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 57 (I) of 11 December 1946,
417 (V) of 1 December 1950, 802 (VIII) of 6 October
1953, 1773 (XVII) of 7 December 1962 and 1919
(XVIII) of 5 December 1963,
l. Applauds the award of the Nobel Peace Prize for
1965 to the United Nations Children's Fund which
~einforces understanding of the importance fa'r peace
m the world of the welfare and rearing of children in a
spirit of friendship among nations;
2. Endorses the policy of the United Nations
~hildren's Fund in supporting the importance of view~ng th~ needs of the child as a whole, and of making,
m national programmes for economic and social development, adequate provision for children and young
people and thereby preparing them for their future
participation in their country's development;
3. N ates with approval the programmes of the
United Nations Children's Fund which now include
assistance to Governments in the fields of maternal and
child health, disease control, nutrition, social welfare,
education and vocational training, and which are carried
out in close co-operation with the technical agencits
concerned in the United Nations family;
4. Welcomes the emphasis of the United Nations
Children's Fund on assistance to young children of
pre-school age, and on the improvement and extension
of elementary education;
5. N ates with satisfaction the decision of the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund that
in seeking the most effective uses of Fund aid stress
sho~ld continue to be placed on developing the basic
s:rv1ces which _bene~t children, on priority programmes
dir~cted at their mam problems and on the training of
national personnel as an essential element of programmes, and the decision that full advantage should
be taken of the relevant experience of all countries in
seeking ways of meeting the problems of children and
youth ;17
6. Welcomes the decision of the United Nations
Children's Fund to hold the next regular session of its
Executive Board in Africa in May 1966 ;18
. 7._ Urge~ Governments an_d private groups to intensify their efforts substantially to increase the resources of the United Nations Children's Fund.
1397th plenary meeting.
16 December 1965.
2058 (XX). Town twinning as a mean@ of international co-operation

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1028 (XXXVII) of 13 August 1964,
Considering that experience in recent years has
shown the great value of town twinning practised
without any discrimination,
'
17 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council
Thirty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 15 (E/4083/Rev.l)'.

para. 74.

18 Ibid.,

para. 237.

C: onsidering that to:Vn twinning promotes the
achievement of the great ideals enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations and in the Constitution of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization,
Considering that the first African Conference of
World-wide Inter-Community Co-operation, held at
Dakar from 1 to 3 April 1964, laid special emphasis on
"twinning co-operation",
l. Considers town twinning to be one of the means
of co-operation which the United Nations should encourage, both in connexion with the International Cooperation Year and on a permanent basis;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council, in
collaboration with the appropriate non-governmental
organizations in consultative status and taking into
consideration the decisions of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on town
twinning, to prepare a programme of measures through
which the United Nations and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization might
take concrete steps to encourage further the achievement of the largest possible number of twinned towns ;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
submit to the General Assembly at its twentv-second
session a report on the programmes of action that have
been taken to comply with the present resolution ;
. 4. Requests the Secretary-General to take, through
his offices, all suitable measures to encourage this form
of co-operation.
1397th plenary meeting,
16 December 1965.
2059 (XX). United Nations assistance for the
advancement of women

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
771 H. (XXX) of 25 Juiy 1960 and General Assembly
reso\ut10n J509 (XV) of 12 December 1960 concerning
spe~ial ass1sta1;ce by the United Nations and the specialized agencies for the advancement of women in
developing countries,
Recalling General Assembly resolutions 1777
(XVII) of 7 December 1962 and 1920 (XVIII) of 5
December 1963,
Reaffirming Economic and Social Council resolution
1?68 A (XXXIX) of 16 July 1965, in which the Council took note of the report of the Commission on the
Status of Women on its eighteenth session, 111 which
was held at Teheran from 1 to 20 March 1965,
Recognizing the importance of the work accomplished
by the Commission on the Status of Women
. Recognizing the contribution of the special{zed agencies and the non-governmental organizations in the
matter of improving the status of women,
Belie_ving that the co-ordination and development of
the vanous programmes concerning the status of women
should be implemented through a unified long-term
United Nations programme for the adva~cement of
women,
. Recognizing that it is appropriate to draw the attention ?f ~orld p1;1blic opinion to the imf)ortance of the
contnbut10n which women can make to national development and to the consequent need to solve the
problem of the status of women and their emancipation,
19 Ibid.,

Supplement No. 7 (E/4025).
