UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECCRITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES.VERBAUX OFFICIELS

FOURTH YEAR

No. 17

QUATRIEME ANNEE

No 17

FOUR HUNDRED AND FOURTEENTH
MEETING

QUATRE CENT QUATORZIEME
SEANCE

Held at Lake S"ucceJs, New York,
on Friday, 4 .HaTch 1949, at 3 p:w•.

Tmufl d Lake SuceSJ, New-York,
le vendredi 4mar.( 1949, d 15 heu1't'S.

Preside/It: Mr. A. ALVAREZ (Cuba).

PrWdent: M. A. ALVA.REZ (Cuba).

Present: 1'h<; representatives of the following
countries: Argentina, Canada, China, eU;)a,
Egypt, France, Norway. Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdorr., United States of America.

Pdsenis: Les re:)fesentants des pays sl1i,'ants:
Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte,
France, NOl"vege, Rerubliql1e soc:ialiste sovietique d'Okraine, Union des Republiqucs socialistes
~ovietiqtles, Royaume-Uni, Etat3- UOtS d'Ame-rique.

1," Provisional agenda (S/Agenda 414)

1. Qrdre du jour provisoire

(SjAgellda 414)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

L Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. Letter dated 24 Febrl1ary 1949 fr:Jm the representative of Israel to tbe Secretary-General
concerning the application of Isfael for mem~
bership in the United Nations (5/1267 and
5/1093).
'

Z. Lettn, en date dll 24 fhl'ier ]949, adresste
'Ill Secnetaire general par le representant
d'Israel au sujet de la demande d'admission
d'IS1"Ile] a l'Organisatior. des Nations Unks

3. Procedure in application of Articles 87 anc 88
of the Charter with regard to the Padfic
Islands under the strategic: trusteeship of the
United States of Ame~ica.
(a) Preliminary rep01t by the Committee of
Experts to the Security Council on the
respective flmctions of the Security
COl1ncil and :he Trusteeship C{)uncll with
regard to the Trusteeship System as
applied to strateg:c areas (Sj642).
(b) Report of tlle Committee appcinted by
the Security Council on 18 June 1948 to
confer with the Committee of the Trusteeship Council on the qttestion of respective fllnctions 0: the two Couucils in
regarrt to trusteeship of stratef!ic areas
(S/916) and statement made by the representative of the Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Re?llblic at the second meeting
of the Joint Conmittee of the Se~urity
Council and the Trusteeship Council on

3. Procedure de mise en application des Articles 87 et 88 de la Charte concernant les ilt's
du Pacifique placee.s sous la tutdle strategiq:le
des Etats-Unis d'Amerique.
a) Rappud pd:li.minalre du COl11ite d'cxperts
d'l Conseil de securite sur 1es attributions
l"cspec:ives chl Conseil de securite et do
Conseil de tutefle en cc q:ll conCeI"ne I'application du RegilTIe de tutelle dans lcs
7.ones strategiques (5/642);
b) Rapport elu Comite nomme le 18 j uin 1948
par le COl1sei! de securite et charge de se
concerter avcc le CDll1it~ tlu Conseil de
tutelle au sujet de la question des attributions respectves des deux: Con~eils ence qui COl1cerne la tutelle des zone; strategiques (S/916) et declaration f<lite paf
le representant de la Repnbliql1e sociallste
sovietique cl'Ukraine la deuxieme seance
rill C:omite mixte du Conseil de SeCllrlte et
du Conseil de tutelle, le 22 jui11et 1948

22 July 1948 (5/916/Add.l).

2. Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

(S/1267 et 5/1093).

a

(S/916/Add.l).

2. Adoptiol1. de l'ordre du jour
L'ord-re du j01/,Y eSI adop/6.

2

3. Continuation of the discussion Oil the
application of Israel for membership
in the United Nations

3. Suite de la discussion sur la demande
d'admission d'Israel a l'Organisation
des Nations Unies

Sir Terenee SHON£ (United Kingdom): My
Government has noted with satisfaction the improvement in the sittul.tion in Palestine and it
sympathizes generally with Israel's desire to
obtain admission to the Vnited Nations. It has,
however, been distL1rbed at statements which have
been made by responsible Israeli representatives,
which Sl\ggest tl1<1t the Israeli Government does
not intend tD pay attention to certain United
Nations resolutions. I refer in particlttar to the
ql1estion of )en1salem.

Sir Terence SHONE (Royaume-Uni) (traduit
de l'anglais): Mon GOl1yernement a constate avec
satisfaction l'amelioration de la situation en Palestine, et il comprcnd, somme toute, qu'IsraCl desire
etre aclmis a l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
Toutefois, des declarations de representants israeliens autorises semblant indiquer que le Gouvernement d'Israe1 n'a pas l'intention de tenir compte
de eertaines resolutions des Nations Unie~ l'inquietent. C'est a la question de Jerusalem en
particulier, que jc fills allusion,
A deux reprises, t'AssenlbIee generale a formule tlrre recommandation precise tendant a SO\1mettre a un regime international l'ensemble de
la region de Jerusalem, telle qu'elle est clefinie clans
les resolutions de J'Assemblee generale en date
du 29 novembre 1947 [181 (ff)] et du 11 decembre 1948 r194 ([J I) J. Une cles taches expresses
de la Commission de conciliation consiste a
recommander la manierc dOllt 11 eOllvient d'etablir
ee regime internationaL Or, des representants
israeliellS autorises, y compris le Premier Minislrc
lui-meme, ont fait des declarations d'ou 11 ressort
qu'ltne partie au mains de Jerusalem doit etre
tncorporee a l'£tat d'Israel et que l'internatiol1alisation, si elle dOlt etre etablie dans une mesure
que1conque, ne peut l'Hre que clans la region
occupee par les Arabes.

The General Assembly has twice made a definite recommendation in favour of the internation<l!ization of the whole area of Jerusalem, as
described in the General Assembly's resolutions
of 29 November 1947 [181 (ll)] ana 11 December
1948 [194(IlI)J. It is one of the specific tasks of
the Conciliation Commission to recommend how
this internationalization sho111d be carried ont.
Yet wc have seen statements by responsible
Israeli representatives, including the Prime
Minister himself, to the effect that part at least
of Jeruslem must be incorporated in the Israeli
State and that internationalization, if it is to be
applied at all, can only affect that area held by
the Arabs.

In the light of these statc:ments, my Govern~
ment WOltlc1 require clarification of tbe Israeli
Government's attitude befort deciding how to
cast its vote.

Etant donne ces declarations, mon Gouvernement a besoin d'eclaireissements sur l'attitucle
du Gouvemement israelien pour decider comment i1 votera.

Another question to which I wish to refer is
that of the Arab refugees. The United Nations
has recommended [194 ([[[) 1 that these refugees
should be allDwed to return to their homes in
Israel or else to receive compensation. This
matter of the refugees is one of the most distressing <lnd nnportant questions resulting from
events in Palestine, and we believe that Israel's
attitudt towards it ought to be clarified. In spite
of the relief w::Jrk being carried out by tbe United
N<ltions-to which the Government of the United
Kingdom has so far been by far the largest contributor-these refugees are still dying in hundreds and me likely to continue to do so until
some f:.rrther decisive action can be taken to help
them.

Une autre question que je ,voudrais evoquer est
celle des refugies arabes. Les Nations Unies ont
recommande [194 (flI)1 que ces refugies fussent
rentrer clans leurs foyers en Israel,
au-torises
ou qu'une indtmnite leur hit donnec. Cette question des refugles est L'ulle afS consequences les
plus affliJ;eantes et les plus importantes des
evenements de Palestine, et nous crayons CJue
l'attih,de cl'Israel a son tgard devrait etre precisee. M<.lIgre les secours distribues par les Nations
Unies - sccours auxque1s le Gouvernement du
Royaume-Uni a contribue jusqu'ici pour la plus
large part, de beaucDup - , ces refngies meurent
par cfotaines, et il continuet'a sans cloute d'ell
elre ainsi jusqu'iJ, ce qu'une noltvelle action decisive puissc etre entreprise pour leur venir en
aide.
. i'-!'-I

Israel's responsibility with regard to the refu-

La respollsabilite d'Israel l'egarcl des refugies
a Ele admise par l' Assemblee generale, et nous
esperons qu'Israel reconnaitra l'obligation que 1ul
Impose la resolution de t'Assemb1ee. De l'avis de
mon Gouvernement, la position du Gouvernement
lsrae1ien en cette matiere n'est pas assez c\airement clefinie. Pour notre part, nous ne pouvons
pas prendre reellement position it l'egard de la
l'Organisation
question de l'admission cl'Israel
des Nations Unies tant que l'attitucle du Gouvernement israelien a propos de la qllestion des
refugies n'aura pas ete pre.cisee.

6~es was recognized by the General Assembly, and

:--re hope that Israel will recognize the obligation

Imp~sed by the Assembly resolution. In the
opmlOn of my, Government, it is insufficiently
clear where the Israeli Government strlnes on this
matter, We, for our part, cannot take a defl11ite
attitl1de on the question of Isr<lel's admission to
the United Nations until the position of the
Israeli Government 011 this point has been
clarified.

I have dmwn attention to two matters on whic11
my Government, for its part, feels that further
clarification is called for; without that clarification it would, in 0111' view, have been preferable to
defer consideration of this application, In the

a

a

a

]'ai attire ]'attention sur deux points au sujet
desquels mon Gouverr..ement e~time que des eclaircissements sont necessaires, et, puisque ces eclaircissements font clefaut, it eut ete preferable, se10n
nous, de differ~r l'examen de la clemande d'admis-

circumstance, my delegation has no alternative
but to abstain from "oling if the question of
hrael's admission comes to a vote now, We shall
not vote a.gainst Israel's admission. We have said
in the past that we do not intend to use ot1r
privileged vote to block the admission of any
State whIch obtains the requisite majurity.

sion, Dam ccs conditions, il n'y "IUra pas d'autre
solution pour mu delegation que de s'abste:J.ir de
voter si la question de I'admission d'Israelest
mise aux voix maintenant. Ncus ne voterans pas
coutre l'admissl0n. Nons avons dit cans le passe
que nous ne nOllS proposions pas d'user de notre
voix privilegiee pOtH empeeher l'admissio:r. d'Ull
Etat. dont la candidature obtiendrait la majorite
reDUlse.
I need l1ardly remind the Council that there'
~e n'ai guere besoin de rappe1er au Conseil que
are a number of other applicant States which have la question de I'D.dmission d'tlll certain nombre
Leen kept waiting for admission for a long time, d'autres Etats ayant fait UJle demande - tets
such as Portugal, Ireland, Transjordan, Italy, que le Portugal, l'IrkHlde, la Trnnsjordanie,
Finland and Ceylon, for reasons which in our l'Itatie, la Finlande et Ceylan - est depuis longview are not valid and bear no relation to the temps pendante, pour des raisons qui, a notre
provisions of t:1e Charter. Their admission has avis, ne sont pas va1ables et n'ont rien a voir
been blocked, as is well known, by the vote of avec 1es clispositions de la Charter L'admission de
one permanent member of the Council.
ees Etats a ete cmped-Jee, comme ch-actin ie sait,
pa:' le vote d'un membre permanent du ConseiL
Je tiens a bien preciser que, si nous nous
I wish to make it quite clear that if we now
abstain en the question of Isr<lel's admission, it ab3tenons maintenant de vOler sur fa question
will be simply because we do not feel assured de I'admission d'Israel, ce sera simp1ement parce
reo-arding Israel's attitude to tbe 'Cnited Nations. que nous n'estimons pas avoir re<;u 1es assurances
W'"e hope that the Israeli Government will be ab:e necessaires quant a l'attitude de cet Etat a I'egard
to make c:1e<lr that it intemb to u.bide by United des Nations Unics. Nous esperons que le GouverNations resollltions nnd does not intend to flout nement d'Israel pourra affirr:ler ne:tement qu'il
them, as ulterances which bear the stamp of a ]'intention de se conformer aux resolutions des
responsible statements suggest may be the case. Nations Unies, et n011 d'en faire fi. WIl1me pourIf, between now and the General Assembly ses- raient le laisser croire ues paroles arant le car.acsion, the:'e is a further improvell1ent and a clari- tere de declarations autorisees. Si, d'ici la session
fication of Tsr~el',<; attitude on the two points to de l'Assemblee generale, l'attitude d'Israe1 au
which I have referred, it may then be possible for sujet des deux points que j'ai cites continue de
us to adopt a Dare favourable view.
s'o.meliorer et ;;t precise, nOus pourrons aIors
adopter tine maniert de voir plus favorable.
Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt): I should be
glad to yield te any other member of the Council
who WOll1d lil<e to sJ.l~ak, so thnt I may avoid
making too IT.any interventions during today's
debate. If any other member wishes to speak
before I do, I will gladly wait; I W0111d rather
do so.

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypte) (traduit de
I'anglais;': .le cederais volontiers mon tour de
pru'ole pour n'avoir pas it inlel'l/enir trop frequem.
ment dans le cIebat aujoul'd'hui. Si U:1 autre mem·
bre d11 Conseil desire parter avant moi, j'attendrai
vo10ntiers.

Mr. SUNDF. (Norway): The Norwegian Government welcomes the creation of the Stale of
Israel and has for tllat reason extended de facto
recognition to it, in spite of the fact that peace
treaties laying down the frontiers of Israel have
not as yet been concluded. My Government has,
for the same reason, been in favour of be
admission, in J\le time, of Israel to mC"mhersbip
in the United Nations. We have, however, been
somewhat in dOl1bt whether it is entirely justified
to recommenc Israel for membership at this
moment.

M. SUNDE (Norvege) (tradu1t de l'anglais):
Le GouverueIllent nOI'Ycgien uee:ueille avee: f.<tvellr
la creation de l'Etat cl'Israel, et c'est pOtl]" cette
raison qu'il l'a reconnu de facto, bien que les
traites de paix nxant ses frontieres n'euss~t
p<:s encore ete oone:tus. pour le meme fiohf,
mon Gotlvernement preconise I'admissicm, en
temps opportnn, d'I.>rae1 contme Mem!:lre des
Nations Unies. Toutefois, nous doutons lJ.uelque
peu qu'il soit entierement justifie de recommander
maintenant d'admettre Israel.

We are now asked to decide immedate1y to
n:cu!tlmend fur lllelllbership a new State the exact
territory of which has 110t yet been defined and
the Government of which has so far has been
recognized by most Governments, including my
own, only de facto, and this in spite of the fact
that the Security Council has no: yet decided to
recommend tl;e admission of a great n'.l1nber of
other States the qualifIcations of which for membership seem to my Government to be clearly
established ar.d the applications of which have
been before us for a long time.

On n011S detr.ande anjonrd'hui de decide!' immed;[lternent cl~ ff>comm;tnder eOll1me Membre un
n:lt1vel Etat dont le territoire n'est pas encore
ex.actement {Wini et dont le Gouvernement est
reconnu seulement de facto par la plupart des
Gouvernements, le mien y cOl11pris; on 110US
demande cela, !:lien que le Conseil de secur!te
n'ait pas encore decide de recommander l'admlssion d'un grand nombre d'alltres Ztats, uont les
titres paraissent ctre nettement etablis, allX yeux.
de man GOtlVernement, et dont les demanJes $ont
depuis longtemps presentees au CODsei!.
Pour ces raisons, ainsi qtle par principe, ~ous
amions prefere que conformement a la pratlque
generale, la question fUt renvoyee de nouveau
au Comite d'admissioll de:: nOllveaux Membres
pour qu'i1 la reexamine, en tenant compte de la

For these reasons, and also as a matter of
principle, we ~houlr1 have preferred the question,
in accordance with general practice, to be referred
Jg<1.in to the Committee on the Admission of New
Members for reconsideratioll in the light of

4
matters as they stand today. However, the
?ecurity Council yesterday 413th meeting J reJected a proposal to that effect, an'1 it seems to
be the clear desire of the majority of the members
of the Council to tal{e a dec:sion on this fjL~estion
rig-ht away, I~, as a consequence of this desire,
the Council wishes to take fi.nal action tod::.y, my
deleg;;tion w:Il vote in favotlr of the admission,
in view of its favourable att:tucle in principle and
in spite of :ts doubts as to the timing of the
decision. We do so in confidence th~t Israel will
co~operate fdly and loyally with all decisions of
United Nations organs.

situation actuelle, Cependan~, le Conseil de securite a rejete hi er [413eme seance] tlne proposition
clans ce scns, et il apparatt fIue le desir tres net
de la majorite des membres du Consei! sait de
prend~e toute de suite une decision sur I", fjuestion. Si, en ccnseqnence, le Conseil tient a prendre
line mesur~ decisive aujomd'hui, ma delegation,
etant donne qu'elle a adopte, en principe, tme
attitude favorable, votera pOllr l'admissio:l, biell
Cll1'elle doute ((l1'il sait oppartun de prendre tme
dtcision en et moment. N ous le fcrana en eotnptant qu'IsraeJ cooperera p1einemcnt ct loyc..lement
it l':WJ!ication de toutes les deci.o:ions des organes
des t,atiolls Unies,

In votinR. in favc\.lf of the application at the
present time, we are bearing in mind tl1e fact
that the dec:sion of the Secllfity COlmcil at the
present stage lS merely a recommendation to the
General Assembly, which will make the final decision and which will. in particular, decide when
the time has come to effect the admis.o:lon nf
Israel to membership in the United Nations.

En votant pour la demande d'admission, nous
ne perdons pas d~ vue le fait que la (h~cisiol1. clu
Conseil de securite, au stade actuel, constltue
une simple recommandation a l' Assemblee generaIl'., et que c'est celle-ci qUI se prOl1oncera ell
demier ressort et, Cll particulier, decidera dl,1
moment auqt.:ell'adOlission aura lieu.

In this ccnnexioT:, I shol11d also like to point
out that we do not think that a decision which
the Secmity Council might now take to recommeno the admission nf Isr~_f'l should he taken ::ts
a precedent in re£pect of the legal gt1estions
involved.

A ~e sujel, je vouclrais faire observer que la
decision que le Cor.seil de securite va peut-etre
prendre maintenant, de recomman~er l'adm.is~i~n
d'hrael ne cloit pas..~elon nOllS, ctre consldel'ee
comme ~n precedent pOUI les questions juridiql1es
qui entrent en j eu.

Mahmoud FAWZ~ Bey (Egypt:: I shall not
take long- today. I am trying to ~ive a :ast reminder to the Council that to take action on the
application whiCh is now before us not only would
be llOtime1y, not only would be wrong and not
only would go agair_st the spirit which is srpposerl
to il1spireO\.lr work here, but would, in my estimation, be an affront to humanity and a sacrilege
to the Organization we are supposed to represent.

M"hmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypte) (tradttit de
l'atlQiais): Te 111'. retiendrai pas 100:gtemps l'attenti01; du Consei1 aujourd'htli. Je veux essayer,
une derniere fois, de lui rappeler que, si nons
dOllll:ons suite a la. demande d'a.dmission dont
nous sommes saisis, non seulement 110US agirions
prematurement, nous coml~ettr,iOl~s Ull~ err~ur :1
notrc action serait cunb'a:re :J If'Sprlt qm dolt
guider nos travaux, mais encore, selon moi,
nous ferions un affront it I'humani~e et nous com~
mettrions un sacrilege envers I'OrganiSJtion que
nOllS sommes censes representer.

To the arguments wliich I alll! sOlJIe others presented yesterday against our "railroading" this
matter through and <lgainst atlr using again, in
connexioll with it, the :.lsual, :lQW only too
familiar, "steam roller", have been added today
some more arguments---and very :ucidly-by th(>
representatives of the United Kingdom ar.d Nor~
. wa)'. I am thankful to both of them for helping
me out, although, to be sincere and frank, I should
have preferred the :Jnited Kingdom representative
not to have told L1S today that he wOlllcl abstain
from voting 2nd would consider that action not
to be a veto, and not to have reminded us of a
declaration by his del1'gation before the General
Assembly that it would not use the veto in matters
of application for memcership in the United
Nations. In itself and on general principle, that
is excellent j it is very good. But W~ hav~1 to om
deep regre:, seen the power of the veto used in
the, Security C,ouneil so unreasona'Jly, a,f!'ainst any
loglc and :usbce, that now I cannot help feeling
very disappuin1ed that we shonld not 1:e given
thl'; satisfaction of seeing that veto power usedat least for once-for a good purpose and on the
side of foresight and good judgment. However,
:it is for the United Kingdom to decide what the
United Kingdom should co,

D"Jue fa~~n tres dairc" les rep~ese~tant.s d~
Royaume-Um et de la N orvege o~t aJollfe, aUJoUl.d'hui, de ncuveallX argl1rr.ents a ,:eux ,que ~01­
meme et d'autres membres du Lousell avalent
presentes h:er contr~ .la. 'liquidation", de cette
affaire et contre l'utlhsatlOn cle la methode du.
"rouleau compresseur", qui n'est maintenant que
trop familiere. Je ,I,eur suis rec:onn~iss~t a tous
deux de j'appui qu:ls m'ont appor~e! blen que.~
ponr etre parfaitement sincere - j'eu.sse, p:efer~
que le representant du Royaut;Ie-Un: n eut pas
aujourd'hui declare qll'il s'abshe:ldral.t de vnttCr
et qt:'il ne camiderait pas cette abstentIOn comm~
tln veto; j'aurais mieux aime qu'il n'etit pas
rappde que sa delegation avait declare a l'Assem~
blee generak qu'elle ne ferait pas usage dll veto
ql1and cles dernandes d'aumission il. l'Organisa~;D~
des Nations Unies seraient presentees, En SOl, et
du point de VUe c1u princi?e general, ceUe dtklaraticn est excellente. Mais, comme nous avons
constate a notre grand regret, au Conseil de secu~
rite, it a et~ fait usage du v.eto d'une f,a~on 51
dcra,sonnab1e, contre tOtlte 10glql1e et contrf' tmlte
justice, fIue je ne puis qu'etre. trcs de~t~ t]u~ !'on
ne nous donne pas la sa1isfactlOn de VOI: utll~ser
au mains llne fois le droit de veto, pour le blen,
par esprit de prevoyance et pour obelr a un
jllgenent sain. 7011tefois, i1 appartient au
Royaume-Uni de decider ce qu'il doit faire,

r

5
One of the good argunents which the representative of the United Kingdom. has presented
was his reference to the long list of applicatjons
of very worthy applkallts for InemJcrship in the

United Nation"s, none of which has 3een admitted
to lllel1lbcrship, altho;;gh Wf' ;;)1' know-of at least
almost all of us know-that they afe we] wo:thy
ot membership. But they are not admitted. Vie
used the veto pvwer; we e'/en brought forth
reasons which are not r.lentioned at all in the
Charter, ill order to say that they were not wotthy
of membership in the United Nations. Yes, for
th<.lt purpuse we used the velo. I repf'at that. for

once, I should have liked, at long last, to sec this
unpopuli1-f use of tne veto power exercised in
favour of good jndgmetlt and foresight.
'Nhere other applicants are concerned, includ~
ing, a:; I have just s:>id, very wortr.y countr~es,
we hold n microscope tc see whether everytlllng
is perfect and impercable before we let them pass
the threshold of the United Nations. For some
countries we even add l:jualilicntions of our own
im'cntion to those stipulated by the Cllarter, C1nd
we say that if they do not have those aC:di:i~~maj
qualifications of Qur own invention, they tan stay
out, they must not come and join our Organiza.
tien.

Most members of the Cotillcil seem very resolutely to dose their eyes and ears, to dose all
their senses, including perhaps t:hr. sixth senSe, so
as not to see 'Jr feel the reasons why the present
applicant sholllrl not be admitted to membership
in the United Nations. I am not speaking here in
any way of anyone's il1tegrity. Even a person or
a body whose integrity is not in !..Ju~stion, however, can make mistakes, can faU into wlar1gle~
melits and can (~e1 himself or itself for::ed to
yield to pressllre or perhaps to :nsidiOllsness. Then
who pays the price? To my way of thinking, the
price is paid principally by tite pco~le who are
now thrown, not on tr.e mercy of humanity, but
simply thrown out in deserts and mountains. They
are being clothed with lmmiliatiotl, hunger and
c.eath, They, three-quarters of a who:e nation,
are heing allotted that treatment. And while tEs
persists, the very people who are rt~sponsibll' for
it find defenders there. They find offered to them
here the highest premium bat could be paid,
membership in the United Nations-membership
:n our peace Organization for people who have
done everything possible against our Organization.

Un des arguments de valeur aV<J.nces par le
ete la longue liste
des demancles d'admissio n presentees pl>.r des
Etats parhitl~menr die-nps et <1ont 1!u:t1n n'a tte
aceepte, bien que nous tons - ou elu moins
presque tOllS - sadlioCIs ql1'l1s meritaicnt tOllt cl
fai~ c"etre admis a l'Organisation des Nations
U11les. Cependant, ils ne le furcnt pas. On fit
usage du droit dc veto; on avall'i<J. merne des
raisons qui ne sont nullement mentionnees chms
1,l C1Jal'te afm de lnontrcr que cCs Etats n'llotaient
pas dignes d'etre MCll1!)res de j'OrgaQisatioll des
N:;.tiom Unies, 011i, iJ. ceUe fin. on fit usa.g-e du
veto. Je repete que, pour une fois, j'au~ais aime,
~nfin, voir Cl' droit de veto, qui a ete utilise j usqu'ici d'une fa~oll impopulaire, exerce avec un
j ugement sain et dans Ull esprit de prevoyance.
Les ~1.UtreS candidats, parmi lesquels, C01l1me
je viens de le dire, se trouvent des pays tres
dignes de devenir Membres de notre Organi:;.ation,
nous les avons examines au microscope pour nous
assurer, avant de ks I,lis~tr elltrer au scin d.: l'Organisation des Nfltions Ulies, qu'ils etaient en
lOllS points parfaits et impeccahlps. flour r]ue1ques
E:ats, nous ajolltons mene cie notre pJ'opre chef
des LOl1oitiol1S a celles qui sOnt prescrites par la
Charte, et nous cleclarons que, s'ils ne les rem~
plissent pas, Us doivent etre ecartes et ne pel1'Vcnt
pas entrer clans notre Organisation.
r~presen;ant du Royaume-Uni a

Ll plllpart des membres Ju Conseil semblent
fermer resolument les yeux et se boucher Ies
oreilles et faire abstraction de taus [euts sens, y
compris reut-ctre clt: sixieme J pour ne voir, ni
ne sentir, les raisons pour lesquel1es le candidat
dont :lO:1S nUl!, oCCttp0113 ne devrait p:H r.tre
admts comme Memb.-e de l'Organisation des Nat:on5 Uniet. Je ne mf'ts llltllement en cause icila
pronile de qui que ce soit. Cependant, meme une
per~onnf'_ DU tm crg,ltIisme dont ]'jnl<!;grite n'est
pas en cause peltt commettre des erreurs, se laisser
entrainer dans une situation embarrassante et se
sentir oblige de c~der a la ~res~ion Cll pcttt-et:-e
une mancettV1'e insidieuse. Qui done alors en
supporte l~s I.:onscqucnces? Selon l~oi, re sont
surtont ceux qui,' en ce moment, sont, nCln pas
"bandonnes a la merr; r1e~ hommes, !TIuis rcjetcs
dans les deserts et [es montagnes. Its sont abreuves
la mart. Les
d'hlmiliation, :affames et exposes
etres qui subissent actuel[ement ce traitemenl
representent les trois quarts d'une nation. Et,
pe:tdant que c.ette situation se perpctue, l~s vrais
responsables trotlvent ici des cefenseuTs. La
prime la plus haute qui puisse etre accorrlef'. ['admission ['Organisation des Nations Unieslell!- est offerte, a r.llX qui ant fait to'Jt cc qu'il
etait possible de hire contl"e cette Organisation.

a

a

a

The representative of the United King-,dam
mentioned the nlatter of Arab displaced persons,
<IS have several uther members, inch.ldillg mysElf.
I am not going to repeat what I said yesterday.
I do not think that weuld do any good in :my
en-se. 1 wish only to add an item an3 a c1ar:fkation.
As for the item, it comes from two pieces of
news, one of which is dated 19 Febntary 1949,
is from Yel Aviv, alld was written by a correspondent· who is not in a:Jy sense favourable to
the Arabs and who is, in every sense, favourable
to the Jews. I shall nat read' the long article; I
shall just read the end. If i~ is desired, however,
I can read t4e whole article; perhaps the. other

Le reprbentant du Royaume-Uni, ainsi que
plusieurs autres membres, oont moi-meme. ant
evoqu~ le pr6bleme des rHugies nrabes. Je n'ai
pas l'itltention de repeter ce que j'ai dit bier,
et jf' ne pense pas que cela puisse etre utile en
qtlOi que Cl;; soit. Je veux simpJement apporter un
autre element et un edaircissement.
Cet autre element provient de deux: extraits
d'artie1es. L'un est date de Te1-Aviv, 19 fevrier
1949, et emane d'lln correspond'\l1t qui n'cst 11Ul1cment favorable <tux Arabes et sympathise au
contraire, a tOilS eg<trds, avec les J:.lifs. Je me
contentel·at de lire la fin de ce long article. 'Si
c:utlqu'un en exprime le desir, je JCeux cependant
donner lectu~e du texte entier j' la partie ad'Verse

6
side would find something useful in it. At the
end of the article it is stated that: "It is o'wions
tbat mOst of the cHsp1acec1 Arabs cannot return,
becattse their homes anu ill some ,;;:ses even
their villages, no longer exist".

y trOllvera peut-etre que1que chose utile. A la I1n
de cet article, il est dit: "]1 est e\lident ql1e 1<1
p111part des refllgies a:-abes ne peuvent pas retOtll"lIcr chez ettx rarce ql1e Il"urs toyers, et CJ.\.lelque~
fois meme 1eurs villages, n'existent plus".

This matter has already been exp:ained in some
of the reports of tile United Nations observers110t Egypt's observers, bllt United Nations observers-wh:ch show that demolition of the nameS
of the disp1E.cec1 Arabs has bcen carried out systematically, with in1ention ;md premeditation, so
that tllOse .1Isabs, once having left their homes,
cannot retl1r:l. As 1 statcd to the Security Council
in Paris [367th meS'ting], they had to leave Because they were not even allowed to harvest their
crops. They were firt'(] at and killed, they were not
allowed to obtain sll[Jplies, it was made impossible
for them to remain in their homes and they had
to leave. Once they left their bOtT_es, the homes
were demolished so' that the people had no homes
to which to return.

Cette question <l MjlL elc exposee d<:l.m quelqncs
uns des rapports des observatenrs des Nations
Unies - je dis bien, observateurs des Nations
Unies, et non pas ohservateurs de l'Egypte qlli montrent :ll1C cette demolition des foyers des
refugies arabes a ete executce systetl1atiquement,
intenti:mnellement et avec premeditation, de telle
maniere que ces Arabes ne puissent pins retourner
dans :el1rs maisons une fois qu'ils les avaient
quittees. Comme je l'<li dit au Conseil de SeCl1rlte
a. Paris [367Ctlle seance], ils ont dft rartir p.arce
qu'on ne les a meme pas autorises a faire la
111oisson.On a tire sur eux, et certains ont et~
tues; on ne les a pas laisse.s se procurer du J'avitaillement; i/lellf a ete rendll impossible de rester
chez eax, et ils ant ete forces de partir. Apres
leur depart, leut"S mai:;on:; onl Cte demolics, et, rle
Cl'. fait, ils n'ont plus de foyer ou rentrer.

I spoke or a telegram which was sent from Tei
Aviv on 19 February 1949. I have another telegram which was p1lblished in New York newspapers and which deals with a certain type of
Siegfrien Lne that the Jews are trying to build
around them. That is not the exact point with
which I am dealing now, but it speaks of some~
thing else. We see one of the spokesmen of the
Jews sayin~, according to this telegram, that;
"conquest by force o[ arms must be followed
immediately by conquest by way of settleoent".

J'ai parle tout l'hettrc d'uo teJegranune envoye
le 19 fevrier 1949 de TeI-Aviv. T'ai un autre
te1egramme, qui a ete reprocuit par les journal1lC
de New-York et dans leq1ll'J il est Cjuestion d'une
sorte de ligne Siegfried que les Juifs essaieraient
de construire autour d'etlx. Ce n'est pas la exactemcn' le point qui m'occupe en ce moment, mais
cl'. telegramme traite aussi d'un atttre projet. Nous
voyOtl5, en le Iisant, que l'un des porte~parole des
Juifs declare que: "la conqm!te par la force des
armes doit etre suivie immediatement de la conquete au moyen de la colonisation".

Yes., cha~e away the Arabs, demolish their old
homes, build new ones, take their lands and settle
there, and make the conquest complete. Make it
an all-round fait accomPli. This is legal ~\lrrency
in the eyes of some people-the fait accompli. It
is legal tender, accepted, unfortunately so often,
in recent months.

C'est cela, chassez les Arabes, demolissez leurs
vieilles demeures, construisez-en de nouvel1es, prenez leurs ten'es, etablissez-vous sur elles et achevez
la conquete. Creez a wus eganls un fait <;ll.:wmpli.
Aux yeux de certains, le fait accompli a cours
legaL It a ete malheureusement souvent accepte
cOlllme te1 ces derniers mois.

It is no \1se deceiving myself. J see that after
forcing a ]c...':ish State, or trying to force it,
down the throat of the Arabs, a similar attempt
.is being made to mete out the same treatment to
the very Crganizaion which we are representing
here. We ,,11 know that while we are deb.ating nere
on the present .application, there a:-e people meeting at Rhodes and elsewhere in an attempt to make
at least a preliminary effort towards conciliation.
Does the Security CO\lllcil sincerely believe that
such a hurried, a llUstlcd, a "railroaded", a "steamrollered" admission of the Jewish State to membership in the United Nations would be an element
of appeasement, a step towards peace? J stlbmit
that to base ourselves on such an assumption
would be the most tremendous m:stake we could
commit.

Itl1e sert arien de me leurrcr. Je vois que, apres
avoir fait accepter de force, ou plutot essaye de
faire accepter de force l'Etat juif par les Arabes,
on est en train d'infliger le meme tmitement
l'Or'ganisation que 1.011S representons ici. Nous
savons taus '1ue, pendant que nous discl1tons ici
la demande d'admission ql1i naus est soumise, i1
y a, a Rhodes ou ailleurs, des gel1s qui se
reuni3sent pour tenter au noins un effort preliminaire de conciliation. Le Conseil de securite
croit-i1 sincerement que ce sera un element d'apaisement, qne ce sera bire un pas vers la paix, gue
d'admettre eet Etat juif a l'Ol"ganisation des
Natic'TI$ Unies, avec line telle hate, L111e tdle precipilati::m,
toute "Vapeur" et en employant la
methode du "rouleau compresseur"? J'affirme que
nous fonder sur une telle supposition serait l'errem la plus enorme que nous puissions comrnettre.

How can you pacify anybody if you do not
under-slanc .him? How can you pacify him if
you make hIm feel that considerations of justice
-according to oh t:stilllate, \vhether he )>$ rni>$taken or not-and even considerations of decency
are disregarded? And they are completely dis:
regarded. How can we pacify his mind if we
do not pacify his heart?

Comment peut-on pacifier guelqu'un si on ne
le comprend pas? Comment peut-on le pacifier si
on hli danne !'impression que la justice - se10n
S<J. proprt': conception, qu'cllc soit cxncte ou fnusse
- et meme la decence ne sont pas observees,
comae c'est le cas en l'GCCUrrellce? Comment
peut-on pacifier son esprit si on ne fait pas regner
la paix dans son cceur?

a

a

"a

7
I c;],nnot see the wisdom, I cannot see the
justire of it, and r see no harmony at all between
the idea of approving or recommending the application now before the Security COllntil and any
attempl at pacifying, appeasing or helping to
create a l1lore serene and more C011eiliatorv atmosphere in that tortured Middle East wllieh we
pretend to pacify. This "pacification work" is
being done in the name of the United Nations,

Je ne VOtS ni la sag-esse, ni la justic~ de cette
faC;oll de faire, ni aucune harmonic entre l'idcc
~'approl1ver la demanc1c d'nclll1lssion sou mise au
Co~sei1 de semrite et d'en recommander l'aceeptatlon et une tentaHve, queUe qu'el1e soit, de
pacifier, rl'apaiser ou ci'aider it cn~er une atmo~
spere pIllS sereine et plus concillante dans le
i'l'Io}'en-Oriellt tortmc C]ue nous pretendons paci·
fie1'. Et Cett~ "ceuvre de pncification" est faite
au nom des Nations Unies!

Do the members of the Security Council sincerely bcliev'c that the p<::ople of tile Middle East
will have great confidence in and reverence for
the United N<Ltions, if, when the Jews forcibly
drive away three-quarters of the people of Palestine from tlIeir homes, and when so many other
considerations tend ngainst accepting their application for membership in the United Nations, we
not only do not treat that application in the way
in which other applications are treated but give
it a vastly preferential treatment over all the other
applications?

Les membres du Conseil de secnrite croient-ils
sincerel1lent que les peuples du Moyen-Orient
<Jurant nne grande confiance clans ],Organis~tion
des Nations Unies et un prefond respect pour elle,
si, a.lms C]ue les Jnifs ch assent de lems foyers
les trois Cjual'ts des habit"nts de Palestine et que
tant d'alltrcs considerations militent contre I'acceptation de Jeur denumde d'admission a. l'Organisation des Natiolls Unies, non seulement nons ne
trn.itons pas cette demande de la meme manihe
que les autres, mais nous hli rcservons 11ll traite!l1cnt tres privilegie?

I think I have sairl all that I considered it my
duty to say to the Security Council today, not
only as a representative of Egypt, but also as a
humble member of the hnman family, a member
of that humanity whose hopes in 11S would be
betrayed if we acted against the principles of
justice, against the principle of self-determination
for the people, and against the precepts of human
rights, which the United Nations, only a short
while ago, approved.
.

Je pense avoir dit tout ce que je considere
comme etcmt de mon devoir de dire au Conseil
de securite, non seulement en ma qualite de repre·
sentant de l'Egypte, mais aussi comme humble
membre de In famille humaine, commt membre
de cette humanite ·qui a mis en nous des espoirs
qui seraient trahis si nous agissions contre les
principes de justice, contre le droit des peuples a
disposer d'eux-memes et contre la Declaration
des droits de I'homme que les Nations Unies ont
approttvec il y a peu de temps.

If in spite of anything and everything to the
contrary, the Seellrity Council decides by a
majority vote to recommend to the General
Assembly the acceptance of the application now
lJefore it, my delegation and my country entirely
wash their hands of such an act.

Si, en dcpit de tous les arguments qui ont ete
invoques, le Conseil de securite decide a. la majorite de recommander a I'Assemblee generale d'accep!er la demande d'admission dont nons SOmmes saisis, ma delegation et mcn pays declinent
toute responsabilite.

General McNAUGHTON (Canada): The: views
of the Canadian dder-ation on Israel's application
for memberslJip were expressed in the Secllrity
Council ill Paris in De~ember of 1948 [383rd
,neeting]. At that time, Canada felt that a decision
on Israel's application for membership should be
deferred, not illdefinitely, but long enough to enable the Security Council to give the matter more
careful consideration. Members of the Council
who believed, as Canada did, that the question
should not be pressed to a vote at that time, were
obliged to abstain, with the result that the application fnllcd to receive a favottrable recommendation
from the Council.

Le general McNAUGITTON (Canada) (traduit
de l'anglais): L'opinion de 1<1 delt'~gatioll canadienne en ce qui concerne la demande d'admission
ti'fsrael a ete expo see en dcccmbre, it Paris, au
Conseil de gecurite [383hne seance]. A ce
moment-la, le CatJal1a etait d'avis gue la decision
concern:1l1t la demande en question devait etre
ajomnee, non pas indefmiment, mais assez longtemps pour pcrmettre au Conseil de securite
d'etudier p1tlS attentivement la question. Les mem~
ores du Conseil qui, comme le Canada, pensaient
qu'il n'y avait pas lieu de rnettre la question aux
voix it ce moment-la, furcnt obliges de s'abstenir;
iI en n~sulta qnc h demande en question n'obtint
pas le nornbre de voix necessaire pour faire
l'objct d'une recommandation favorable de la
part du Con'eil.

N ()w the POSitIon has been somewhat clarified
in consequence of the armistice agreement which
we welcomed so warmly in the Sectlrity Council
yesterday, Taking this fayourable development of
the situation into account, and in the hope that the
armistice wlll lead to a peaceful settlement by
agreement, the vie\\' of my Government is that
Canada would now be justifIed in supporting
Israel's reneweu application fcr membership in
the United Nations.
I have been instructed to vote accordingly.

La situation s'est quelque pen eclaircie a la
suite de l'accord d'armistice dont le Conseil de
scc'lrite s'est si chaudement felicite hier. En
ronsideration de celie evolution favorabie de la
situation, et dans l'espoir que l'annistiee conduira
a un reglement pacifique par voie d'accord, mon
Gouvernement estime que le Canada cst fonde a
appuyer la nouvelle demande d'ad~lission d'IsraeJ
a l'Organisation des N.atiOIlS UnIes.
J'ai ret;u (lour instructions de voter dans ce
Sens.

8

The

PRESIDENT

(trallsiated from Spanish):

If no other representative wishes to speak, I lihall
expl .. in the position of my (;overnment in the l:use
of Israel.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de i'e:;pagMl):
Si alleuo autre ~epresentant ne demande la parole,ic vais la prendre pour exposer les raisons
de la position que prend ma delegation sur la
question cl'IsraeJ.

As representative cl Ct'IlA, and :n accurdance
with the instructions received fron~ my Government, I wish to state that 31Y deleg..tion will vote
in favour of a recom1l1en:1ation by the Security
Council to the General Assembly that Israel
should be domitted to the United Nations be~t1use
it iuif1h the reqllirerrents for membership as laid
down in the Charter and the Council's rub; of
pr:.cedure. In t~king tl13t position, my delegtition
is adhering to the traditional view of the Cuban
people, who welcome the fact that large groups
of human beinp.s who have developed a certain
national consciouSness are not to be subjected to
the domin;ltion of other countries differing from
them i:l clllture, tracEtion and other characteristics
of a modern State.

~I1 ma qtlalite de rep~sentant de C:.reA et en
excctllion des instructions que j'ai re~t1es de moo
Gouv~memen(, je Hens E. indiqllcl' que ma delegation valeta en faveur de l'"dO[)tiOIl de la resolution recommandant a l'AssembJee generate d'ad~
mettre Israel a l'Organis3tion des NationsUnies.
car eHe estime que (et Etat reunit les conditions
reqllises par la CiJarte d le reglemen: intericl.1r
dt1 CrJl1seil POll:- ueveni:- l'\'Iembre de l'Organisation des Nations Unics. En votant ainsi, ma
deU~gation reste £icicle a la tradi:ion du peup1e
cubain, qui tient a ce que les grdntIs grJupements
humains qui ont retlssi a se forg-er tine cons~ience
collective nationale ne soient pas soumis d'autres
p"ys, dont la tradltioll, la culture et les wtres
elements caracteristiques c1'tm Et<,.t mod erne different des leurs,

In yoting for the admission of Israel, Ct·.ha is
confident that the latter will develop pec,ceful
relationships, based on mutual understanding,
with its Arab neig~.bours, towards whom CLtba
has always had friendly feelings, and Lhat a satisfactory solt\tion will be found on the question of
the international st<.tus of th~ Holy Places, the
tradle of the three greatest and oldest religions on
earth.

En votant en faveul" de l'admission d'Israel,
Cuba est er_ outre convaincu que cet Etat vivra en
bonne intelligence avec ses ,oisins arabes, pour
lesquels Cuba ressent une profonde sympathie,
cl que la question du statut illternatiOm.l nes
LLeux saints, berceau des trois religions les pbs
importantes et les plus anciennes du monde, sera
resolue d'une matliere satisfais<ll1te.

As no other representative wishes to speak, I
take :t that th~ COLlncil is in favour of recom~
t,ncnding the admiss:on of Israel. I wonder, however', whether any rcpresentafve desires to submit
a concrete proposal in that connexion.

Si aucun autre representant ne desire prendre
la parnte, je considercrai que le Consed est d'avis
de recomr.1ander l'admissiol1 de l'Etat d'IsraiH;
j'aimerais dOni: savoir si un representant quelcon que a unf', proposition concrete a faire a ce
sujet.

a

M. AUSTIN (Etats-Unis d'Am~riqt:e) (tr,ad~£it
Mc AUSTIN (United States of America) : Four
months ago tl:e Secretary-General placed before de l'anghds): It y a Cjuatre mOlS, le Secretalre
:he members of the Security Council c10ctlment gcneml U SOIlrr.is ~\1}( membre,s cy ~on~eil de seSjl093, which was a letter dated 29 November cmite le document 5/1093. r s agJssOllt dune lettre
1948, from Israel's Midster for Foreign Afftlirs adressee au Secretaire general, le 29 novembre
to tbe Secretary-General concerning Isr4lel's appli- :948, par le Ministre des affaires et.ra,!gercs
cation for admissiun to membership in the United d'Israel, et relative a ta demande d'acllTIlsston de
Nations and' containing a declaration accepting te pays cO~1me Membre d; 1:0rg.a::lisa~10n de;s
the the obligations of the Cllarier. That applica- ~ations Vmes. Ce:te lettre etalt SttlVlC dune detion was discussed in Paris on 2, 15 and 17 De- clara:iol1 acceptant les obligations decoulant de la
cember and again yeste:"day 1383'rd, 384th, 385th C11arte. 1..<1 delllande cl'admission a ete discutee a
and 413ih meeting.s] wd today in New York Paris 1es 2, 15 et 17 d§centbre [383eme, 384bne
Moreover, the Committee on the Admission of el 385Jme seances1. La discussion ~ ~te reprise
New Members discussed this appEcation and a New-York 11ie1' [413cme .\eance] et a1.1jourd'hui.
mace a report which is ccntair.ed in document De plus, le Comite c'admission des 1.1Ouveaux
$/1110. This report conc1Ltded with the state- Membres a discute cette denande et 2. fait un rap_
ment that the Committee: "considers that it will port qui constitue le do:ument 5/1110. Le Comite
be for the Security Council to decide at the conc1ut :;on rapport de la fil,;on suivante " . . . 1t
pro?er time whether to refer the matter back appartiendra au Couseil de decider, le moment
to the Committee or :0 take a decision itself". vem:, s'i1 convient qlJ'il en rHere a nOl.Jveau au
Comite ou qu'il se ?rononce directen:ent luimerr.e ".
The Security Couod yesterday decided not to
Hier, le Conseil de securite a decide de ne pas
submit the matter agab to the Membership Com- renvoyer de nOtlveau lel. question au Comite d'ad_
mittee, and 'GppatE"Tlt1y we have now finished tile mission tIes r.O!.lveaI.lX Membres. 11 semble dons
debate. Therefore, I move the following resolu~ que nous soyons arrives a"..l. terme de nos debats
tion [.5'/1276]:
sur la q\lestion. Rn c::tnseql1en:e, je propose au
Conseilla resolution $Jivante [S/12761:

.

"The Security COU1!CU,
"Having r,xeived and cOt:sidered the application
of Israel for membership in the United Nations,

"Le Co,nseil de securitc,
"Ayallt rept et exa-mine la demande d'admissio n
d'Israel comme Mcmbre des Natioll~ Ullies,

9
"Decides in its judgment that Israel is a peaceloving State and is able and willing to carry out
the obligations contained in the Cbrter, and

"Decide qu'a son avis Israel est un Etat pacifique capable de remplir les obligations de la
Chute et dispose a le faire et, en consequence; .

"Recommends to the General Assembly that it
admit Israel to membership in the United
Nations."

"Reconnnande l'Assemblee genal'ale d'admettre Israel comrr.e Memhe des Kations Unies."

The PRI'5WENT (translated from Spanish) ~
The propcsal which has just been submitted by
the United States representative is open for disCl:ssion.

~ PRfl:SIDZNT (traduit de l'espagnol):
J'aJ en mains la proposition que vient de formuler
le representant des Eta.ts-Cnis; quelqu'un desiret-il prendre la parole a ce sujet?

If :10 representative wishes to speak on ~he
proposal, r shall put it to the vote at once

Si aucun representant n'a d'obsei\'Rtions a
presen:er, je vais immMiatement mettre cette
proposition aux voix.

Mr, MALIR: (Un.ion of Soviet Socialist Rep:lhlies) (tra11slatec/ f10m Russian) : The USSR delegation has repeatedly outlined its views on the
q:1estion of the admission of the State of Israel
to membe:-ship in :he United Nations. It sLlpports
the application; it announced this SllWart already
last December, when the question was exami:1ed
by the Security Council i:1 Paris.

M. MAUK (Un:on des Republiquf'.s socialistes
sovietiques) (traduit du russt): La delegation
de !'URSS a expose maintes reprises son point
de vue stir l'adl11ission cl'Israel a :'Organisation
des Natior:s Unies, La delegati:m de l'URSS appuie la uemamk u'adlllissioll de l'Eta: d'Isl-ae1.
Elle I'll. declare deja au mois de decembre demier,
Jorsque le Comeil de s€curite elait en train d'etudier cette question
Paris.

The delega:ion of the USSR i3 guided by the

La delegation de l'URSS s'inspire des hauts
principes de la politique exterieurt du Gouvernement de l'Union sov:e:tiq:.te qui reconnait cha~
que nation le droit
une existence libre et independante, le droit d'avoir son propre :3:tat et de
se developper en toute liberte, confonnement a
la vo:onte pogulaire, S'inspirant de ces nobles
princi;Jes, la delegation de l'URSS a soutenl1, des
les premiers jours de la disCllSsion du probleme
palestinien, qUE' 1;< popnlatinn juive et la population arabe de Palestir.e ont, toutes deux, pleinemen! droi: une existence natioJnale independante
et libre, jusque et y compris le droit de faire
secession et de fonder tm Etat inclependant.

lofty principles of the foreign policy of the USSR
Government, which ,ecognizes the right of all
natio:1s to (l free and independent existence, as it
recognizE'S their right to create their own state
struc~ure and to progress independently in accordance witr. their own wisl1es and the will of their
people. Guided by these noble principles, the
c'.elegation of the USSR has oaintained, from the
Yl:ry beg:nulug of the discussions on the Pde!'l~
tine question, that bcth the Jewish and the Arab
population of Palest.ne were eq:lal1y en:itled to
w independent national existence, freedom and
independence, induding the right to secede and
form an independent State.
The USSR c!elegatio:1 ha.s accordingly supported, both in the Security Co:mdl and in the
General Assembly, the lofty principle of the free
and independent existence of the JewiSh and
Arab peDples in ?alestine.

a

a

a

a

a

a

S'inspirant de ce principe, la delegation de

l'URSS a defendu, tant au Conseil de seetlrite
qu'a l'AssemJlee ger.erale, le droit du pettple
arabe et du peuple j uif a une cx:ster.cc librc et
indep~nd;;.nte.

a

Certain extraneous forces, however, have :ried
. harc'. to prevent a pellceft:l settlement of the Palestine questio::J. a:1d the immediate creation, in
accordar:ce with the General Assembly resolution
of 29 Kovember 1947 '181(IJ)], of two jnde~
pendent States in Palestine-a Jewish and an
Ara') Statf>.

Toutefois, it s'est trouve des forces,
l'exterieur, qui ant fa.it de3 efforts cOll3ide:ables pour
em]J€dler la solution pncifique du problerne p:Jles
tinien, et qui se sont opposers la cre<.tion immediate de deux Etats independ<.nts en Palestine I'un juif, l'au~re arabe - ainsi que le prevo}'ait la
resolution de l'AssembJee gen~rale (181 (fIJ] en
date du 29 novembre 1947.

This resoluticn would have been ca:ried out
in good time and the Palestine question would
have been solved already, had it not been for the
interference of those outside forces working for
the colonial, oil and military 8trategic interests
of the United Kingdom and t~.e rnited States,
through the notoricus Aramco Corporation and
the Bri:ish puppet, King Abdttllah, and had it
not been for the aggressive action 0: those forces
in preventing tr.e imple:nentation of the General
Assembly decision on the creation of two independent States in Palestine. Ko settlemen~ has
been achieved 30 far because these extraneOL;S
forces have interfered in the no~mal anc peaceful
development of the Palestine question.

S'i1 n'y avait pas eu il1gefc.nc~
ces I?::'ces
exterieures qui, de£endar.t les mterets colol1laux,
petroliers et str~legiques du ,~oyaU1;'Ie.-1!ni et des
Elats~Unis aglssent par Imknnedtalrc de la
iameuse c~n:pagnie Aramco et dll. roi AJrlu.llah,
qui n'est qu'un panti:1 entre les mams des bntanniques· si ces forceS exteriet:res :l'avaient pas eu
recour~ ~ dE'S actes agressifs afin d'e:npecher
~'execution de la resolution <ldoptee par l'Assemblee generale au suje: cl~ la creatio,: d~ d.eux Eta~
independants en Palestine, cette ~eSO.tltion a~tr.alt
deja ete mise en '1igueur, et le problem7 palestJm~r.
aurait He resolu il y a longtemps. Mals, par S1l1te
de l'interver.tion de ces forces exterieu:-es clans
I'evolution norrr.ale et pacmque des eveneroents
palestiniens, ce probleme n'a pas ete resolu jusfju'a. present.

M

a

?e

10
Yesterday [413th mectillg], many members of
the Council rejoked and exulted at tl1e cor.clnsbn
of an agreement between Egypt and the State of
Israel. The attitude and statements of the Egyptian representative show, however, tllaL exccssive
ap:imism may be somewhat premature in this
field. The Secmity Council must not relax its
attention in the matter and should take measures
to carry through to the end the initiative already
taken tor its peaceflll settlement and for the
development and strengthening uf peace, f:eedom,
rlf'mocracy and the peaceful co-existence and
collaboration of the Jewish and Arab peoples in
Palestine.

Hier [4.13em,e sea1u'p J, plusif'urs membre5 nt!
Comeil de sectlrite "c sont montres enthotlsiasmes
de l'accord canclu entre l'Egypte et Israel et ont
donne lib~e COllrs a l'allegresse qu'il lenr inspirait.
Cependanl, I'a-:titudc ct les declarations dtt repre.sentant de l'Egypte montrent qu'il est peut-etre
premature de se montrer trop optimiste. le Conseil
de seCllrite doit continuer suivre avec vigilance
l'evolution de la question j)<llestinielll\e. 11 duit
veiller a ce que les premieres mesures entreprisesen vue de regler pa~ifique1l1ent ce probleme soient
app.1Jquees jnsqu':Hl bout. et i ce que les rapports.
paClflques et la collabol'atlOn entre les peuples juif
et arabe de Palcsti~e se deve!oprent et se COIlSOlidcnt, clans l'i.:lteret de la p.aix, de: l<l liberte et de·
democratie.

The Security Council should, therefore, take
steps to prevent the forces of aggression from
pursuing their evil desig:1S in Palf>stim, from
inciting th~ Jew:Srl and Arab peoples aga:nst one
another, and from fishing in tbe troubled waters
of hatred and armed strife between the two
peoples. Tlwse forces pursue thc se1tl.sh interests
of a g~oup of large Ang1o-Arneric:an moropolies,
whose interest lies in tlle exploitation of tbe oil
wealth of the Near and Middle East; they p1lrsue,
too, the interests of the military grollps of ."lame
great Powers which are noW forgil:g aggressive
bloc:s, eyeing those two regions as a military
strate.g-ic base for launching new aggressi"l"c wars,
and undermining peace and international sec:udy,
a:ld consequently the Un:ted Nations itself. In
these drCt1mstances, the Security Council cannot
be complacent simply because the States of Israel
a:1d Egypt have agreed upon an armistice.

Allssi le Conseil clait-il prendre les dispositior.s
necessaires pour empecher les forces d'agression
de poursnivre lenr sinistre besogne en Palestine,
d'attiser ia haine cntr.:: :es J~lifs et les Arabes, GC
pec1~er en eau trot.;ble et d'utiliscl' la 111tte et 1esconflits ~rmes qui opposent ces deux peuples
att ~e111 profit d'un gr:ntpe de g-ros mOtlopoles
anglo-arnericains, desireux d'exploiter ies richesses
petrolieres du Proche et du Mo)'en-Orient. D'autre part, il £a11t les empecher de faire le jell des
cliques militaires qui se sont f01"mee.~ all sein de
cert.1ines grar:dcs Puissances et qui s'appliquent
a fOrnler des blocs agressifs, cOl,siderent le
Froche et le Moven-Orient comme une base
str<l:egittne et com:ne L;n tretnpEn permettant de
declencher de nouvelles guerres d'agression, sapent la p<:.lX et la securite internationales et mettent
par consequent en danger I'existence meme de
l'Organisation des Nations Ullies. DellS ces conditions, le Conseil de sec:urite ne ,Joit pas lie
c:ontenter de la c:onc1usion d'un accord d'armistice entre les Gouvernements d'lsrael et de
l'Egypte.

The statements made today by scorne memcers
of the Security Council must also be noted, in
partinIar that of the United Kingdom re:r:reser.tative. We all remember ttat during the meetings
of the Council in Paris he tried to find a series
of far-fetched and artificial prf>texrs to prevent
the State of Is:ael from beconing a member of
the United Natiol1s.

On ne saurait ncm P:llS passer sous silence les
declarations faites aujourd'~.ui par certains membres dll Conseil de sectlrite et, e:1 particulier, par
le representant du Royaume-U:li. Nom savons
tous que, au cours des reunions clu Con.$eil de
sect:rite tenues
Pais, le representant du
Royaume-Uni anit invoque toutes sortes de
motifs artifieie1s 'Jour ne pas permettre l'Etat
d'Israel 11. l'Organlsatic-n des Nations Unies,

The first argument concerned the territorial
problem: the United Kingdom ~epresentative
alleged that the State of Israel had no territory,
though wc all know that its tenitory has been
defined by the General Assembly resolution and
that a special map has been attached to that resoIlttion. TllOse who are intere3ted in seeing the
territwry of hrad may refcr to the General
Assembly resolution of 29 November 1947 and
the annexed map wbich clearly marks t~at territory,

11 a fait notamment allusion au problelile territorial. Le represer.tant du Ro)'atune-Uni a affirme que l'Etat d'Israe1 n'avait pas ce territoire.
On sait pour:ant que le territoire de cet Etat a
ete delimite dans une reso:utioll de l'Assemblee
genera1e et qt.'une carte a ete attachee a ce texte.
Quiconq:te desire connaltre les limites dn territoire d'hrael n'a qu'a consulter la resolution de
l'Assemblee en date du 29 novembre 1947; cette·
resolution estlUun:e d'tne carte qui delimite d'une
h<;on precise le territoire de l'Etat d'Ismel.

It was no ralllt of the JewisJ-: peof-'le that
extraneous forces and th imperialistic interests
of international oil companies made it impossible
t.J u<.:cupy th~ tenitDry Md establish ordcr there
h time. Leave the Jewisb people to themse:ves
and tbey will be masters of the territory assigned
to them. But that is evidently not to the liking
cf some international monopolies amI aggressive
ardes, and they are trying to prevent its realization.

Des forces etrangeres au pays et les interets·
imperialistes des monJpoIes petro1icrs internationatlx ont, certes, ecnpeche l'Etat d'Israe1 de
prendre po<;~('ssiol1 de ce. :erritoire et cl'y faire
reg:1er l'ordre. Mais c'est la une tout autre affaire.
DU :'on ne samait en bltmer le pellple juif. Laissez
ee peuple etl paix, et il se rendra maitre du
lerritoire qui lui a etc att:iblle. Totttefois, certains monopoles internatianaux et certaines cliques
tendances agressives semblent s'opposer
cette solution.

a

a

a

a

11
The second argument advanced by the United
Kingdom delegation in Paris concerned the Con·
ciliation Commission. It was argued at the time
that the admission of the State of Israel to
membership in lhe United Nations would hinder
the work of the Commission, an argllment which
does not bold \vater.

D'autre part, la delegation du Royaume-Uni a
invoque a Paris la question de la Commission de
conciliation. On a affirmc, ell dIet, qm: l'admission
d'IsraeI a 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies entraverait les travaux de cette Commission. Or, on ne
so.urait accepter un tel argument.

The third argument was that the State of Israel
had no elected government. Now, however, this
pretex.t too is no longer valid, since we all know
that an election has been held <md a government
formed in the State of Israel.
In view of the worthlessness of the old pretexts, new ones are now being; put forward.
Dotlbt 11a5 been cast upon the ability of the State
of Israel to fulfil its international obligations to
the United Nations. The Security COl\ncil is well
awa,e, however, that the provisional Government
of the State of Israel is loyally complying with
its obligations to the United Nations and particularly the decisions adopted by the Security Council
on the Palestine question.

Enfin, on "3 affirme que l'Elat d'Israel ne posseclait pas de gouvcrncmcnt ~.1u Mais ceUe objection n'est plus valable, c<lr cl1acun sait que des
elections ont eu lieu en Israel et qn'un gouvernement y a ete etabli.
Etant donne gue tous ces arguments se sont
reveles fort pet! convaincants, on en produit
d'autres maintenant ; on met ell cloute la capacite
de l'Etat cl'Israel de s'acql1itter des obligations
intemationales imposees par l'Organisation des
Nations Unies. Pourtant, k Conseil de securite ~
sait tres bien que le Gouvernement provisoire
d'Israel respecte loyaiement ses ohligations a
l'eganl de l'Organisation des Nations Unies et
execut;e, notamment, les decisions adoptees par le
Ccnseil de securite sur la question palestiniel1!1e.
011 a parJe deja id de l'un des probJemes, a
savoir ce1ui de Jerusalem. Mais il rcleve de la
competence de la Commission de conciliatil]l1 qui
a ete creee par une resolution [194 (fIf)] de
I'Assemblee generale; ceUe Commission est en
train d'etudier ce proble.me et doit soumettre ses
recommandations au Conseil. I1 n'y a aucune raison de rattacher la question du stattlt de Jerusalem
it ce11e de l'admission d'Israel ;). l'Organisatioll
des Nations Unies.
On a egalement parle IC] des rHt1gies arabes,
mais queIJes raisons a-t-on de rendre l'Etat d'Israel
responsable de ce prob1i:me? Si on demande quels
sont les responsables de la situatio!l des reiugies
arabes, il n'y 11 auctln dotlte que, en repolldant
it cette question, II faudra Ilwntionner leg forces
exterieures auxquelles j'ai deja fait nll1lSion,
forces qui de£endent 1eurs intel'ets strictt:l11ent
egoistes en cherchnnt a. s'assurer le monopole
de l'exploitation des richesses petrolieres. du Proche et du Moyen--Orient et a ereer des bases
strategiql1es daM celte partie dtl moncle, cC qui
n'a rien a voir ,wee la cause de la paix et de
la securite internationa1es, ni ave.c les interets des
peup1es arabe et juif. Il n'y a la que des velleites
agressives des milieuX" dirigeants de certains Etats.
Quelles sont les conditions les plus propiees
au reglement rapide du probleme des refugies
arabes? Faut-i1, ponr re$lJllc1re ce probleme, fJue
la situation en Palestine soit instable et incertainc,
que cc pays soit en proie a la haine, qu'il y <tit un
eon£li1 arl11e entre Israel et les Etats Arabes, DU
bien faut-il qu'il y regne la paix ( En abordant
ce prob1el11e d'une fa~on impartiaJe, totlte personne objective et honnete recol1llaitra qu'un
rcglcment pacifique de la question palestinienne
sem be<lucoup plus l)ropice a la sohltion du p1'Oblemc des re£ugies arabes qne les operations militnires et l'atmosphere d'instabilite qui regnc en
Paie$tine en ee moment.
Le Conseil de seeurite doit done g'efforcer
d'aboutir le plus vite possible a. un reglement paci~
fique de la situation en Palestine et d'assurer par
la meme la solution du problell1e des re£ugies
arabes. Sinon, ce probJeme ne fer<l que s'aggraver,
11 n'y a done aucune raison de rattacher le prob1erne des refugies arabes a eelui de l'admission

One of the problem5 has been mentioned here,
namely, the question of Jerusalem. This, however,
is a matter for the Conciliation Commission set
up by General Assembly resolution [.l94(IIIJ].
The Commission is examining the question and
will submit its recommendation thereoll. There
is no ground for linking the question of the status
of Jerusalem with that of tl1e admission of Israel
to membership in the United Nations.
Statements have also been made on the Arab
refugee question, but why sbould the State of
Israel be blamed for the ex;ste.nce of that prob~
lem? Wben seeking to detennine the responsi~
bility for the existence of the problem of Arab
refugees, we cannot fail to mention the outside
forces I have alre<ldy referred to. They pursue
their own selfish interests for the monopoly
exploitation of the oil wealth l]f tbe Near and
Middle East and the creation of military strategic
bases, which have nothing in common either with
the eallse of peace and international security or
the interests of the Arab and Jewish peoples and
only correspond to the aggressive designs of the
leading circles of some States.
What conditions would be more condllCive to a
quick solution of the problem of Arab refugees:
instability in Palestine, uncertain relations, enmity and military operations between Israel and
the Arab States on the one hand, or peLlce on the
other? Any honest person approaching the problem objectively would realize without any doubt
that the problem of Arab refl1gees could be solved
more. easily if a peaceful settlement l]f the Palestine question was achieved tban if military operations and instability were to continue.

The Security Council should strive, therefore,
to achieve a peacefd settlement of the Palestine
question as soon as possible, thereby ensuring a
so1ution of the problem of Arab refugees. Other~
wise, this problem can only grow more acute.
Consequently, there is no reason for linking the
question of Arab refugees with that of Israel's

12
adlllissiol1 to membership in the United Nations.
The only link between the two is that the socner
peace is established in ?alestine, the sooner and
the more successfully will it be possible to solve
the problem of Arab refugees.

d'Israel it I'Organisation des Natiom TJnie~_ r.es
deux problemes ne sont lies que dans la mesure
ell un prompt retablissement de la pai>:: en Pa1est:ne con:ribtlera a regler rapidement le prob1eme
ecs refugtes arabes.

I now wish to say a few words on the attenpt
of the United Kingdom representative to link
the question of Israel's admission with tllat of
the admission of some of the States whose applic::.tionshave now been before the Security Council
for a considerable time.

Je vO:.ldrais dire quelques mats a-j snjet de la
tentative faite par le representant eu RoyaumeDni en vue de rattacher l'admissiUll J'hraeI it la
cuestion de l'admission'de certains Etats dont 1es
demandes se trouvent depuis 10ngtemps entre les
n1<Jins dtl Conseil de securite.

It is o)vious from the statenents he has made
that both he and his Goyernmel~t are still pursuing
a policy of favouritis:n towarrl_~ some of the
applicants and of disdmination aga:nst others.
The Uni:ed Killgdom representative has carefully
listed the States favoured by himself and his
Government. He mentioned Portugal, Ireland,
Ceylon and Transjordan, but failed to mer.tion
Bulgaria, Romania, Hung-arYl the Mongolian
People's Republic and Albania. What is more,
"te passeJ uvel' in silence the fact that it was the
United Kingdom delegation itself. with the supFort of :he United States of Americ;;:, which had
blocked the applications of bese States in the
Security Council and had thus in fact applied the
'''veto'', ?reventing so far the admission of States
which have a full and legal right to ':le members
of the Unlted Nations, much more right, for
instance) that the brand-new "State" of Ceylon,
which i:J. effect remains a British colony. The
United Kingdom rep:-esentative was silen~ on
those facts, for mention of them would not have
been to his advantage_

I1 re5sort tres nettement de la declaration du
representant d-j Royaume-Uni que son Gouvernement et lui-meme sont l'cstes fdeles a leur
politique de favoritisme it I'egard de certains des
Etats qui ont fait leur de111ande d'aclmission a
1'0rganisation des Nations Unies e-_ qu'ils contiuuent a s'opposer a l'~.dmission de celiains autres.
Le representan: dl! Royaume-Uni a soignel1sement
enumere les Etats a l'egard dt:squels son Gouver:lement et 1ui-meme poursuivent nne politique
de favoritisme. Il a nomnle le Portugal, l'I:landf',
Ceylan et la Transjordanie, tout eu evitant de
mentionner les demandes de la Bulgarie, de la
Roumanie, de la Hongrie, de la Republique populaire de Mongo1ie et de I'Albanie. Non seulement
il n'en fait aucune rtention, mais il a egalement
passe sous silence le fait que c'est preciser:1ent la
delegation clu Royaume-Uni qui, <t.'lec I'appui de
la delegation des Etats-Unis, a empeche le Com;eil
ele securite de donner suite atlx demancles de ce5
Et;;:ts. EUe a fait, en rea1ite, usage de son droit
de "veto" et a empeche ainsi l'admission d'Etats
qui possedent toutes les conditions requises pour
hire partie de l'Organisation eles Nations Unies
et qui sont certainement plus qualifies que ne l'est,
par exemple, le nOllveL "Etat" de Ceylan, qui reste,
en fait, une colonie britanniquc. Le representant
du Royaume-Uni n'en a souffle mo~) car il n'etait
pas da::ls son interet d'en parler.

Le representant d'J Royaume-Uni s'est egale~
Nor did he mention the fact that the General
Assembly in Paris had adopted the Swedish reso~ ment abstenu de mentionner que l'Assembltic genelution [197(III)] recommending that the Security rale avait ad07te it Pal-rs unc resolution presentee
Counci:, acting in accordance with :hc principle pur la Suede' [J97 (lIl)] et c1'apres laquelle le
of universality, should reconsider all :we1ve appli- Conscil de securite do it n~e:ltaminer Ics douze
cations and make the appropriate decision on the deman::Jes d'a1missien dont iI est saisi en s'insadmission of those States to membership in the pi rant dn pr:ncipe de I'universaJj~e et prendre
United Nations. It would seem, however, that une decision au sujet de l'admisslon des Etats
the Udted Kingdom representative has no inten- interesses a l'Orgar_isation des Nations Unies.
tion 0-: being guided by the General Assembly 11 semble cependant que le representant dtl
recommendation to reconsider the application of Ro)'at1me~Uni n'ait pas l'intention d'obser"Q"er
all twelve States and to take a pos:tive decision cette recolllmandation de l'A;;selll1>h~e gelleralc
on their admission to memJership. He is still selon laquelIe le Corseil doit examiner les declamaintaining l1is former attitude of favouritism rations de ces douze Gouvernements et donner
towards one group of States and discrimination une stlite favorable ~ leurs dem<Jlldes d'admission
agains: another. It is of course impossible to it l'Organisation des Nations. Unies. Le represenagree with such an attitude, sillce it is in direct tant (u RoyaumeRUni contlllue it favoriser un
C!ontradiction with both the principles of the groupe d'Eta~s et a s'opposer it l'admission d'un
Charter and the recommendation of the General ;mtre groupe. I1 va sans dire (]t:'on ne saurait
Assembly.
accepter cette attitude, car die est incomp;;:tib1e
avec les prineipes de la Charte et va a l'encontre
de la recomn::andation de l'Assemblee generale.
There can be no doubt that the sooner the
United Kingdom delegation and those who support it withd.aw frem that positiQ:l, the sooner
will it be possible to reach a favourable solution
of the question of the admission of all ~elve
States which have applied for membership of the
Unite': Nations.

On peut e1re certain que, aussi:6t que la cteJegation du Royaume-Uni et ceux ,qui la sOtltiennent
auront abandonne leur attitude presente, la question de l'ndmission des douze Etats a~'allt bit
leur demande d'<Idmission a l'Organisation des
Nations Unies pourra etre resolue favorablement.

13

n'e

In condll3ion, I would
to state again that
H-_I"'; delegation of the USSR supports the aPFlicatian of t~e State of Israel and will vote for its
admissioll to membership in :he l"ni:ed Nafons.

En tenn:nant, je vou::lr<lis ab:!nrer de nO:1vcau
que la delegation de l'URSS o:ppuie la demande
d'Israel et qu'elle vu!era. en ftLveu: de :'admi55ion
de ee: Etat a l'Organisation des Nations Unies,

Mr. TAl(:I.. SRNECO (Vlml.inian Soviet Socialist
Repnblic) (lraJlsllJ-led froM Russian) = The
Ukrainian deleg<'..t1oll has .already had the opportunity to explain its attitude towards the creation
of the State of Israel a:ld the admission of that
St.. !!' to membership in the United Nations and
alsc towards tl1e Pakstine que3tion as a whole,

M. T'\.K.\..'i-'hl"\lCO (RepubJique SQci.a:istc SOVLC
tiq~le d'Ukraine) (traduit du ms.se:: La de.lega-

tio~ de la Rej::ublique so:::ialiste sovietlque d'Uk:ai:le a deja eu ·'occasion d'exposer ~on attitude
a J'egard de la creation de l'Etal' d'Israel et de
son adn:ission l'Orgnnis."\tion des Nn:io:ls LJnies
Unies, ct de faire colltw.ilre ~es vues sur la ques·
tion ::le POllesti:le dans son ensemble,

a.

~ome members of tl:c Sccu~ity Council have
done tlleir utmost to prevent the ·implementation
of the General Assembly resolution on the Palestino:: 4U~liol1. Thcsc clforfs were r.:w_de both in
the Security Council £lnc1 other organs o{ the
United Natlo:ls and in Palestine itself, where the
AraJ! ad Jewi~h peoples were incitNl to fight
each other. Th:l.t bns led to sl.::ffering and iosses
on both sides. It has also created the problem
of rdllgees.

Ce:'ta.inE met;1b~es du Conseil de securite ant
fa:t :out ce qui elait en leur pOilvoir pour empecher l'execution de la resolution G.doptee par
I'Assern1Jlee ge.nerale au sujet dl1 ~roblcll1e palestinien. Ces efforts ont Me poursUlyis au Coused
de secu:ite et clans les auttes organes des Nations
U:1i~'i ainsi ql.:'ell Palestine mbnr;, ::>u certair:s
Etats ant prati::Lue une politique qui consistait a
provoquer un conHit arme entre les peltpleE arabe
et jl1if. Cr.tte politiq\le a entrain6 de grandes
souffrances pour la poplllation arabe et juive et
a callse nombre de vidimeS. Elle a egaJement
crM le prnhleme des rHug-ies,

Some members of t~e Sen:rity Ccuncil hRve
not been conspicuous either by the:r consistency
'Jr their princip:es. Indeed, they hrn-e displ~yed a
signa: lack of principles and consistency. T;1e)'
var.illated Jetween one position anc atlo:her and
the motives guiuing :hem hnd nothing in common
with the pri:lciples of the United Nntions. The
po3ition of the Ukrainian and USSR delegations,
on the other hand, bs been one of principle and
has bee:! consistent ':rom the very beginning.

D'autres memhes du Conseit de securite ont
adopte une attitude. qui n'e.tnit ni Jogiqlte, ni cmsequentc. En fait, ils ant fuit montre d'un mrpris
absolu pour les p:-ineipes ct pour ['esprit de s:l.ite.
Ces membres dl1 Conseil aIlaient d'exrrerne en
extreme. Lellr a6tudt etait dictee par :es c.0n51ideratioJ,s qui ll'avaient .rien voir avec Ies llrincipes ie l'Organis<ltion des :\rations "Cnies, Au
contraire, l'aUitude de la delegation de la R~Pll­
b:ique socia:istesoviecique d'Ukra.:ne et celli': de
l'Dnion s:)V:etique a ete, des le clebu:, logique et
cOO8eq'.lente,
La deIegaticn de la RSS d'Ucraine votera en
faveur de la recammanclation relative a l'admission de l'Etat e'Israel a rOrgan1sation des Nalio:ls
Unies.

Tr.e Ukrainian delegaticn wJI vote for the
a(ltnit the State of Israel to
membership in the United Na:ions.
re::::omm~w:l<.tljon to

Sir Terence SnoNE (United Kingdom): The
delegation of the USSR is entitled to its own
interpn:tatioll of United Kin&,dom poEry as
regards f'1e Middle East, just as we, for our
part, are entitled to Clur own interpretation of
USSR policy in ::hat or in any other area of the
world, The clifference between us is thn.t I do
not intend to take this o?portunity, whkh hardly
seenls to b<: t1pp:oprbte, tJ inflict an ohnoxious
propaganda speech on the Secllrity Council. I
wish, however, to make a brief reference to Mr,
Mallk'3 remarks about w~at 1 said regarding other
applicants for admission.

I felt that, in expb.ining that my Government
was a't~t:;.ining on the question of the admission to
the Untted Nations of Israel, aJout whose quali~
fications for membership it unfortunately still
feels doebt, I was fdly justified in referring to
ether applicants ab:lllt whith my Gover:m:ent has
r.o doubts, I wou:d add that the States I cited
all received seven or more votes in this Council,
and that, had it not been for the Soviet Uniou's
"eto, they would bve been admitted, This does
not apply to anyone of the States mentioned by
the representati-... e of the USSR.

a

Sir Terenee ::HONE U{oyaume-Uni;· (trikluit
de l'onglcis) : La delega:ion de ]'ORSS a le droit
d'interpreter comme elle remend la politiqt:e du
Royaume-Cni d<ins le Moyen-Orient, tcut CGIlUUe
nOllS SQnmes fondes nDtlS-r.1emes a interpreter
a notre manie:e la poJtique de l'URSS dans cette
pade du monde 011 da.ns toute aatre. La differtncc
entce neus est que je ne :ne propose pas de
saisir cette occasion, 1ui ne me parait .sue-re
opportllne, pO:.1r infli[er a\: Conseil de securite tll.
d€plaisant discours de propagande. Toutefois, je
desire reve:Jir b:-ievemellt su:- l'allusion Q".1'a faite
M. Mali~ t ee que j'ai dit all sujet d'autre.s E1ats
qui ont demande it etre :2.dmis comme Membres
de~ Nations Unies.
Lotsque j'ai expliql1~ que man Gouvernen:ent
s'a')stier.drait lors eu vote sur la question de
:'aQlI1issior. d'hr1l.C1 i notre Orgar.is~.tion p<lrce
qu'il eprouvait tertains doutes quant aux titres de
eet Etat a eet egard, j 'etais parfaitement en dro:t
ue faire allusion a d'autres demnr:des !J. propos
dcsquelles mon Gouvernement n'a pas la moindre
hesitation. J'ajoute que les candldatures dont il
.<;'ilgit unt rccllCilE, au sein du Conseil, ~t"pt voix
ou plus, et que, sans le veto de l'Union sovietique,
les Eiats en question auraient ete admis, Ccd ne
peut s'app[ique~ it aucun des Etats dent le representant de l'U~SS a fait mention,

14
Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republies) (translated from Russian): I would like to
draw the attention of the President and of the
Council to the fact that some representatives in
the Council, as well as in other organs of the
United Nations, have developed the habit of
loudly uttering the word "propaganda" whenever
they are short of arguments to refute the facts
cited by the USSR delegation, and of thinking
that that proves everything they want and ex~
hausts the subject. By so doing, they only lay
themselves open to ridicule, since uttering the
word "propaganda" can prove ahsolutely nothing.
Sir Terence Shone is now using that method.
Such "arguments" do not deserve any attention.

The PRESIDENT (translated from S pmtish) :
May I refer the Council to the United States draft
resolution [S/1276], which will now be put to the
vote?
A vote was taken by show of hands, as follows:

In favour: Argentina, Canada, China. Cuba,
France, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United States of America.

M. MALIK (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) (tradj~it du t'usse): Je voudrais attirer l'attention du President et des membres du
Conseil de securite sur le fait que certains memhres du Conseil, ainsi que certains membres d'autres organes de l'Organisation des Nations Unies,
ont pris l'habitude de prononcer hien haut le mot
de "propagande" lorsqu'ils sont a court d'arguments pour refuter les faits cites par la delegation
de l'URSS; ils estiment, en effet, que ccla suffit
prouver leur these et a regler tout. En adoptant de
tels procedes, its se mettent dans une situation
ridicule, car on ne prouve rien en pronon<;ant le
mot de "propagande". Or, c'est precisement
cette methode qu'a eu recours Sir Terence Shone.
Cette "argumentation" ne merite pas que l'on s'y
attarde.

a
a

Le

PICrcSIDE,NT

(tnuiuit

Votent pour: Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba,
France, Norve-ge, Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes $0vietiques, Etats-Unis d'Amet'ique.
Vote contre: l'Egypte.

Abstaining: United Kingdom.

S'abstient: le Royaume-Uni.

The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):
In accordance with the principle established by
the Security Council on resolutions subject to
the unanimity rule, ahstention by a permanent
member of the Council does not render the
Council's decision invalid. I therefore declare the
United States draft resolution to be adopted.
Mr. AReI': (Argentina) (translated from
Spanish) : I do not wish to comment on the Presi~
dent's statement that the Council, having adopted
the draft resolution by more than the seven votes
required by the Charter, has decided to recommend Israel's admission to membership in the
United Nations. I wish, however, to go on record
as stating that, contrary to the view held by some
if not by practically all the permanent members of
the Council, this resolution has not been supported
by the £ve permanent members of the Council as
required in .Artic1e 27, paragraph 3, of the
Charter. Whlle the President has referred to an
established principle, I do not believe that the
Sect~rity Council can establish principles to
modify the Charter whenever it thinks fit.

l'espagnol):

II est procede alt vote a main levee.

Against: Egypt.
The resohtlion was adoPted by 9 votes to 1,
with 1 abstention.

de

T'attire l'attention des membres du Conseil sur le
l)rojet de resolution soumis par le representant
des Etats-Unis [Sj1276] que je vais maintenant
mettre aux voix.

Par 9 voix contre line, avec tme abstentio,t, la
resolution est adoptee.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I' espagnol) :
Etant donne que le Conseil de securite a deja, en
ce qui concerne les resolutions soumises a la regIe
de l'unanimite, etabli nn precedent selon lequel
l'abstention volontaire d'un memhre permanent
n'invalide pas la decision dlt Conseil, le projet
de resolution presente par le representant des
Etats-Unis est adopte.
M. ARc£ (Argentine) (tradl~it de l'espagnol) :
Je n'ai aucune observation a formuler au sUJet
de la declaration du President seIon laquelle le
Conseil a decide de recommander l'admission
d'Israel a l'Organisatian des Nations Unies, Ctant
donne que ce projet de resoluti.on a obtentt plus
des sept voix exigees par la Charte; en revanche,
je tiens a ce qu'il soit specifie dans le procesverbal que, contrairement a la these soutenue par
quelques-uns, sinon par la presque totalite, des
membres permanents du Conseil, ladite resolution
n'a pas f(~uni les voix des einq membres permanents du Conseil, comme l'exige le paraf{raphe 3
de l'Article 27 de la Charte. Certes, le President
a fait allusion a. une jurisprudence deja etablie,
mais je soutiens que le Conseil de securite n'a
pas qualite pam creer, quand il le juge utile, une
jurisprudence en vue de modifier la Charte.

. ~ahmoud FAwzI Bey (Egypt): For reasons
similar to those expounded by the representative
of Argentina, I wish to express my doubt as to
cert~in interpretations of the way in which
Article 27, paragraph 3, of the United Nations
Charter should be applied.

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypte) (tradHit de
I' angla.is): Pom des raisons analogues Et celles
qui ont He exposees par le representant de l'Argentine, je tiens exprimer le doute que j'eprouve
au sujet de certaines interpretations de la maniihe
dont l'Artic1e 27, paragraphe 3, de la Charte des
::-:Iations Unies devait etre applique.

Mr. MAUK (Union of Soviet Socialist Repub~
(translated from RltSsian): I would merely
like to draw the Council's attention to the fact

M. MAr-IK (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Je voudmis
seulement faire observer que, conformement

l~cs)

a

a

15

that, in accordance with the established practice
of the Security Council, when a permanent mem~
l1P.r of the Council abstains from voting, such
action :s not interpreted in the way that some are
now erJdeavouring to interpret it,

la pr"tique etablie par le Canseil de securite, l'abstenticn d'un memure perm"nent du Conseil n'a
pas r.ecessairemerit la signification que d'aucuns
tentent de lui attribucr.

The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): If
th~Te i~ no ohjection, we shall consider the remaining ite:ns on the Council's agenda at our next
meeting, to be held next Monday, 7 March, at
3 p.m., and I hope that we shall be able to settle
the Indonesian question as soon as possible after
tILe other n:attcrs which have first to be considered.

Le PnES1DIWT (tradu;t tie l'e.pGgnol):
Si les membres et! Conseil n'y voient pas d'jncon~
venient, lcs points slli"ants de l'ordre du jour se~
ront exal1lines 10rs de la seance qui aura lieu
lundi prochain 7 mats a. 15 heures; j'esperc
que la question d'Indonesie sera resolue ensuite,
nussit6t que possible, apr~s la rlisC1tssion des questions qui doiven: etre exam:nees en premier lieu.

The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.

La seance list levee d- 17 h. 50.
