A/RES/76/52

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
13 December 2021

Seventy-sixth session
Agenda item 100
General and complete disarmament

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 6 December 2021
[on the report of the First Committee (A/76/444, para. 93)]

76/52.

Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of
Nuclear Materials
The General Assembly,
Recalling the principles of the Agreement between the Republic of Argentina
and the Federative Republic of Brazil for the Exclusively Peaceful Use of Nuclear
Energy, 1 which was signed on 18 July 1991 and by which the Common System of
Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials and the Brazilian-Argentine Agency for
Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials were established,
Recalling also the provisions of the Agreement of 13 December 1991 between
the Republic of Argentina, the Federative Republic of Brazil, the Brazilian-Argentine
Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials and the International
Atomic Energy Agency for the Application of Safeguards, 2
Reaffirming the conviction of the States parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 3 that the Treaty is the cornerstone of the
nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament regime while ensuring the benefits of the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
Recognizing the principles of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
in Latin America and the Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco), 4 and welcoming its
important contribution to the achievement of the objectives of nuclear disarmament
and nuclear non-proliferation,
Mindful of the role played by the International Atomic Energy Agency with
respect to nuclear safeguards and verification pursuant to article III of the Treaty on

__________________

CD/1117.
International Atomic Energy Agency, document INFCIRC/435.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
4
Ibid., vol. 634, No. 9068.
1
2

21-18492 (E)

161221

*2118492*

A/RES/76/52

Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control
of Nuclear Materials

the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, with a view to preventing the diversion of
nuclear energy from peaceful uses to nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosi ve
devices,
Considering that, in accordance with the aforementioned article, non -nuclearweapon States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons may
enter into agreements with the International Atomic Energy Agency either
individually or together with other States, in accordance with the Agency’s statute,
Considering also that bilateral and regional safeguards agreements involving
the International Atomic Energy Agency play an important role in the further
promotion of transparency and mutual confidence between States and also provide
assurances concerning nuclear non-proliferation,
Considering further the contribution by the Brazilian-Argentine Agency for
Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials in researching and developing
innovative verification methods for improving efficiency in safeguards
implementation,
1.
Notes with satisfaction that the year 2021 marks the thirtieth anniversary
of the entry into force of the Agreement between the Republic of Argentina and the
Federative Republic of Brazil for the Exclusively Peaceful Use of Nuclear Energy, on
12 December 1991, and of the establishment of th e Common System of Accounting
and Control of Nuclear Materials and the Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting
and Control of Nuclear Materials;
2.
Welcomes the continued cooperation between the Brazilian-Argentine
Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, and encourages them to increase their cooperation, taking
into account their respective responsibilities and competencies;
3.
Notes that the Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of
Nuclear Materials has proved itself as an innovative and effective bilateral
confidence-building mechanism, with positive effects for peace and security at the
subregional and regional levels, and as a reference of best practice in nuclear
safeguards and non-proliferation verification;
4.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-seventh session
an item entitled “Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear
Materials”.
45th plenary meeting
6 December 2021

2/2

21-18492
