V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, to be held
at Nairobi from 15 to 26 July 1985,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General47 concerning the preliminary results of the survey, including the
emerging awareness of the important actual and potential
contribution of women to economic development around
the world,
Recognizing that further efforts will be required to collect adequate data on the participation of women in economic sectors and that further research is needed to determine the steps to be taken to ensure the effective mobilization and integration of women in development, especially
in relation to the formulation and implementation of economic policies and to economic production and the use of
resources,
Recommends that the survey in its final form should be
considered by the General Assembly at its fortieth session
under the item entitled "Effective mobilization and integration of women in development", together with any
comments on the survey and related decisions taken at the
World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/173. Implementation of the Nairobi Programme
of Action for the Development and Utilization of New and Renewable Sources of
Energy
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration and the Programme of Action
on the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order, contained in its resolutions 320 I (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) ofl May 1974, the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, contained in its resolution 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974, its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation, and the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade, contained in the annex to its resolution 35/56 of 5
December 1980,
Reaffirming the importance of the Nairobi Programme
of Action for the Development and Utilization of New and
Renewable Sources of Energy4 8 as the basic framework of
reference for action by the international community in this
field,
Emphasizing the need for development of new and
renewable sources of energy in order to improve the welfare of the people,
Bearing in mind the need for financial and technical support by the international community and the vital role to
be played in this respect by the United Nations system and
emphasizing in this context that special attention should
be paid to the development of new and renewable sources
of energy of developing countries in accordance with their
national plans and priorities,
Recalling its resolutions 36/193 of 17 December 1981,
37/250 of 21 December 1982 and 38/169 of 19 December
1983 on the immediate implementation of the Nairobi
Programme of Action,
47 N39/566.
4 8 Report o(the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources

of Energy, Nairobi, /0-2 I August /98/ (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.81.1.24), chap. I, sect. A.
49 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtv-ninrh Session, Supplement No. 44 (N39/44).

133

Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Development and Utilization of New and Renewable
Sources of Energy on its second session, 49
I. Takes note of the report of the Committee on the
Development and Utilization of New and Renewable
Sources of Energy on its second session;
2. Notes with concern that the implementation of the
Nairobi Programme of Action for the Development and
Utilization of New and Renewable Sources of Energy had
been slow and falls far short of the urgent needs of developing countries, and, in this regard, stresses the need for
continuous commitment and action by the international
community at the national, regional and global levels, in
particular with respect to the mobilization of financial
resources, to which the General Assembly has attached
high priority;
3. Calls for the early and effective implementation of
the Nairobi Programme of Action and of the conclusions
and recommendations adopted to this end by the Committee at its second session;' 0
4. Expresses its concern at the results of the few regional consultative meetings thus far convened and reiterates
that thorough preparation, as well as financial and technical support, is necessary for ensuring the convening and
success of such meetings at the national, regional and global levels;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/174. Implementation of the Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for the
Least Developed Countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 320 I (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975
on development and international economic co-operation,
Reaffirming the provisions of the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade relating to the least developed countries, 51
Reaffirming the Substantial New Programme of Action
for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries, 52 adopted unanimously by the United Nations Conference on the
Least Developed Countries and endorsed by the General
Assembly in its resolution 36/194 of 17 December 1981,
Expressing serious concern at the continued deterioration of the economic and social situation of the least
developed countries in spite of their national efforts at
development, as well as efforts made by the international
community, including donor countries, even three years
after the adoption of the Substantial New Programme of
Action, and stressing the immediate need for greatly
expanded support measures, including a major increase in
the transfer of additional resources for the realization of
the objectives of the Programme,
50 Ibid., sect. V.
5 I See resolution 35156, annex, sect. 111.K.
52 Report of the l'nued Natwns Conference on the Least Developed
Countries. Paris, 1-/4 Septemlirr /981 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E 82 I 8). pan one. sect. A

General Assembly ~Thirty-ninth Session

Deeply concerned at the very slow pace at which the
Substantial New Programme of Action is being implemented,
Recalling resolution 142 (VI) of 2 July 1983 of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 51
on progress in the implementation of the Substantial New
Programme of Action for the I 980s for the Least Developed Countries,
Recalling also its resolution 38/195 of 20 December
1983,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of the Substantial New Programme of
Action for the I 980s for the Least Developed Countries, 54
Recognizing that the mid-term global review of the
implementation of the Substantial New Programme of
Action will provide an opportunity for the international
community to consider ways and means of enhancing the
implementation of the Programme during the rest of the
l 980s and adjusting it, as appropriate. in the second half
of the decade of the 1980s.
I. Emphasizes that, in view of their deteriorating
socio-economic situation, the least developed countries
need the urgent and special attention of the international
community and its large-scale support on a continuous
basis to enable them to progress towards self-reliant development, consistent with the plans and programmes of each
least developed country;
2. Reaffirms the commitment of the international
community to the Substantial New Programme of Action
for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries and urges
all countries. international institutions and others concerned to implement fully and effective]) their commitments under the Programme;
3. Decides to convene the high-level Meeting of the
Intergovernmental Group on the Least Developed
Countries of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development from 30 September to 11 October 1985 to
carry out, inter alia, the mid-term global review of the
implementation of the Substantial New Programme of
Action and readjust, as appropriate, the Programme for
the second half of the Decade of the 1980s in order to
ensure its full implementation, pursuant to paragraph 9 of
General Assembly resolution 36/194 and paragraph 119 of
the Substantial New Programme of Action; 52
4. Urges all countries as well as multilateral and bilateral financial and technical assistance institutions to take
the necessary steps to ensure appropriate preparations for
an in-depth review at the high-level meeting;
5. Stresses the importance of the timely preparation of
all necessary documentation, as requested in the Programme, including specific recommendations for the full
and expeditious implementation of the Substantial New
Programme of Action by the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development and other competent organizations;
6. Welcomes decision 284 (XXVIII) of 6 April 1984 of
the Trade and Development Board, 55 in which the Board
decided to convene from I to I O May 1985, as part of the
preparatory process for the mid-term global review of the
progress made towards the implementation of the Substantial New Programme of Action, a meeting of governmental experts of donor countries and multilateral and

bilateral financial and technical assistance institutions with
representatives of the least developed countries to consider
the following:
(a) Areas for possible improvement of aid practices
and management with respect to the least developed
countries, taking into account the experience to be drawn
from the national review meetings, and in particular:
(i) Measures to improve the co-ordination of assistance programmes:
(ii) Measures that the least developed countries are
already taking with the support of the international community, as well as possible additional
measures that could be undertaken for accelerated
progress of the least developed countries and full
and expeditious implementation of the Substantial
New Programme of Action, taking into account
the economic situation of the least developed
countries:
(iii) Ways of better adapting the implementation of
development assistance programmes to the specific needs of the least developed countries, taking
into account the agreed conclusions of the Second
Meeting of Multilateral and Bilateral Financial
and Technical Assistance Institutions with Representatives of the Least Developed Countries, held
at Geneva from 11 to 20 October 1982: 5"
(b) Organizational issues related to the 1985 mid-term
global review of the implementation of the Substantial
New Programme of Action, including the state of preparation of documentation for that review, especially documents concerning the economic situation of the least
developed countries:
7. Takes note of decision 289 (XXVIII) of 6 April
1984 of the Trade and Development Board, 55 in which the
Board decided that the results of the comprehensive
review, to be carried out at its thirtieth session in March
1985, of the implementation of section A of its resolution
165 (S-IX) of 11 March 1978, 57 called for in paragraph I
of United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
resolution 161 (VI) of 2 July 1983, 53 and of the implementation of resolution 165 (S-IX) as stated in the Substantial
New Programme of Action and in Conference resolution
142 (VI), are to be taken into account during the preparatory process for the mid-term global review:
8. Emphasizes the need for the conclusion of the first
round of remaining country review meetings for the least
developed countries as soon as possible and, at the latest.
before the mid-term global review;
9. Requests all relevant organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system to submit reports
containing a review of the implementation of the Substantial New Programme of Action within their fields of competence and proposals for further action as input into the
preparation for the mid-term global review;
10. Requests the Director-General for Development
and International Economic Co-operation, in conformity
with paragraph 123 of the Substantial New Programme of
Action, 52 to continue, in close collaboration with the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, the executive secretaries of the regional
commissions and the lead agencies for the aid consultative
groups, to ensure at the secretariat level the full mobilization and co-ordination of the United Nations system for

53 See Proceedings of the L'nlled Na11om ( ·on/errnce on Trade and Devel
opment. S1x1h Sesswn, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United Nations publica··
tion, Sales No. E.83.11.D.6), part one. sect. A
54 A/39/578.
55 See Official Records o(thc <;eneral Asscmhlr. Thmr-mnth Scss11>n. Sup
plement No. 15 (A 3911 ~). vol I part one. sect 11.R

56 See O/jic,a/ Records o(the rrad,, and Development Board. Twenty-sixth
Session. Annexes, agenda item 6, document TD/8/933, part two.
57 Official Records ol the General Ass,,mhly. Thirty-third Sessum, Supple•wnt No I.< (A 33/ 151. vol. I. part two, annex I.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Commitke

the purpose of implementation and follow-up of the Substantial New Programme of Action, taking into account. in
particular, the mid-term global review:
11. Requests the Secretary-General to obtain extrabudgetary resources to ensure effective participation of the
representatives of the least developed countries, through
provision of necessary resources to finance travel expenses
of at least two representatives from each least developed
country to attend the high-level Meeting on the mid-term
global review of the implementation of the Substantial
New Programme of Action and one representative from
each least developed country to attend the meeting referred to in paragraph 6 above;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session a report on the
high-level Meeting on the mid-term global review and on
the implementation of the present resolution.
/03rd plenary meeting
17 December I 984

39/175. Immediate measures in favour of the developing countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 320 I (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment ofa New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975
on development and international economic co-operation,
Reaffirming its resolution 38/200 of 20 December 1983,
Gravely concerned that the immediate measures referred
to in resolution 38/200 are far from being implemented
fully and that the critical problems facing developing
countries in areas identified in that resolution still exist
and in many cases have worsened further, particularly in
Africa,
l. Calls upon all Governments, in particular those of
developed countries, to adopt and intensify measures
aimed at the full implementation of General Assembly resolution 38/200 and to fulfil, as a matter of urgency, the
existing international commitments in the areas identified
in that resolution;
2. Requests the relevant organs. organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system to intensify their
efforts to develop specific proposals and expedite actions
for the implementation of resolution 38/200;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the heads of organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system, to follow up on the actions taken
by the agencies and to submit a report on the progress
made in the implementation of the present resolution to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
/03rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/176. Development of the energy resources of
developing countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration and the Programme of Action
on the Establishment of a New International Economic
58See E/1983/91 and Corr.I. A138'5lc and A 1-9·4211 and (orr.1

13S

Order. contained in its resolutions 320 I (S-VI) and 3202
(S-Vl) of I May 1974, the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States. contained in its resolution 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974. Its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September I 975 on development and international economic co-operation. and the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade contained in the annex to its resolution 35/56 of 5
December 1980.
Recalling its resolutions 37/251 of 21 December 1982
and 3g: I 51 of 19 December 1983,
Considering that the principal impediments to the realization of the indigenous energy potential of the developing
countries are, in addition to inadequate exploration, the
scarcity of financial resources, insufficient exploration
data. inadequate access to technology and a shortage of
skills.
Reaffirming the principle of the full and permanent sovereignty of each State o~·er its natural resources,
Reaffirming also that effective and urgent measures need
to be taken by the international community to assist and
support the efforts of the developing countries, in particular the energy-deficient among them, for developing their
energy resources, in order to meet their needs through cooperation, assistance and investment in the field of conventional and of new and renewable sources of energy,
consistent with their national plans and priorities, as called
for in the International Development Strategy,
I. Reaffirms its resolution 381151 and calls for the
immediate and effective implementation of all its provis10 ns:

2. Requests the Secretary-General to improve further
and update the contents of his report on the development
of the energy resources of the developing countries 58 and,
in so doing, to consider all sources of energy, including
new and renewable sources of energy, in a balanced and
integrated manner and to submit a consolidated and comprehensive report to the General Assembly at its fortieth
session;
3. Urges, in this connection, early consideration of
possible avenues that would increase energy financing,
including, inter alia, the mechanisms being examined by
the World Bank, such as an energy affiliate, and calls upon
Member States to take appropriate measures to this end in
the relevant forums:
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the organs and organizations of the United Nations system. to promote international co-operation for the development of internal technological and other capabilities in
developing countries in order to achieve the development
of their energy resources:
5. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare and submit to the General Assembly at its fortieth session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution and to
include in that report the results of symposia and similar
undertakings in support of efforts by developing countries
for the exploration and development of their energy
resources.
/03rd plenary meeting
17 December l 984
