Resolutions adopted 011 the reports of tbe Fifth Committee

IV
INVESTMENTS OF THE FUND

1. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirtieth session a report on
investments by the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund, such report to deal, inter alia, with the following
subjects:
(a) Investment policy;
(b) Machinery used for making investments;
(c) Types of investment;
( d) Profile of the investment portfolio as at 31 December 1974;
( e) Statement of profit and loss from the sale of
securities as at 31 December 1974;
(/) Reasons for the loss resulting from the sale of
securities;
(g) Currencies and countries in which investments
were made and amounts thereof;
(h) Effects of inflation and monetary instability on
the real situation of the Fund; ·
The information provided shall be considered within
the context of article 19 of the Regulations of the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund;
2. Endorses the recommendation in paragraph 74
of the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Board that special attention should be paid to suitable
investment opportunities in developing countries and
requests the Secretary-General to report on the matter
to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session;

127

that the maximum amount to which the Board shall be
authorized to supplement voluntary contributions to
the Emergency Fund 46 shall be set at $100,000.

2324th plenary meeting
18 December 1974
3355 (XXIX). Translation of some official docu•
ments of the General Assembly and of resolutions of the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council into the German
language47

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the translation of
some official documents of the General Assembly and
of resolutions and decisions of the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council into the German
language,
l. Notes with appreciation the assurances given
by Austria, the German Democratic Republic and the
Federal Republic of Germany that they are prepared,
until further review, to contribute collectively to cover
the cost resulting from the present resolution;
2. Decides that, pursuant to rule 57 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly, the resolutions
and decisions of tl)e General Assembly, as well as
the other supplements to its official records, and the
resolutions and decisions of the Security Council and
the Economic and Social Council shall be issued in
the German language as from 1 July 1975.

2324th plenary meeting
18 December 1974

V
JOINT INSPECTION UNIT

1. Requests the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Board to consider, at its twentieth session, the possibility of including the members of the Joint Inspection
Unit among those eligible to participate in tbe United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund and, if necessary, of
proposing amendments to the Regulations of the Fund
accordingly;
2. Authorizes the Secretary-General, in collaboration
with the other members of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, to explore alternative methods
of providing coverage for the Inspectors and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session,
taking into account also the results of the consideration
of the question by the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board in accordance with paragraph 1 above;

VI
l. Endorses the observations and recommendations
of the Advisory Cbmmittee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions in paragraphs 20 and 42 to 45
of its report;
2. Also endorses the observations of the Advisory
Committee in paragraph 22 of its report, provided
that the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board
shall commence the review of the existing scheme of
pension adjustment early in 1975 and shall make an
interim report thereon to the General Assembly at its
thirtieth session;
3. Further endorses the observations of the Advisory Committee in paragraph 30 of its report, provided

3357 (XXIX). Statute of the International
Civil Service Commission 48

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3042 (XXVII) of 19 December 1972, by which it established, in principle, an
International Civil Service Commission and laid down
basic principles regarding its functions and composition and the method of appointment of its members,
Noting that the aforementioned resolution provided
for the participation of the organizations of the l 1nited
Nations common system in the development of the
statute of the Commission and the choice of its
members,
Taking into account the comments and recommendation~ of the Secretary-General contained in his reports
of 20 September 1973,49 1 October 1974 50 and 22 October 1974•• 1 and the observations and recommendations contained in the reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions of
30 November 1973 52 and 29 November 1974, 53
1. Approves the statute of the International Civil
Service Commission ~s set out in the annex to the
present resolution;
46 See

Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-

eighth Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/9009 and Corr. I), vol. I.

chap. IV, paras. 41 and 42.
47 See also p. 140, item 106.
48 See also p. 140, item 82.
49 A/9147 and Corr.I.
no A/9738.
5t A/9738/Add.1 and Add.I/Corr.I.
02 A/9370.
oa A/9891.

General AS11embly-Twenty-ninth Session

128

2. Endorses the administrative and budgetary
arrangements proposed for 197 5 by the Secretary-General/' subject to the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions;'' 3
3. Requests the International Civil Service Commission to review, as a matter of priority, the United
Nations salary system in accordance with the decision
in paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 3042
(XXVII), and to submit a progress report to the Assembly at its thirtieth session;
4. Invites the organizations members of the United
Nations common system to participate in and contribute to the work of the International Civil Service
Commission and requests the Secretary-General, as
Chairman of the Administrative Committee on C<H>rdination, to report on relevant developments to the
General Assembly at its thirtieth session.
2325th plenary meeting
18 December 1974
ANNEX
Statute of the International Civil Service Commission
CHAPTER I
ESTABLISHMENT

Article 1
I. The General Assembly of the United Nations establishes, in accordance with the present statute, an International Civil Service Commission ( hereinafter referred to as
the Commission) for the regulation and co-ordination of the
conditions of service of the United Nations common system.

2. The Commission shall perform its functions in respect
of the United Nations and of those specialized agencies and
other international organizations which participate in the
United Nations common system and which accept the present
statute (hereinafter referred to as the organizations).
3. Acceptance of the statute by such an agency or organization shall be notified in writing by its executive head to the
Secretary-General.
CHAPTER II
COMPOSITION AND APPOINTMENT

shall consult with the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Bdgetary Questions before oonsideration and decision
by the General Assembly.
2. In the same way, the names of candidates shall be
submitted to the General Assembly to replace members whose
terms of office have expired or who have resigned or otherwise
ceased to be available.

Article 5
1. The members of the Commission shall be appointed by
the General Assembly for a term of four years and may be
reappointed. Of the members initially appointed, however,
the terms of five members shall expire at the end of three
years, and the terms of five other members at the end of
two years.
2. A member appointed to replace a member whose term
of office has not expired shall hold office for the remainder
of his or her predecessor's term.
3. A member of the Commission may resign on giving
three months' notice to the Secretary-General.
Article 6
1. The Commission shall be responsible as a body to the
General Assembly. Its members shall perform their functions
in full independence and with impartiality; they shall not seek
or receive instructions from any Government, or from any
secretariat or staff association of an organization in the
United Nations common system.
2. No member of the Commission may participate in the
del•iberations of any organ of the organizations on any matter
within the competence of the Commission unless the Commission has requested him or her to do so as its representative. Nor shall a member of the Commission serve as an
official or consultant of any such organization during his or
her term of office or within three years of ceasing to be a
member of the Commission.

Article 7
1. No appointment of a member of the Commission can
be terminated unless, in the unanimous opinion of the other
members, he or she has ceased to discharge the duties in a
manner consistent with the provisions of the present statute.
2. Notification thereof to the Secretary-General by the
Commission shall make the place vacant.

Article 8
1. The Chairman shall direct the work of the Commission

and its staff.

Article 1

2. If the Chairman is unable to act, the Vice-Chairman
shall act as Chairman.

The Commission shall oonsist of fifteen members appointed
by the General Assembly, of whom two, who shall be
designated Chairman and Vice-Chairman respectively, shall
serve full-time.

3. For the purposes of the Convention on the Privileges
and lmmumties of the United Nations, the Chairman and the
Vice-Chairman of the Commission shall have the status of
officials of the United Nations.

Article 3
1. The members of the Commission shall be appointed in

their personal capacity as individuals of recognized competence who have had substantial experience of executive responsibility in public administration or related fields, particularly in personnel management.
2. The members of the Commission, no two of whom shall
be nationals of the same State, shall be selected with due
regard for equitable geographical distribution.

Article 4
I. After appropriate consultations with Member States,
with the executive heads of the other organizations and with
staff~ representatives, the Secretary-General, in his capacity as
Chartman of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination,
shall compile a list of candidates for appointment as Chair· man, Vice-Chairman and members of the Commission and

CHAPTER III
FUNCTIONS AND POWl!RS

Article 9
In the exercise of its functions, the Commission shall be
guided by the principle set out in the agreements between
the United Nations and the other organizations, which aims
at the development of a single unified international civil
service -through the application of common personnel standards, methods and arrangements.
Article 10

The Commission shall make recommendations to the General Assembly on:
(a) The broad principles for the determination of the
conditions of service of the staff;

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

129

(b) The scales of salaries and post adjustments for staff in
the Professional and higher categories;
(c) Allowances and benefits of staff which are determined
by the General Assembly;*
(d) Staff assessment.

mentation of its decisions and recommendations. The report
shall be transmitted to the governing organs of the other
organizations, through their executive heads, and to staff
representatives.

Article 11
The Commission shall establish:
(a) The methods by which the principles for determining
conditions of service should be applied;
( b) Rates of allowances and benefits, other than pensions
and those referred to in article I O (c), the conditions of
entitlement thereto and standards of travel;
(c) The classification of duty stations for the purpose of
applying post adjustments.

I. The Commission shall establish policies and shall formulate guidelines with respect to all matters for which it has
responsibility under this statute. In particular, it shall formulate recommendations under article JO concerning the
system -of salaries and allowances and conditions of service;
adopt the annual report under article 17; propose its budget
estimates under article 21; and adopt its rules of procedure
under article 29.

Article 12
I. At the headquarters of duty stations and such other
duty stations as may from time to time be added at the
request of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination,
the Commission shall establish the relevant facts for, and
make recommendations as to the salary scales of, staff in the
General Service and other locally recruited categories.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph I above,
the executive head or heads concerned, after consultation with
the staff representatives, may request the Commission to determine the salary scales at a particular duty station inste.id
of making a recommendation. The salary scales so determined
shal_l apply to all staff in the same category at the duty
station.
3. In exercising its functions under paragraphs I and 2
above, the Commission shall, in accordance with article 28,
consult executive heads and staff representatives.
4. The Commission shall determine the date or dates on
which it can assume the functions set out in this article.
Article 13

Article 18

2. Within the aforesaid policies and guidelines, the Commission may delegate to its Chairman, Vice-Chairman or to
any other member or members, responsibility for carrying out
specific functions under the statute other than those enumerated
above. The Chairman, Vice-Chairman or the member or
members concerned shall be responsible to the Commission
for the discharge of the functions delegated to them and shall
report to the Commission thereon.
CHAPTER IV
ADMINISTRATIVE, BUDGETARY AND FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS

Article 19
I. The conditions of service of the Chairman and the
Vice-Chairman of the Commission shall be determined by the
General Assembly.

2. Other members of the Commission shall be entitled only
to travel and subsistence expenses in accordance with the
rules established by the General Assemhly for members of
organs and suhsidiary organs of the United Nations serving
in their individual capacity.

The Commission shall establish job classification standards

Article 20

for all categories of staff in fields of work common to several
of the organizations. It shall advise the organizations on the
development of consistent job classification plans in other
fields of work.

I. The Commission shall have a staff as provided in the
budget approved by the General Assembly.

Article 14
The Commission shall make recommendations to the organizations on:
(a) Standards of recruitment;
(b) The development of recruitment sources, including the
establishment of central rosters of qualified candidates, particularly at junior entrance levels;
(c) The organization of competitive examinations or alternative selection procedures;
(d) Career development, staff training programmes, including interorganization programmes, and evaluation of staff.

Article 15
The Commission shall make rtcommendations to the organizations on the development of common staff regulations.

Article 16
The Commission may, after appropriate consultations, make
suet, recommendations to the organizations on other matters
as it may consider necessary to achieve the purposes of the
present statute.

2. The staff, selected in accordance with the provisions of
Article IOI, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations,
shall be appointed by the Secretary-General after consultation
with the Chairman of the Commission and, as regards senior
staff, with the Administrative Committee on Co-ordinatio11.
All staff shall be appointed after appropriate selection procedures. In carrying out their duties, they shall be responsible
to the Chairman and shall be removable only after consultation with him or her.
3. Subject to paragraph 2 above, the staff of the Commission shall be regarded for administrative purposes as officials
of the United Nations, which shall provide the necessary administrative facilities for them.
4. Within the! relevant budgetary provisions, the Commission may employ such experts and auxiliary staff as it may
deem necessary.

Article 21
I. The Secretary-General shall provide such office and
conference facilities as the Commission may require.

Article 17

2. The budget of the Commission shall be included in the
regular budget of the United Nations. The budget estimates
shall be established hy the Secretary-General. after consultation with the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, on
the basis of proposals by the Commission.

The Commission shall submit an annual report to the
General Assembly including information on the imple-

3. The expenditure on the Commission shall be shared by
the organizations in a manner to be agreed by them.

• Dependrncy allowances and language incentives for staff
in the Profes,ional and higher categories, education grant, home
leave, repatriation grant and termination indemnity.

The seat of the Commission shall be New York, United
States of America.

Article 22

General Assembly-Twenty-ninlh Session
CHAPTER V
PROCEDURE

Article 23
I. The Commission shall meet at least once every year.
2. The meetings of the Commission shall be held in private.
Article 24
1. Recommendations of the Commission under article l 0
shall be communicated by the Secretary-General of the United

Nations to the executive heads of the other organizations.
2. The decisions taken thereon by the General Assembly
shall be communicated by the Secretary-General to the executive heads of the other organizations for action under their
constitutional procedures.
3. The executive head of each organization shall inform
the Commission of all relevant decisions taken by the governing organ of his organization.
4. The recommendations under paragraph 1 above shall
be communicated to staff representatives.
Article 25
1. Decisions of the Commission shall be promulgated un-

der the signature of the Chairman and transmitted to the
executive heads of the organizations concerned. If they affect
the interests of the staff, they shall a!lso be transmitted to
staff representatives.
2. The organization concerned shall be notified of the principal reasons for each decision.
3. The decisions shall be applied by each organization
concerned with effect from a date to be determined by the
Commission.
Article 26
The Commission, in making its decisions and recommendations, and the executive heads, in applying them, shall do so
without prejudice to the acquired rights of the staff under
the staff regulations of the organizations concerned.
Article 27
The Commission may, with the approval of the General
Assembly, establish subsidiary bodies for the purpose of carrying out particular tasks within its competence. The Commission may make arrangements with one or more of the organizations whereby they will carry out, on its behalf, functions of
fact finding and analysis.

Article 28
1. The Commission shall be given such information as it

may require from the organizations for the coMideration of
any matter under examination by it. It may request from any
organization or from staff representatives written information,
estimates or suggestions in regard to such matters.
2. Executive heads of the organizations and staff representatives shall have the right, collectively or separately, to
present facts and views on any matter within the competence
of the Commission. The manner in which this riitht shall be
exercised shall be set out, after consultations with executive
heads and staff representatives, in the rules of procedure established under article 29.
Article 29
Subject to the provisions of the present statute, the Commission shall establish its rules of procedure.
CHAPTER VI
OTHER PROVISIONS

Article 31
1. An organization may not withdraw its acceptance of the
statute unless it bas given to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations two years' notice of its intention to do so.
2. The Secretary-General shall bring any such notice to the
attention of the General Assembly and, through the executive
heads concerned, to that of the legi,slative organs of the other
participating organizations.

•

•

•

At its 2325th plenary meeting, on 18 December 1974, the
General Assembly, in pursuance of article 2 and article 5,
paragraph 1, of the annex to the above resolution, appointed
the fifteen members of the International Civil Service Commission.
'
The General Assembly decided that Mr. Raul QUIJANO and
Mr. A. L. Anu would serve as Chairman and Vice-Chairman
of the Commission, respectively, for a term of four years.
The General Assembly then decided by the drawing of lots
that Mr. Pascal FROCHAUX, Mr. Jiri Nosu: and Mr. Doudou
THIAM would serve as members of the Commission for a term
of four years, Mr. Toru HAGIWARA, Mr. Robert E. HAMPTON,
Mr. A. H. M. HILLIS, Mr. Antonio Fonseca PlMENTEL and
Mr. Jean-Louis PLIHON for a term of three years and Mr.
Amjad Au, Mr. Michael 0. ANl, Mr. A. S. CHtSTYAJCOV, Mr.
P. N. HAKSAR and Mrs. Halima WARZAZl for a term of two
years.

3358 (XXIX). Salaries and allowances.of staff in
the Professional and higher categories: amendments to the Staff Regulations of the United
Nations

A
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International
Civil Service Advisory Board54 and the note by the
Secretary-General,55 together with the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, 56
Decides that, with effect from 1 January 1975:
(a) The net base salaries of Professional and higher
categories shall be increased by 6 per cent;
( b) The dependency a1lowance in respect of a child
payable to staff in the Professional and higher categories shall be increased from $300 to-$450 a year;
( c) The rates of assignment allowance shall be revised as recommended by the International Civil Service Advisory Board in paragraph 61 of its report.
2325th plenary meeting
18 December 1974

B
The General Assembly
Decides that, with effect from 1 January 1975:
(a) Paragraphs 1 and 3 of annex I to the Staff Regulations of the United Nations and regulation 3.4 of the
Staff Regulations shall be amended as shown in the
annex to the present resolution;
(b) The amounts of post adjustment for each 5
per cent variation in the cost of living above or below
the new base level shall, at all the main headquarters

Article 30
The present statute may be amended by the General Assembly. Amendments shall be subject to the same acceptance procedure as the present statute.

54 Official Records of tire General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 30 (A/9630).
5a A/9709.
a&A/9919.
