S/PV.9087

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9087th meeting

Friday, 8 July 2022, 12.45 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Costa Filho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Bongo
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-41623 (E)
*2241623*

S/PV.9087

The situation in the Middle East

08/07/2022

now, has a 6 + 6 month extension. This is our effort to
reach a compromise.

The meeting was called to order at 12.55 p.m.
Expression of sympathy on the deaths of former
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan and former
President of Angola José Eduardo dos Santos
The President: On behalf of the Security Council,
I should like to express our sadness and shock at the
senseless assassination of former Prime Minister Shinzo
Abe of Japan. Our sadness also extends to the passing
of former President of Angola José Eduardo dos Santos.
The members of the Security Council express their
condolences and deepest sympathy to Mr. Abe’s and
Mr. Dos Santos’s families and to the Governments and
the peoples of Japan and Angola on those tragic losses.

The draft resolution would renew the Bab Al-Hawa
border crossing. The draft resolution would ensure
that humanitarian assistance reaches all those in
need, facilitate further early recovery and encourage
regular follow-up meetings on its implementation. We
believe this draft resolution is a fair compromise. It
represents a balance between the different positions of
Council members.
We are grateful to all Council members for their
constructive engagement to that end. We now commend
the draft resolution to the Council and ask all members
to support it.

I would ask all those present to stand and observe
a minute of silence in the memory of Prime Minister
Shinzo Abe and the memory of President José Eduardo
dos Santos.

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me start by joining others in expressing
my condolences on the passing of the former Prime
Minister of Japan and the former President of Angola.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.

I would also like to thank the co-penholders, our
colleagues from Norway and Ireland, for their work
on the issue at hand for us today. Their leadership in
drafting the compromise draft resolution S/2022/538
was very much appreciated. And that is what we are
voting on today — a compromise. The United States
and many others wanted a more expansive resolution
that would open more border-crossings. That is what is
required to actually meet the dire needs of the Syrian
people, whose condition is worse than at any point since
the war started. And we will need to do much more to
help them after today. We have had a consistent position
on that over the years. Humanitarian decisions must
be driven by the needs on the ground, not by politics.
But we are not letting the perfect be the enemy of the
good. We want to build on the unity we saw last year in
the Security Council and therefore today we will vote
in favour of this draft resolution. But before we do, I
want to explain the three main reasons we are strongly
supporting the draft resolution and why we are urging
every member of the Council to do the same.

Ms. Juul (Norway): As co-penholders, Ireland
and Norway engaged carefully and consistently
with all Security Council members throughout the
negotiations. The result of our effort is the amended
draft resolution that members now have before them
(S/2022/538). Throughout, we were guided solely by the
humanitarian needs of the Syrian people. We started
with 12 months in our first draft in blue. The vast
majority of Council members support such a 12-month
extension. Our amended text, which we will vote on

First, the United Nations cross-border mechanism
provides unparalleled transparency and stability. It
ensures that aid that goes into north-west Syria is
properly inspected, reviewed and tracked. It also gives
non-governmental organizations the critical 12-month
timeline they need to plan ahead and coordinate the
incoming resources. Any renewal of less than 12 months
would disrupt supply chains, resulting in less aid for the
larger numbers of people who require it. I visited the Bab
Al-Hawa crossing and transshipment hub last month,

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2022/538 and S/2022/541, each of which
contains the text of a separate draft resolution.

2/12

22-41623

08/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East

where boxes are verified and sealed, and I can say that it
is one of the most closely monitored and well-organized
crossings in the world. I saw first-hand what is going
across the border. I saw the medicine, food, diapers
and blankets. If we do not renew that border-crossing,
we will have no United Nations verification system in
place and no regular timeline. Whatever emerges to
take its place will provide less humanitarian assistance
and lack any collective oversight or reliability, and that
is a bad outcome for all of us.
Secondly, we have all made progress on everything
we promised when we unanimously adopted resolution
2585 (2021) last year (see S/PV.8817). The United States
in particular has demonstrated its sincere commitment
to delivering on issues that are important to members of
the Council. A vote against draft resolution S/2022/538
is in fact a vote against cross-line aid. While that
component of the draft is insufficient on its own, the
United States will continue to support it and hopes
it will continue to expand. A vote against the draft
resolution is a vote against early-recovery efforts, which
we know are an important component of a sustainable
humanitarian response. A vote against it is a vote
against the transparency efforts undertaken by the
United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for Syria. A vote
against it is a death sentence. Bab Al-Hawa is the single
most effective corridor for delivering life-and-death
assistance into north-west Syria, including medicines,
vaccines, food, water, educational supplies and so much
more. We cannot shut off all of that assistance at a time
when prices for basic goods such as food and gas are
spiking. We cannot cause a self-inflicted catastrophe
while a humanitarian crisis is pushing more and more
Syrians to the brink.
That leads me to our third and final reason — a
simple reason — for supporting the draft resolution,
which is that 4.1 million people are counting on us.
That is how many people in north-west Syria need
humanitarian assistance, the issue on which we must
all vote to renew in just a few moments. There are 15
of us on the Council. That means that each one of us
holds the fate of roughly 270,000 people in our hands.
So as we are voting, I want Council members to think
about the 270,000 people whom they are personally
responsible for. I want them to think about the young
boy who is wondering whether he will be able to
continue his education, let alone survive the harsh
winter to come. I want them to think about the pregnant
woman who will not be able to deliver her baby safely if
her hospital does not have the supplies she needs. I want

S/PV.9087

them to think about the family feeling hunger in the
pit of their stomachs — unbearable hunger that no one
should ever have to experience — if we do not renew
the draft resolution.
Failure is not an option today. We must get this
done. We must put politics aside and the needs of the
Syrian people first. I urge everyone to vote yes on the
draft resolution.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the floor. I am explaining
our vote on behalf of the current 10 elected members
(E-10) of the Security Council in Kenya’s capacity as
coordinator for the month of July.
The E-10 has been in consultations this morning.
We appreciate the co-penholders’ extensive efforts
to achieve a compromise text that accommodates the
legitimate concerns of all delegations while meeting the
dire and urgent needs of the Syrian people. All of the
E-10 members are in favour of a 12-month renewal of
the cross-border humanitarian aid mechanism based on
the co-penholders’ draft resolution (S/2022/538), which
would enable the humanitarian actors on the ground to
operate effectively. As coordinator of the E-10, Kenya
has also consulted with the United Arab Emirates. As
an Arab representative on the Council, the United Arab
Emirates has made it clear that the Arab countries want
a renewal of the mechanism for providing urgent relief
to the millions of Syrians in need. The E-10’s pressing
interest has been for a united Council on behalf of the
Syrian people. Despite the imminent outcome of the
voting on the two draft resolutions, we will continue to
make every effort to unite the Council.
The President: The Council is ready to proceed to
the vote on the draft resolutions before it. I shall first put
to the vote the draft resolution contained in document
S/2022/538, submitted by Ireland and Norway.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, France, Gabon, Ghana, India,
Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, Norway, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Against:
Russian Federation
Abstaining:
China

22-416233/12

S/PV.9087

The situation in the Middle East

The President: The draft resolution received 13
votes in favour, 1 against and 1 abstention. The draft
resolution has not been adopted, owing to the negative
vote of a permanent member of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): Ireland and Norway
are extremely disappointed that the Security Council
did not adopt draft resolution S/2022/538, on crossborder humanitarian aid into Syria, on which we
just voted.
Having engaged carefully with all Council
members, we put forward the draft resolution in good
faith and as our best effort towards a compromise
that could command the support of the Council. The
draft resolution’s text would have made it possible
for life-saving humanitarian assistance to reach those
in need in north-west Syria by all modalities — both
cross-border and cross-line. It would have facilitated
continued and enhanced early-recovery efforts. It
would have renewed the cross-border mechanism for
12 months, unless the Council decided otherwise after
six months. The cross-border operation is a lifeline for
millions of Syrians who are dependent on humanitarian
aid. The humanitarian situation is not getting any
better; on the contrary, it has only worsened over the
past year. People lack food and food prices are rising.
We think that every member of the Council can agree
on that.
We appreciate the engagement from all sides
during the negotiations. We also appreciate the
support that our text received from the large majority
of Council members. However, we deeply regret that
our compromise was rejected through the use of the
veto. Ireland and Norway’s views on the veto are well
known. We regret the veto’s existence and deeply regret
its use today, but we are not daunted by it — this is not
the end of the road.
What matters to us as co-penholders is getting
humanitarian aid to those who need it. The Council has
a responsibility in that regard, and we will continue to
engage with all members to seek to ensure that it lives
up to that responsibility. We need to reach a solution
in the immediate term — a solution that renews the
mandate for cross-border aid. There is simply no time
to waste. The Syrian people are counting on us.
4/12

08/07/2022

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Today is a dark day in the Security Council.
As we sit in this ornate Chamber, it is easy to lose sight
of the real-life consequences of our votes. But roughly
5,000 miles away, for 4.1 million people in north-west
Syria, the impact of this vote will be swift and dire.
Owing to the vote of one Council member, hospitals
will have to turn patients away because they will not
have the necessary supplies and medicine. Schools
will likely have to close their doors, denying children
the promise of an education and a brighter future.
The nutrition assistance that 85,000 people rely on
to survive will be cut off, as will life-saving dignity
kits for 250,000 women and girls. Shipments of vital
therapeutics, such as Plumpy’nut, will stop. Hopes will
be dashed.
This is not a moment to mince words. I have long
said this is a life-and-death issue; and ,tragically,
people will die because of this vote and the country that
shamelessly deployed the veto today.
Getting this done would have been the bare
minimum. Draft resolution S/2022/538 was already
an extreme compromise. It is unfathomable that one
Security Council member — Russia — put its own
political interests above the humanitarian needs of the
Syrian people. This was a moment to save lives and
lead responsibly. One country failed to do that. United
Nations reports and non-governmental organizations
on the ground have told us clearly that the United
Nations cross-border mechanism was the single-most
effective way to get aid into the country. Twice now I
have seen the efficacy of the cross-border mechanism
with my own eyes.
The Security Council has failed today, but I refuse
to let this be the end of the story. Because of today’s
vote, the Syrian people are at risk of receiving less aid,
resulting in yet more suffering. And there will be less
of the transparency that one Council member claims to
want. That will be solely the fault of that veto today.
It is in the interest of no one — including Russia — to
have resolution 2585 (2021) expire. The United States
therefore stands ready to continue talks on the issue
until we find a way to extend the cross-border mandate.
When I visited the region last month, I saw the
desperation in the eyes of countless Syrians. I promised
the aid workers and refugees I met with that I would
convey their desperation and do everything in my power
to renew the cross-border resolution and get them the
22-41623

08/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East

aid that they need. I will honour my promise — I will
keep at this — and I pray that everyone here will do
the same.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Our delegation voted against draft resolution
S/2022/538, which would have extended the crossborder mechanism in Syria for one year. We regret
that the determination of the delegations of Ireland and
Norway, co-penholders on the Syrian humanitarian file
at the Security Council, failed to find the best way to
resolve the issue.
Our position on the proposals for a one-year
extension of the cross-border mechanism for
humanitarian assistance to Syria has been well known
from the very start. We did not mislead anyone in
that regard, and we remained flexible on other issues.
However, our Norwegian, Irish and other Western
colleagues clearly lacked the diplomatic skills and
commitment needed to reach an agreement.
First and foremost, draft resolution S/2022/538,
which was just put to the vote, ignored the interests of
Damascus, which is supposed be its main beneficiary.
It also ignores the fact that, over the past year, in our
estimation the Security Council and the United Nations
as a whole have not been able to fulfil the objectives
that we had unanimously agreed to work on, including
establishing deliveries through north-west Syria
via domestic routes, increasing the transparency of
reporting on United Nations project activities in Syria
and providing a significant increase in donor assistance
for early-recovery projects.
We tried to correct those shortcomings in draft
resolution S/2022/541, which we submitted to the
Council today and on which members will have
the opportunity to vote. It provides for a six-month
extension; in addition, once the required parameters
of the work we agreed on last year have finally been
achieved, it provides for a further six-month extension.
My American colleague’s statement was particularly
deceptive, sly and hypocritical in that regard and could
give the impression that the draft resolution proposed
by Russia does not envisage an extension of the crossborder mechanism at all. However, everything that
the Permanent Representative of the United States
just outlined in her statement is included in the draft
resolution we proposed. Everyone can see that for
themselves. Her words are a blatant expression of

S/PV.9087

political cynicism and an attempt to mislead world
public opinion.
We will now have another vote. I hope that
everyone will vote in favour of the draft resolution
we submitted, because the alternative is the final and
irrevocable closure of the cross-border mechanism.
We therefore encourage everyone who cares about
the fate of the cross-border mechanism to support
draft resolution S/2022/541, instead of playing suspect
geopolitical games.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
would like to start by expressing the United Kingdom’s
deep condolences following the deaths of former
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe and former President José
Eduardo dos Santos.
Moving to today’s topic, I would like to start by
thanking Ireland and Norway for their sterling efforts
and masterful diplomacy as co-penholders to find a
reasonable compromise on draft resolution S/2022/538.
It is deeply regrettable that Russia has yet again vetoed
a humanitarian resolution on Syria. That deeply
irresponsible veto will have a tragic impact. The United
Nations and humanitarian organizations have repeatedly
described a 12-month renewal as essential, not least to
provide operational hope for the 4.1 million Syrians
who desperately rely on the support provided by the
cross-border mechanism. The co-penholders consulted
Council members extensively and their balanced text
also provided important support for planning for
early recovery, resilience and livelihoods, which was
reflected in the widespread support it received.
A renewal of the mechanism for six months only
would create significant operational challenges for
front-line non-governmental organizations in their
planning, procurement, hiring of staff and ultimately
their sustainability. We will not support draft resolution
S/2022/541, submitted by the Russian Federation,
which simply serves to slice in half the fragile certainty
that we are giving to humanitarian operations and to
bolster the Al-Assad regime. We need to find a way
forward to preserve this vital humanitarian lifeline, and
the co-penholders have our full support as they seek to
do that.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We regret that today the Security Council,
owing to the veto of one of its permanent members, was
not able to adopt draft resolution S/2022/538, aimed
at renewing the cross-border humanitarian assistance

22-416235/12

S/PV.9087

The situation in the Middle East

mechanism in Syria, which is simply essential to the
lives of millions of people caught up in the conflict. We
reiterate that humanitarian assistance cannot and should
not be held hostage to political considerations, and that
is even more damaging when the draft resolution in
question is strictly humanitarian, designed to guarantee
the planning and delivery of assistance schemes by the
various actors operating in Syria, and has the necessary
support of the Council’s membership. The veto of the
draft will only have negative repercussions for the
people of Syria, who continue to suffer the devastating
effects of 11 years of war.
We hope that the Council will act with the necessary
urgency to renew this mandate in order to address the
humanitarian needs in Syria, thereby assuming the
responsibility entrusted to it by the Charter of the
United Nations. Meanwhile, the General Assembly can
now turn to discussing that use of the veto pursuant to
resolution 76/262, for which we ask the presidency to
prepare a corresponding special report.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): We too would like to
thank Norway and Ireland, the co-penholders of draft
resolution S/2022/538, for the intense work that they
have done. Albania supported a 12-month renewal of
the cross-border mechanism, a must for us and among
other things for the planning of resources. But the vote
we just cast makes today a sad one for the Security
Council and the United Nations, as we have failed to
find agreement on a basic matter such as humanitarian
aid, which should not even be a point of discussion.
It is also a tragic day for the more than 4 million
Syrians who have lost access to life-saving aid. More
than 1 million children will be exposed to hunger. We
have let the Syrian people down once again. We have
once again witnessed the devastating effects of the
arbitrary use of the veto by a permanent member. That
is not the way forward. We want a united Council that
also acts on behalf of the Syrian people, and we should
make every effort to achieve that. Millions depend on
it. What is the purpose of the Council if it cannot come
to the rescue of millions of Syrians in dire need of help?
Until we find a political solution, we have to deliver
humanitarian aid. We will support the co-penholders’
efforts to find a solution, and we must go back to
consultations with renewed resolve to find a solution as
soon as possible.
The President: The Security Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution contained
6/12

08/07/2022

in document S/2022/541, submitted by the Russian
Federation. I shall now give the floor to those members
of the Council who wish to make statements before
the voting.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): The United States will vote against draft
resolution S/2022/541 because by renewing the crossborder mechanism for six months only, Russia’s draft
fails to give aid workers the assurances required to
enable them to sufficiently meet needs on the ground,
and that would result in needless suffering. I want to
make it clear that this draft resolution has a mandate of
six months only and benefits the Syrian regime more
than the people of Syria. When I went to the region,
aid workers specifically cautioned me that a six-month
renewal of the mechanism would be a disaster for their
supply lines. They would not be able to arrange steady
supplies of life-saving goods at a volume necessary to
reach all the people who currently depend on crossborder operations. On top of that, the draft resolution’s
six-month timeline would mean that life-saving
assistance would be shut off in the dead of winter when
needs are at their highest, which would be a nightmare
scenario for a region in which millions of people are
still displaced.
Last year, the Council — including Russia — voted
to support cross-border aid for a year (see S/PV.8817),
specifically through a six-month authorization followed
by a six-month extension subject to the issuance of the
Secretary-General’s report. The humanitarian needs
have only increased since then. The negotiation process
for Russia’s draft resolution was also problematic, given
its process. As presented, it circumvented the normal
negotiation process that allows the full Council to
weigh in and it completely disregarded draft resolution
S/2022/538, which the co-penholders put forward in
good faith, a draft that sought to address the concerns
that Russia has claimed to have about the mandate.
The draft resolution before us, submitted by
Russia, simply does not do right by the Syrian people
or by aid organizations. And it is not the right way to
conduct business in the Council. Russia has greedily
and disrespectfully hijacked the negotiations from the
co-penholders, who led a consultative and inclusive
process. For those reasons, we cannot support draft
resolution S/2022/541 and call on others to join us in
voting against it.
22-41623

08/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East

The President: The Security Council is
ready to proceed to a vote on the draft resolution
contained in document S/2022/541, submitted by the
Russian Federation.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
China, Russian Federation
Against:
France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Brazil, Gabon, Ghana, India, Ireland,
Kenya, Mexico, Norway, United Arab Emirates
The President: The draft resolution received 2
votes in favour, 3 against and 10 abstentions. The draft
resolution has not been adopted, having failed to obtain
the required number of votes.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I will not speak at length, because the
vote we just cast on draft resolution S/2022/541 was
more eloquent than any words — especially the
empty, deceptive words we heard from our Western
colleagues today. Those who did not support the draft
resolution demonstrated their real attitude towards
the needs and aspirations of ordinary Syrians. They
had the opportunity to extend Syria’s cross-border
mechanism for one year, in two stages, on the condition
that the assistance mechanism for the entire country
would improve.
The words frequently spoken by certain colleagues
in support of improving the cross-border mechanism
turned out to be false and hypocritical — they
clearly proved that today by killing the cross-border
mechanism for good. I do not think anyone in Syria
will suffer from that, whatever they may be saying. As
for the terrorists entrenched in Idlib, those Security
Council members already have their own opportunities
to provide for them.
Everyone had a choice, and everyone made their
choice, and now this page of history has been turned
once and for all. For our part, we will keep providing
assistance to the brotherly people of Syria, with full
respect for its sovereignty and territorial integrity.

S/PV.9087

Ms. Juul (Norway): As co-penholders of the Syrian
humanitarian file, Ireland and Norway abstained
in the voting on draft resolution S/2022/541, which
was submitted by Russia. We believe it is essential
to renew the mandate for cross-border aid. Draft
resolution S/2022/538, which was submitted by Ireland
and Norway and which we consider a fair and careful
compromise among the views expressed during the
negotiations, was unfortunately vetoed.
Draft resolution S/2022/538 included a 6 + 6
extension of the mandate. That is a practical issue,
not a political one. For the humanitarian organizations
operating on the ground, a predictable mandate is
necessary to be able to plan and implement humanitarian
responses. It is critical for cross-border and crossline operations and for the implementation of earlyrecovery projects.
The draft resolution submitted by Russia amounts
to a six-month extension. That is simply not enough
in our view, which is why Ireland and Norway chose
to abstain.
The Security Council has a responsibility to
secure continued humanitarian aid to north-west
Syria. Ireland and Norway will continue to engage
all Council members to seek to ensure that it lives up
to that responsibility. That means we need to reach a
solution in the immediate term. There is simply no time
to waste. The Syrian people are counting on us. It is
essential that those who depend on humanitarian aid
can continue to receive the support they need.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): France
regrets that draft resolution S/2022/538, which was
submitted by Ireland and Norway with the support of
virtually all the members of the Security Council, was
not adopted owing to the veto exercised by the Russian
Federation alone. That jeopardizes international
humanitarian support to Syria and the survival of
millions of people.
France commends Ireland and Norway for
their tireless efforts to reach a compromise. Crossborder humanitarian aid remains vital for hundreds
of thousands of Syrians. No other alternative exists
today for providing assistance to more than 2.4 million
people; meanwhile, the Syrian regime continues to
instrumentalize aid for political purposes.
Draft resolution S/2022/541, which was submitted
by the Russian Federation, does not take into account

22-416237/12

S/PV.9087

The situation in the Middle East

the humanitarian needs in Syria, which have never
been greater in 11 years of conflict. The humanitarian
community is united on the point that a renewal for
only six months would be insufficient. It would not
permit the proper planning of operations, which need
predictability and stability. A six-month renewal would
be all the more difficult as it would plunge Syrians into
uncertainty in the middle of winter, when aid is most
needed. That is why France voted against the draft
resolution submitted by the Russian Federation and
why that resolution failed overwhelmingly to convince
the members of the Council.
France now calls on all members of the Council
to show unity and responsibility and to continue the
dialogue to renew this indispensable mechanism, at
the request of the Secretary-General himself as well
as humanitarian agencies and non-governmental
organizations. Council members can rest assured
that France is committed and mobilized to achieving
that end.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): With
regard to the two draft resolutions that were just put
to the vote, China abstained in the voting on draft
resolution S/2022/538 and voted in favour of draft
resolution S/2022/541. We regret that no consensus
was reached in the Security Council on extending the
authorization of cross-border humanitarian assistance
in Syria. I would like to make the following points.
First, the humanitarian situation in Syria continues
to face great challenges. China has continuously
supported the United Nations and the international
community in providing humanitarian assistance to
the Syrian people in accordance with the principles
of humanity, neutrality and impartiality. China also
actively provides various types of assistance to Syria
through a number of different channels, plays a
constructive role in improving the local humanitarian
situation and helps people overcome the difficulties
impacting the economy and their livelihoods.
Secondly, China has reiterated many times that,
in order to resolve the humanitarian issue in Syria, we
must fully respect Syria’s sovereignty and the leadership
of the Syrian Government. Cross-line relief should
become the main channel for humanitarian assistance in
Syria. The Security Council must put forward specific
requirements on improving the efficiency and scale
of cross-line relief and push all parties to strengthen
relevant capacity-building, effectively ensure the safety
8/12

08/07/2022

of relief channels and support the work of international
humanitarian agencies.
Thirdly, the cross-border humanitarian assistance
mechanism is a temporary arrangement based on
the particular situation in Syria. In the light of
developments on the ground, the Security Council
should assess the effectiveness and applicability of the
mechanism in a timely manner and make corresponding
adjustments. The Security Council must come up
with a clear timetable for the termination as soon as
possible of cross-border delivery and advance the
gradual transition from cross-border relief to a crossline approach. The specific duration of the Council’s
extension of the mandate should give the Council the
room and the necessary flexibility to make timely
assessment and adjustments.
Fourthly, early-recovery projects can bring selfgenerated impetus to the recovery and development
of the Syrian economy. Under the current situation,
it is necessary to increase input in a targeted manner,
and relevant donors should give priority to providing
unconditional and sufficient financial support for this,
so that more projects can be implemented as soon as
possible. The Council must make tangible efforts to
this end.
Fifthly, unilateral sanctions have greatly weakened
the Syrian Government’s ability to raise resources and
carry out reconstruction, which is the most important
obstacle to improving the humanitarian situation
in Syria. China once again urges relevant countries
to immediately and comprehensively lift unilateral
sanctions against Syria so as to provide maximum
convenience for humanitarian activities in the country.
The Security Council should make a clear request in
that regard.
The mandate set forth in resolution 2585 (2021)
expires on 10 July. We still have some time, and we also
have many bases for consensus. We have also heard a
lot about addressing the humanitarian situation in Syria
and the suffering of the Syrian people. We call on all
parties not to give up, but to continue the consultations
and increase mutual trust, demonstrate greater
flexibility and find practical solutions for arrangements
after the mandate expires.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): Before
I begin, I would like to join others in first expressing
the United Arab Emirates sincere condolences to the
people and the Governments of Japan and Angola on
22-41623

08/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East

the passing of former Prime Minister Shinzo Abe and
former President José Eduardo Dos Santos, respectively.
Today we deeply regret that, despite the immense
efforts made over the past few weeks, the Security
Council has failed to adopt a resolution to extend the
cross-border aid mechanism in Syria. We had hoped
that the Council would be able to send a positive
message today to the Syrian people, particularly over
Eid Al-Adha, a sacred occasion that should remind all
of us of the importance of giving and of compromise.
We extend our thanks to Norway and Ireland, the
co-penholders of the Syrian humanitarian file, for their
tireless work towards reaching a compromise.
The 10 elected members of the Security Council
spoke with one voice on its commitment to deliver on
the Council’s mandate, and we hope that this unity can
encourage all Council members to redouble their efforts
in the coming hours and days to reach an agreement
and extend the cross-border mechanism to ensure the
delivery of humanitarian aid to millions of Syrians
in need. We support a 12-month renewal of the crossborder humanitarian aid mechanism because of the
clarity it provides to humanitarian actors and projects.
However, given today’s result, the dire needs on the
ground and taking everyone’s concerns into account,
we are ready to work with all parties on other options,
including a nine-month extension to ensure that the
needs of millions of Syrians will be served through
the winter and that the mechanism does not expire in
the winter months when the needs of ordinary Syrian
people will be at their greatest.
Ultimately, Syrian lives today are at stake. The
Council’s credibility is also at stake. Failure is simply
not an option. It is our collective responsibility to
ensure that the Syrian people are not left without access
to the most basic assistance, and it is our solemn duty to
rise above political spectacle. I would urge all of us as
diplomats to do our jobs, find the compromises needed
and empower the co-penholders to fulfil their objective.
We are close, and we believe it can and should be done.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): Today is a costly day for
the Security Council and even more so for the people
of Syria. Our lack of unity will have real-life dire
humanitarian consequences.
We commend and thank the co-penholders, Ireland
and Norway, for their immense efforts to have the
cross-border humanitarian aid mechanism renewed for
another year. We voted in favour of the text presented

S/PV.9087

by the co-penholders (S/2022/538) in solidarity with the
millions of Syrian people requiring the humanitarian
assistance that is largely accessible through the crossborder mechanism. It is unfortunate that this text,
which had the support of all 10 elected members of the
Council, has failed to be adopted. It was our hope that a
compromise text would have been presented so that the
Security Council would once again act in unity, as it did
with resolution 2585 (2021).
Unfortunately, that was not to be. In our view, the
co-penholders went to great lengths to accommodate
the legitimate concerns of all delegations. We are
persuaded by the Secretary-General’s assessment that
renewing the cross-border mechanism for 12 months
is critical for the continuation of logistical support,
especially during the winter months in Syria.
Going forward, Kenya is ready to work with the
co-penholders to explore further options, including a
nine-month renewal of the cross-border mechanism. It
is our hope that the Security Council can demonstrate
unity by manifesting a spirit of compromise for the
sake of the people of Syria. As we have stated before,
Kenya stands in solidarity with the Syrian people in
their quest for peace, stability and prosperity.
We think there will be serious consequences
from both votes taken today. Among them will be a
clear signal to the world that the Security Council is
struggling to respond to the challenges it is mandated
to solve. In the remaining months on our membership
in the Council, Kenya will undertake every effort to
rally a more united approach to the dire needs to which
we are being asked to respond.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): Let me begin by
thanking the co-penholders of the draft Syrian
humanitarian resolution contained in document
S/2022/538, Ireland and Norway, for the valiant efforts
they have made to accommodate the interests of all
delegations on this important resolution, which provides
a lifeline of support to over 4.1 million Syrians.
The need for the Security Council to act in a
manner that preserves the lives of every Syrian is a
responsibility that must be upheld at every moment. We
therefore welcome the constructive approach that the
co-penholders embraced so as to receive the inputs of all
delegations and enhance the nature of the humanitarian
assistance required to alleviate the suffering of millions
of Syrians who, through no fault of their own, have been
stripped of their right to decent and dignified living

22-416239/12

S/PV.9087

The situation in the Middle East

by the ongoing conflict and regrettably now have to
depend on the United Nations and other humanitarian
organizations for their basic needs.
Ghana’s support for the co-penholders’ text, which
includes the renewal of the resolution for 12 months,
was premised on the fact that it is more practical and
will afford their humanitarian agencies involved enough
time to plan and satisfactorily execute the mandate of
the Security Council. However, we welcome further
constructive engagement by the co-penholders with all
delegations to reach a consensus text that may include
exploring a compromise duration of nine months.
We do so conscious of the need for the predictability
of a mandate for the humanitarian agencies in their
ever-challenging tasks of mobilizing funding for the
increasing humanitarian needs in Syria. For the people
of Syria, their needs are to have access to the required
assistance, and both the cross-line and the cross-border
mechanisms are required to achieve that.
We conclude by reiterating our position that
humanitarian needs have become acute because
the international community has not worked hard
enough to achieve a truly nationwide ceasefire and a
political solution that would enable the Syrian people
to determine their future direction. That must be
our priority.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Brazil.
First, I thank the co-penholders, Ireland and
Norway, for sparing no effort to achieve the extension
of Security Council authorization for cross-border
operations through compromise language for a
consensual text (S/2022/538).
The fact is that in the north of Syria the humanitarian
situation continues to deteriorate, affecting in particular
those living in camps and informal settlements, who
are mostly women and children. It has certainly not
improved since last July, when resolution 2585 (2021)
was adopted; it has in fact gotten worse, and we are all
aware of that.
As the cross-line modality cannot yet match the
scale and scope of the cross-border modality, which
provides food, vaccines and other vital aid to 2.4 million
people each month, the renewal of the authorization
of closely monitored cross-border operations seems
indispensable. An unplanned failure to renew that
10/12

08/07/2022

authorization would mean suddenly cutting off vital,
life-saving aid at a time when needs are at their highest.
The adoption of a consensual draft resolution on
this divisive but crucial issue would show the unity
and the commitment of the Security Council with
respect to the plight of all those in Syria who did not
choose to be part of a conflict but are now trapped in a
situation in which they depend on international aid to
meet their most basic needs. That is our responsibility,
and we need to show the world that the Council is still
capable of responding to those in desperate need of
humanitarian assistance.
Last year the Council added very important
elements to the cross-border resolution: the need
to increase both cross-line deliveries and earlyrecovery and resilience initiatives aimed at restoring
the provision of essential services. The requirement
to keep cross-border humanitarian operations under
close scrutiny and monitoring by the United Nations is
another consensual point.
As was said here on Wednesday (see S/PV.9083),
with those elements we have 99 per cent of an agreement.
We now need to agree on the timeline for the extension
of the authorization for operations.
As stated by the representative of Kenya on behalf
of the 10 elected members of the Security Council, we
support the renewal of the cross-border mechanism
for 12 months. That would allow for better fiscal and
operational planning on the part of United Nations
and other humanitarian agencies. But, as we also said
yesterday, we are prepared to explore any compromise,
including the option of a nine-month extension, that
would achieve the humanitarian objectives that we
are seeking.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, since this is the first time I
take the floor under your presidency, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on presiding over the
Security Council for July. We are confident that you
will lead it to a successful outcome.
The Syrian Arab Republic attaches great
importance to the humanitarian situation. We
22-41623

08/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East

have been making considerable efforts to meet the
humanitarian needs of the Syrian people and alleviate
their suffering. For that reason, at all previous meetings
of the Security Council on the humanitarian situation,
we have pointed out relevant weaknesses and flaws as
well as the impediments imposed by some Western
countries, including by deliberately politicizing
humanitarian work.
Since the beginning of the negotiations on the
extension of resolution 2585 (2021), my delegation has
taken a clear and constructive approach, pointing out
the flaws and risks represented by the cross-border
mechanism, exposing the double standards related to the
promotion of access from within and showing how the
early-recovery projects were not seriously implemented.
We have always stressed that the reason for the
humanitarian crisis in Syria is the adoption of wrong
policies by the United States of America, France and
Britain which continue to practice deception and fraud.
We saw that very clearly in their statements today. They
have falsely pretended that they are keen to provide
humanitarian support to the Syrian people.
My country’s delegation has been frank in
expressing its fundamental concerns. We have also
been open to all genuine initiatives and efforts aimed
at meeting the humanitarian needs of all Syrians
across Syria without politicization, discrimination or
exclusion. In that regard, we have detailed the flaws in
the implementation of the Security Council resolutions
on the humanitarian situation that we have identified
in the past years and months. We have exposed the
manipulation and misleading tactics carried out by some
States, in addition to the catastrophic repercussions of
the unilateral coercive measures imposed by the United
States and the European Union. We have called for an
end to those measures and all hostile and inhumane
practices. We have called also for the provision of
genuine guarantees so as to ensure the effective and
transparent implementation of resolution 2585 (2021).
My delegation stresses the need to implement
early-recovery projects that include vital sectors such
as electricity, which is essential to all humanitarian
activities related to providing basic services, including
health care, education, water and others.
The Syrian people have been suffering from
a lack of electricity for long hours in most Syrian
regions as a result of the unilateral inhumane coercive
measures imposed by Western states. Imagine living

S/PV.9087

without electricity for just one hour to see really how
Syrians suffer.
My delegation also called for the inclusion of a
clear reference in the draft resolution on support for
demining operations and the removal of explosive
devices planted by terrorist groups. Such operations
are extremely important to save the lives of Syrians
and facilitate the safe return of refugees and displaced
persons to their homes and land.
Among the important issues that the delegation
of the Syrian Arab Republic have stressed is the need
for a monitoring, review and follow-up mechanism
for implementation. That will ensure tangible results
in the implementation of early-recovery projects and
non-delivery of cross-border humanitarian assistance
to terrorist groups. That can be assured by enabling
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and the International
Committee of the Red Cross to oversee the distribution
of humanitarian assistance across the country. In
order to ensure the efficient implementation of all
the provisions of resolution 2585 (2021) and that such
implementation be measured, we also called for the
resolution to be extended for no more than six months,
thereby allowing for a review and follow-up process.
My delegation commends the sincere efforts of
the Russian Federation’s delegation to ensure that the
humanitarian needs of Syrians are met in an effective,
balanced, transparent and measurable manner.
Together with our friends, we have exercised maximum
flexibility to ensure that the humanitarian needs of all
the Syrian people are met.
My delegation believes that the United States of
America, Britain and France bear full responsibility
for thwarting the implementation of key provisions
of resolution 2585 (2021) and for hiding behind the
wording of draft resolution S/2022/538, put forward by
the humanitarian co-penholders. They pushed for a vote
on it, even though it does not achieve a real response
to the humanitarian needs and does not include any
substantive amendments or improvements that meet
the concerns that we have repeatedly expressed and
made it impossible to accept such discriminatory and
unbalanced version.
For years, those three countries have chosen to
follow an approach that violates Syria’s sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity and to besiege and
suffocate its people economically, plundering their
resources and depriving them of the most basic

22-4162311/12

S/PV.9087

The situation in the Middle East

necessities of life. Those countries must realize that
they cannot turn back the clock and that the wrong
approach that they adopted must stop, that those hostile
policies must be changed and that starving the Syrian
people is not in anyone’s interest.
My delegation fully agrees with the compelling
reasons that prompted the delegation of the Russian
Federation to veto the draft resolution introduced by
the humanitarian co-penholders. We commend its
commitment to achieving a response to the humanitarian
needs of Syrians and alleviating their suffering.
My delegation would like to thank the Russian
Federation’s delegation for taking the initiative and
putting forward draft resolution S/2022/541, which was
just voted on and which supports the implementation
of key provisions of resolution 2585 (2021) to improve
the humanitarian situation in Syria by promoting earlyrecovery projects and increasing their number and
quality by ensuring that assistance is delivered to all
those in need from within the country. That will have a
positive impact on the humanitarian situation in Syria.
My delegation regrets that the balanced draft
resolution put forward by the Russian Federation’s
delegation was not adopted. We deplore the fact that
the three Western countries — the United States of

12/12

08/07/2022

America, Britain and France — have been so insistent
on misleading facts and disregarding the genuine and
objective concerns expressed by my delegation and that
of the Russian Federation. Those countries continue to
politicize humanitarian work, obstruct every genuine
effort to alleviate the suffering of the people and use
that as a tool for political blackmail and pressure
against my country.
The draft resolution put forward by the delegation
of the Russian Federation is a sincere attempt to allow
the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities. It
exposes the real parties that are fully responsible for
the failure to implement the provisions of resolution
2585 (2021).
My delegation reaffirms that it stands ready to
engage in any positive and constructive effort to alleviate
the humanitarian suffering of the Syrian people while
fully respecting the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Syria.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting
so that the Council can continue its deliberations in
closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 2.05 p.m.

22-41623
