A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/85
7 February 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 110 (a)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/51/619/Add.1)]
51/85.

International Convention on the Protection
of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming once more the permanent validity of the principles and norms
set forth in the basic instruments regarding the international protection of
human rights, in particular the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 the
International Covenants on Human Rights,2 the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,3 the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women4 and the Convention
on the Rights of the Child,5
Bearing in mind the principles and norms established within the
framework of the International Labour Organization and the importance of the
work done in connection with migrant workers and members of their families in
other specialized agencies and in various organs of the United Nations,
Reiterating that, despite the existence of an already established body
of principles and norms, there is a need to make further efforts to improve

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

2

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

4

Resolution 34/180, annex.

5

Resolution 44/25, annex.

97-76633

/...

A/RES/51/85
Page 2

the situation and to guarantee respect for the human rights and dignity of all
migrant workers and members of their families,
Aware of the situation of migrant workers and members of their families
and the marked increase in migratory movements that has occurred, especially
in certain parts of the world,
Considering that, in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,
adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,6 all States
are urged to guarantee the protection of the human rights of all migrant
workers and members of their families,
Underlining the importance of the creation and promotion of conditions
to foster greater harmony and tolerance between migrant workers and the rest
of the society of the State in which they reside, with the aim of eliminating
the growing manifestations of racism and xenophobia taking place in segments
of many societies and perpetrated by individuals or groups against migrant
workers,
Recalling its resolution 45/158 of 18 December 1990, by which it adopted
and opened for signature, ratification and accession the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members
of Their Families,
Bearing in mind that, in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,
States are invited to consider the possibility of signing and ratifying the
Convention at the earliest possible time,
Recalling that, in its resolution 50/169 of 22 December 1995, it
requested the Secretary-General to submit to it at its fifty-first session a
report on the status of the Convention,
1.
Expresses its deep concern at the growing manifestations of
racism, xenophobia and other forms of discrimination and inhuman or degrading
treatment directed against migrant workers in different parts of the world;
2.
Welcomes the signature or ratification of, or accession to, the
International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers and Members of Their Families by some Member States;
3.
Calls upon all Member States to consider signing and ratifying or
acceding to the Convention as a matter of priority, and expresses the hope
that it will enter into force at an early date;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to provide all facilities and
assistance necessary for the promotion of the Convention through the World
Public Information Campaign on Human Rights and the programme of advisory
services in the field of human rights;
5.
Invites the organizations and agencies of the United Nations
system and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to intensify
their efforts with a view to disseminating information on and promoting
understanding of the Convention;

6

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
/...

A/RES/51/85
Page 3

6.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,7 and requests
him to submit to it at its fifty-second session an updated report on the
status of the Convention;
7.
Decides to consider the report of the Secretary-General at its
fifty-second session under the sub-item entitled "Implementation of human
rights instruments".
82nd plenary meeting
12 December 1996

7

A/51/415.
