26

General Assembly -

1534 (XV). Preparation and training of indigenous civil and technical cadres in Non-SelfGoverning Territories

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report ori·the progress achieved
in the Non-Self-Governing Territories since the establishment of the United ~ations,1
Noting that, while information is not available in the
report as to the strength, the composition and the state
of training of indigenous civil and technical personnel
employed in all the various branches of administration
in Non-Self-Governing Territories, the report gives
c\·idence of the serious shortages of trained personnel
of all kinds in these Territories,
Considering that the existence of adequate personnel
of this kind is indispensable to the effective implementation of plans and programmes of development in the
educational, social and economic fields,
Bearing in mind that suitably trained indigenous civil
and technical cadres are essential to the efficient functioning of the administrations of the Territories,
Believing that the absence of such cadres has, in the
past, resulted in serious administrative dislocation in
certain Territories upon their attainment of independence, and that their very expeditious development in
the remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories will
assist in the transfer of full control of powers, in conditions of stability, from the Administering Members
to the administrations of Territories emerging from the
status of non-self-government,
I. Urges the Administering Members to take immediate measures aimed at the rapid development of
indigenous civil and technical cadres and at the replacement of expatriate personnel by indigenous officers;
2. Invites the Administering Members to make full
use of the United Nations technical assistance programmes for training in public administration and related
fields;
3. Requests the Administering Members to transmit,
before the next session of the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories, special reports
setting out all available information on the training
facilities for, and the current strength, composition, state
of preparation etc. of. civil and technical services in
the Territories for which they are respectively responsible, so as to enable the Committee, at that session,
to undertake an examination of such information and
to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixteenth
session;
4. hwther req11ests the Administering Members to
include such information on their Territories regularly
in their annual reports to the Secretary-General under
Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations.
948th plenary meeting,
15 December 1960.
1535 (XV). Progress achieved in
Governing Territories

Non-Self-

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 932 (X) of 8 November
1955 and 1053 (XI) of 20 February 1957, by which it
invited the Secretary-General, in collaboration with tl_1e
1 Progress of the N on-Self-<Joveming Territories under the
Charter (United Nations publication, Sales No.: 60.VI.B.1).
vols. 1-5.

Fifteenth Session

specialized agencies concerned, to prepare a report on
the progress that has been achieved in the N ~n-~elfGoverning Territories in accordance with the obJcct~ves
set forth in Chapter XI of the Charter of the Umted
Nations since the establishment of the Organization,
Having regard to the objectives set forth in Chapter
XI of the Charter, and particularly the objectives of
Article 73 a and b,
1. Takes note of the report on the progress achieved
in the. Non-Self-Governing Territories 2 prepared by the
Secretary-General in collaboration with the I_nternational Labour Organisation, the Food and Agnculture
Organization of the United Nations, the Uni~ed _Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Orgamzatton and
the World Health Organization in accordance with
General Assembly resolutions 932 (X) and 1053 (XI);
2. Notes with appreciation the observations and conclusions3 on the progress report prepared by. the Co~mittee on Information from Non-Self-Govermng Terntories in accordance with General Assembly resolution
1461 (XIV) of 12 December 1959;
3. Notes that progress has been achieved in some
of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, and notes that,
in spite of the increased tempo of change, a substantial
number of Territories still remain non-self-governing
and that in the great majority of these the achievements
of the period fall short of the needs of the inhabitants
of these Territories;
4. Expresses its satisfaction that since 1946 a number
of former Non-Self-Governing Territories have become
Members of the United Nations after acceding to independence, and that the transmission of information on
some others has ceased, with the approval of the General
Assembly, after the achievement of the objectives of
the Charter ;
5. Considers that, while rapid economic, social and
educational aa.vancement must be directed towards the
independence of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, the
inadequate level of economic, social and educational
development in the Territories should never serve as a
pretext for deferring their accession to independence;
6. Urges the Administering Members to streng:then
their efforts in the economic, social and educational
fields, with the full participation of the indigenous inhabitants of the Territories in all fields of activity, by
transferring to those inhabitants effective powers so
that during the period of transition from dependence
to independence the Non-Self-Governing Territories will
be able to establish sound foundations for their future;
7. Further notes w;th regret that, in spite of some
reference in the progress report to constitutional and
political developments in some of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, the absence of information of a political
and constitutional character on a majority of these
Territories renders it impossible to assess the extent
of their progress towards the goals of the Charter;
8. Considers that a full knowledge of the political
and constitutional developments in Non-Self-Governing
Territories is essential not only to a proper evaluation
of the progress of the Territories towards independence
but also to that of their economic, social and cultural
advancement;
9. Urges ona again the Administering Members
concerned to extend their full co-operation to the General
2 Ibid.
3 Official

Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Sessi011, Supplement No. 15 (A/4371), part two.

27

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Assembly in the performance of its functions by transmitting information of a political and constitutional
character on developments in the Territories under their
respective administration ;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
progress report and the observations and conclusions
prepared by the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Governing Territories to the Member States responsible for the administration of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories, to the Economic and Social Council to the
regional economic commissions and to the spe~ialized
agencies concerned, for necessary action.

948th plenary meeting,
15 December 1960.

1536 (XV). Racial diBcrimination in Nm1-SelfGoverning Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling that it is among the purposes and principles
of the United Nations to ensure equal rights, and to
promote respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex,
language or religion,
Recalling further that in its resolutions 644 (VII)
of 10 December 1952 and 1328 (XIII) of I 2 December
1958 it recommended the adoption of certain measures
for the abolition of all practices and policies of discrimination on racial grounds in the Non-Self-Governing
Territories,
Noting with deep concern, from the information available in the report on the progress achieved in the NonSelf-Governing Territories, that racial discrimination
persists in several Territories and that in some cases
discriminatory practices continue to be reinforced by
law and regulation,4
1. Endorses the view of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories that not only
~s racial disc:im~nation a violation of human rights, but
1t also constitutes a deterrent to progress in all fields
of development in the Non-Self-Governing Territories ;5
2. Recommends that the Administering Members immediately rescind or revoke all laws and regulations
which tend to encourage or sanction, directly or inclirectly, discriminatory policies and practices based on
racial considerations, and that they do their utmost to
discourage such practices by all other means possible ;
3 .. Urges. the Administering Members to give full
and 1mmed1ate effect to the recommendation of the
Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories that measures to solve the problem of race
relations should include the extension to all inhabitants
of th~ full exercise of basic po(itical rights, in particular
the nght to vote, and the establishment of equality among
the members of all races inhabiting the Non-SelfGoverning Territories;
4. Requests the Administering Members to furnish
all relevant information relating to the present resolution to the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Governing Territories so as to enable the latter to
sub1;1it a report to the General Assembly at its sixteenth
session.

948th plenary meeting,
15 December 1960.
4 Ibid., part two, para.

5 Ibid.,

para. 188.

177.

1537 (XV).

Report on economic conditions
in Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling that by resolution 564 (VI) of 18 January
195.? it approved the special report drawn up in 1951 °
as a brief hnt considered indication of economic con<litions in Non-Self-Governing Territories and the problems of economic development,
Rcralling further that by resolution 846 (IX) of
22 November l 954 it approved another special report
on ernnomic conditions 7 as a supplement to the 1951
report,
Rrralling also that by resolution 1152 (XII) of
26 November 1957 it approved a further special report
on economic conditions, 8
IT m 1ing received and considered a further report 011
economic conditions in Non-Self-Governing Territorics 9
prepared hy the Committee on Information from Non:-;c1f-Govcrnillg- Territories at its eleventh session in
1960,
'
1. Tal,es note of the report on economic conditions
in Non-Self-Governing Territories prepared in 1960 by
the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Ter~itorics an'.1 con~iders that this report should be
studied m connex1on with the other reports mentioned
above;
2. hniites the Secretary-General to communicate this
rrport to Member States responsible for the aclministrat ion of Non-Self-Governing Territories, to the Economic_ a!1d Social Council, to the regional economic
co111~111~s1ons, to . the Trusteeship Council and to the
,pec1ahzecl agencies concerned, for their consideration ;
. 3. Expresses its confidence that the Members respons:blc.
th~ administration of Non-Self-Governing
1 erntones will bring the report to the attention of the
authorities responsible for economic development in
those Territories.

fo:

948th plenary meeting,
15 December 1960.

1538 (XV). Dissemination of information on
the United Nations in the Non-Self-Governing
Territories

The General Assrmbly,
Recalling it~ resolution 1465 (XIV) of 12 December
1959 on the dissemination of information on the United
Nations in the Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Reiterating the principle that the interests of the mhahitants of these Territories are paramount,
Considering that the story of the United Nations its
purposes and principles, as well as the principles of' the
U_niversal Decl_aration of Human Rights, would greatly
stnnulate the mterest of the adult populations of the
Non-Self-Governing Territories in the political activities
and peaceful objectives of the Organization,
Keeping in mind the ever-growing needs for the dissemination of information on the United Nations
partirnlarly as the increased tempo of change ha~
6 Ibid., Sixth Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/1836), part
three.
7 Ibid., Ninth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/2729), part
two.
8 lbid., Twelfth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/3647 and
Corr.I), part two.
~ Ibid., Fifteenth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/4371), part
three.
