United Nations

S/PV.4993 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-ninth year

4993

rd meeting
Tuesday, 22 June 2004, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Albert . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Philippines)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Katti
Mr. Cordeiro
Mr. Zinsou
Mr. Tarrisse da Fontoura
Mr. Acuña
Mr. Cheng Jingye
Ms. Cluzel
Mr. Thuemmel
Mr. Khalid
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Konuzin
Mr. De Palacio España
Ms. Moir
Mr. Olson

Agenda
Role of civil society in post-conflict peace-building
Letter dated 1 June 2004 from the Permanent Representative of the Philippines
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2004/442)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

04-39905 (E)

*0439905*

S/PV.4993 (Resumption 1)

The meeting was resumed at 3.25 p.m.
Expression of condolence
The President: Before I return to the speakers’
list, may I read to you a statement.
I have just learned the sad news that a citizen of
the Republic of Korea, Kim Sun-il, held hostage by a
terrorist organization in Iraq, was beheaded earlier
today. On behalf of the members of the Security
Council, I wish to condemn in the strongest terms this
abominable act of terrorism against an innocent
civilian. I also express my deep condolences to the
bereaved family of the victim, as well as to the
Government and people of the Republic of Korea. In
the face of such evil, the world must stand united
against the scourge of international terrorism that
continues to plague our global community.
Role of civil society in post-conflict peace-building
The President: I will not individually invite
speakers to take seats at the Council table and invite
them to resume their seats on the side of the Council
Chamber. When a speaker is taking the floor, the
conference officer will seat the next speaker on the list
at the table. I thank you for your understanding and
cooperation.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Ireland.
Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Bulgaria, Croatia, Romania and Turkey, the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Serbia and Montenegro and the European
Free Trade Association countries Iceland and Norway,
members of the European Economic Area, align
themselves with this statement.
Madam President, may I join you in extending to
the people and the Government of the Republic of
Korea our deepest condolences on the violent death of
a Korean citizen, Mr. Kim Sun-il.
Madam President, the European Union is
honoured by your presence in presiding over the
Council’s deliberations today. We also welcome the
participation of the Secretary-General, the President of
the Economic and Social Council and representatives

2

from CARE International and the International Centre
for Transitional Justice in this open debate.
The EU is grateful for the opportunity to debate
this important topic today. The role of civil society in
conflict prevention was discussed at an open meeting
of the General Assembly last September. I am
confident that our debate today will complement those
fruitful discussions.
The EU firmly believes that strategic partnerships
forged between government and civil society are
essential to successful post-conflict reconstruction.
While Governments may have a comparative advantage
over civil society organizations in certain areas, those
organizations can play a pivotal role, in particular
where functioning governmental institutions are
ineffective or absent. Respective areas of expertise
should be mapped out, and mutual responsibilities and
accountabilities should be more clearly understood by
the two actors.
Post-conflict societies are often polarized
societies. It is crucial that bridges of communication
are rebuilt between social groups. Post-conflict peacebuilding must seek to foster the re-emergence of civil
society. The process of post-conflict peace-building
requires both knowledge and information. Local and
national civil society organizations are often invaluable
sources in that regard. Even if it is government that
must necessarily take the lead, a policy of inclusion
and partnership is a sine qua non in effective postconflict peace-building. Because it is ordinary citizens
themselves who are the main targets of peace-building
activities, input provided on their behalf by civil
society actors is key to the success of that peacebuilding. Having said that, we also stress the
importance of having a good knowledge of one’s
collaborating partners. In some instances, civil society
actors may be part of the same polarization equation
that peace-building efforts are trying to break down.
Civil society organizations are often uniquely
well-placed to furnish vital grass-roots early-warning
facilities such as where a particular peace-building
measure being pursued may inadvertently cause a
disturbance or impact in some other unintended,
negative way. The capacity of civil society
organizations as funding sources in peace-building
initiatives must also be highlighted in the context of the
Council’s discussions today.

S/PV.4993 (Resumption 1)

The European Union has consistently recognized
the vital role played by civil society in post-conflict
peace-building operations. The European Initiative for
Democracy and Human Rights has funded civil society
initiatives that contribute to preventing the outbreak or
continuation of conflict. I will mention a few examples.
In Angola, the European Centre for Common
Ground has helped to promote the liberalization of the
media, over a period of 12 months, through the training
of journalists in the principles of human rights and
common-ground reporting and programming, the
creation of appropriate radio and television
programmes and by engaging civil society actors in
radio discussion sessions.
In Mozambique, we have a project which intends
to strengthen the capacity of grass-roots civil society in
the fields of human rights and democratic action in
Zambesia Province, supporting the forum of the
Zambesian non-governmental organizations through
specific capacity-building activities, the reinforcement
of information collection skills and the training of civic
educators.
One project in Sierra Leone takes a broad
approach to the subject of capacity-building for civil
society organizations. The focus is to put nongovernmental organizations on a new footing with
government so as to help promote and protect human
rights in a post-conflict environment. A special focus is
given to women and children. The project has three
objectives: first, to improve the professionalism of
human
rights
non-governmental
organizations;
secondly, to enhance their watchdog role by developing
their knowledge base; and thirdly, to strengthen their
advocacy capacity in order to improve inputs into
national human rights policies.
In Georgia, the European Union has a confidencebuilding project in place to promote an environment
conducive to a political resolution of the conflict there.
The purpose of the project is to contribute to ongoing
capacity-building among both wider and more focused
networks
of
committed
peace-building
nongovernmental organizations and other civil society
organizations and structures. Target groups include
young and potential leaders from across Georgia and
the Caucasus region, women in positions of leadership,
ex-combatants and Georgian regional civil society
organizations.

I cannot speak of engagement with civil society
in post-conflict peace-building without making specific
reference to the extensive cooperation between the
European Union and certain non-governmental
organizations in promoting fuller participation in, and
the effective functioning of, the International Criminal
Court (ICC). Impunity for genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes poses a serious obstacle in
the way of the lasting restoration of peace. In tackling
impunity for crimes of this nature, where Governments
are unwilling or unable to do so, the ICC can play a
key supportive and supplementary role in future peacebuilding operations.
The European Union also attaches considerable
importance to the full and equal participation of
women in post-conflict peace-building operations and,
in that regard, wishes to recall the Agreed Conclusions
adopted during the session of the Commission on the
Status of Women held earlier this year. As the
Secretary-General recently remarked,
“... women, who know the price of conflict so
well, are also often better equipped than men to
prevent or resolve it. For generations, women
have served as peace educators, both in their
families and in their societies. They have proved
instrumental in building bridges rather than
walls.” (S/PV.4208, p. 3)
In recent years, Governments have discovered the
real benefits that accrue from cooperating with civil
society actors in post-conflict societies. The Security
Council is also aware of the important role that nonState actors can play in the process. The European
Union encourages the Security Council to reflect
further on how it can encourage greater interaction and
synergies between these important actors. Future
resolutions, for example, might more specifically urge,
call upon or encourage newly emerging Governments
to cooperate closely with civil society organizations.
The European Union also encourages civil society to
continue to provide Security Council members with
prompt relevant information and to seek to identify
innovative ways in which the Council could develop or
encourage closer cooperation between government and
civil society.
Suspicions of old between Governments and civil
society organizations have, in very large measure,
receded in many parts of the world, giving way to
genuine and meaningful interaction. The European

3

S/PV.4993 (Resumption 1)

Union believes that the Security Council is in a strong
position to adopt resolutions which preserve and indeed
enhance this improved climate. Our debate today
should help to crystallise new ideas on how the Council
can act as a catalyst in securing even greater
integration between these two constituencies.
The President: I cannot but note the reference by
the representative of Ireland to the Agreed Conclusions
adopted during the session of the Commission on the
Status of Women held this year.
I now call on the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
role of civil society is clearly gaining importance for
United Nations peace-building and peacekeeping, and
there is greater awareness of the needs of peacebuilding and peacekeeping. In that connection, we
cannot fail to recognize the important role played by
civil society organizations in the economic, social and
humanitarian fields as a channel of communication and
daily
interaction
between
Governments,
the
international community and the people, particularly in
post-conflict situations.
We believe that, when considering the role of
civil society organizations in peace-building, we must
take into account several important elements relative to
their broad participation in responses to conflict and
post-conflict situations.
In the United Nations system, particularly in the
Security Council, we can observe a significant trend of
relying on civil society organizations as a ground-level
source of information in the economic, political,
security and humanitarian fields. That places a moral
and a legal responsibility on those organizations to be
fully objective and impartial. It is our view that civil
society organizations face a real test of credibility and
objectivity if they are to be considered full and active
partners in the efforts of the United Nations and the
international community to help people overcome the
negative impact of conflict.
Secondly, the capacity of civil society
organizations effectively to help alleviate the suffering
of vulnerable or affected groups in a conflict situation
is linked to their ability to gain access to those groups
to provide humanitarian assistance or other social
services. Their commitment to cooperate and work in
coordination with the local authorities or the traditional
leaders of such societies is important in order for them

4

to enjoy the necessary legitimacy to achieve their
goals. Such coordination and cooperation enhances the
ability of international civil society organizations to
absorb the relevant cultural values of the societies in
which they are working, which makes it easier for their
efforts to be accepted in the settlement of such
disputes.
Thirdly, it is imperative, given the need for
cooperation and coordination with local governments,
to help to address the root causes of conflicts, to spread
a culture of tolerance and to help implement national
policies for national reconciliation and the
reintegration and rehabilitation of refugees and
displaced persons, so that the efforts of such
organizations can complement and support national and
international peace-building efforts. From that
perspective, multilateral relations between the United
Nations, national Governments, regional and
subregional organizations, international financial
institutions and civil society organizations become
increasingly important in order to achieve the synergy
necessary to enhance peace-building, peacekeeping,
reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts.
Fourthly, we should, in that context, reiterate the
fact that the achievement of a durable peace requires a
comprehensive strategy that takes account of the
political, security, economic, social and human
dimensions in dealing with post-conflict situations. I
am therefore convinced of the importance of the role of
civil society in peace-building efforts. It might be
appropriate to determine the nature and the limits of
such a role in the framework of a comprehensive
strategy at the start of efforts to deal with a conflict on
the part of the United Nations, the international
financial institutions and regional and subregional
organizations, in order to achieve clarity of purpose on
all sides and realize the necessary synergies.
In that context, we propose that meetings be held
between the Security Council and the principal United
Nations bodies, including under the Security Council’s
Arria formula, so that such bodies could become
familiar with the priorities and prerequisites of the
peace process and the coordination mechanisms in the
field, be they peacekeeping missions or the United
Nations Resident Coordinators in the States concerned.
It would also be appropriate for civil society
organizations active in the field to participate in
discussions held by any committees, monitoring

S/PV.4993 (Resumption 1)

mechanisms or working groups set up by the parties to
the conflict, or those related to coordination at the field
level.
We have carefully studied the report of the Panel
of Eminent Persons, headed by former President
Cardoso. We will give it due consideration and study it
with a view to helping to strengthen relations between
civil society and the United Nations. In that respect,
what is required in future is to arrive at agreed norms,
rules and mechanisms that would set limits and
determine the responsibilities of all partners, in a
manner that is commensurate with their means and
capabilities, which would rationalize the utilization of
the financial, human and material resources available
to the international community in the process of facing
the challenges inherent in working to achieve a durable
international peace.
In conclusion, I should like to express our deep
gratitude to you, Madam President, for your successful
conduct of this debate. We wish also to thank the
delegation of the Philippines for its successful
presidency of the Council during the current month.
The President: I thank the representative of
Egypt for the kind words he addressed to me.
I give the floor to the representative of Sierra
Leone.
Mr. Pemagbi (Sierra Leone): My delegation
would like to join others in congratulating you,
Madam, on your country’s assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of June.
Our participation in this open debate should be
seen from the perspective of a country that has
experienced a prolonged armed conflict and is in the
process of building and consolidating peace. We in
Sierra Leone have learned that the search for peace is
not, and should never be, the exclusive prerogative of
Governments. Civil society and other nongovernmental organizations should be fully involved in
peacemaking efforts.
Who could forget the role that the civil society
movement — comprising, among others, trade unions,
women’s movements and the Inter-Religious
Council — played in facilitating informal but crucial
contacts between the parties to the conflict in Sierra
Leone? While the Government had always maintained
an open-door policy as far as dialogue with the rebels

was concerned, those organizations were helpful in the
implementation of that policy.
The consequences of armed conflict do not
discriminate between Governments and civil society.
That is one reason why we share the view that
representatives of civil society should be given an
opportunity to participate, as observers, in peace talks.
We in Sierra Leone went beyond that. We made a
provision in the 1999 Lomé Peace Agreement with the
rebels for the establishment of a Commission for the
Consolidation of Peace in which 40 per cent of the
seats were assigned to members of civil society. Three
representatives from civil society were also represented
in the Commission for the Management of Strategic
Resources to promote national reconstruction and
development.
The act of signing a peace agreement is not
enough. Disputes and conflicting views over the
interpretation and implementation of the provisions of
such an agreement could create obstacles in the process
of consolidating peace. It may be necessary, therefore,
as we found out in Sierra Leone, to create appropriate
non-governmental mechanisms for dealing with such
disputes. We made provisions in the Lomé Peace
Agreement for a Council of Elders and Religious
Leaders to mediate in any conflicting differences of
interpretation of any article in the Agreement or its
protocols.
The peace-building process is not merely a
response and a reaction to the consequences of armed
conflict; it is also a proactive contribution to conflict
prevention. In building peace, we are also preventing
the recurrence of war. That is why the peace-building
process should be taken more seriously. It is a process
that demands collective effort on the part of the States
concerned and the international community as a whole.
As the Council itself has determined, most armed
conflicts in the world today — including those
described as internal conflicts or civil wars — have
repercussions on the maintenance of international
peace and security. It is therefore imperative that we
mobilize all resources and institutions, including those
of civil society, within and across States in the
concurrent processes of building peace and preventing
further conflict.
The role of civil society in the reintegration of
ex-combatants cannot be overemphasized, because
their reintegration involves, first and foremost, their

5

S/PV.4993 (Resumption 1)

acceptance by members of their respective
communities. Sierra Leone is aware of the fact that, as
in other post-conflict situations, completing the
disarmament and demobilization of ex-combatants is a
prerequisite for peace-building. We are also aware of
the need to get rid of weapons that may have slipped
through the formal process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) — weapons
that could be used either to rekindle armed conflict or
as instruments of banditry or of some other social
menace. That is where community arms collection
programmes come in. The success of such activities at
the community level depends on the active
participation of civil society. The Sierra Leone police,
in collaboration with civil society, has successfully
conducted a community arms collection campaign
outside the official DDR programme.
It may be unnecessary to emphasize that civil
society is absolutely indispensable in the process of
creating a human rights-sensitive culture, especially
after a conflict characterized by human rights
violations. Citizen education is equally essential in
transforming a post-conflict society into a peaceful and
stable democracy where all citizens are aware of their
rights and responsibilities and where they stand up for
those rights.
While recognizing the role that civil society has
played and continues to play in building peace in
countries emerging from conflict, we must also
emphasize the need to ensure that civil society is
equipped to meet the challenges of peace-building. The
proliferation of armed conflicts, especially in Africa,
and the complexity of the problems created by those
conflicts — particularly in Africa’s least developed
countries, such as Sierra Leone — require new
strategies for meeting those challenges. Among other
things, we need to strengthen or, where they do not
exist, create networks of civil society groups at the
national, regional and international levels. As The
Hague Agenda for Peace and Justice for the Twentyfirst Century pointed out, the effectiveness of civil
society is often hampered by a lack of coordination
between groups operating in similar fields.
My delegation believes that The Hague Appeal
for Peace, as it relates to the role of civil society in
peace-building, is still relevant. We would like to take
this opportunity to recall that Appeal: in order to
increase its effectiveness in this area, civil society
should create networks that promote the building of

6

coalitions and constituencies between civil society
organizations.
We believe that the Security Council, as part of
its responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, should reaffirm the need to create
and strengthen civil society networks. The Council
should promote and support initiatives already in place,
such as the Mano River Union Women’s Peace
Network, organized by women’s organizations in the
volatile region of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
This meeting of the Council nearly coincided
with the launching of the report of the SecretaryGeneral’s Panel of Eminent Persons on United NationsCivil Society Relations. The Council may wish to take
note of relevant recommendations of the Panel. We are
referring to those recommendations that could be
applied to the Council’s relations with civil society —
relations that could enhance the work of the Council in
the area of post-conflict peace-building.
The President: I thank the representative of
Sierra Leone for his constructive and specific
contributions to this debate.
Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
congratulate you, Madam, on your presidency of the
Security Council and on your delegation’s initiative of
considering the role of civil society in post-conflict
peace-building.
The nature of conflicts has changed significantly
in the past decade. They are no longer conflicts
between nation-States, but rather armed conflicts
within States. These conflicts are true struggles of
national self-depredation in which there is often no
difference between civil war and crime. Since the
Berlin Wall fell, more than 33 civil conflicts have
broken out or resumed, leaving behind nearly 5 million
deaths and 17 million refugees. Today, those domestic
armed conflicts form a large part of the Council’s
agenda and result in the deployment of complex
peacekeeping operations.
For Peru, the role of civil society — organized
non-governmental social actors, such as nongovernmental organizations, labour unions, business
associations and academic, student and religious
groups — is essential to prevent armed domestic
conflicts and to contribute to peacemaking and national
reconstruction.

S/PV.4993 (Resumption 1)

As we are considering only post-conflict
situations at this meeting, I wish to refer to two central
aspects in which civil society contributes to peacebuilding. First, I shall discuss its contribution to the
reconciliation process; secondly, I shall mention its
contribution to the nation-building process.
National reconciliation in post-conflict situations
is a very complex national process that depends on the
social and political conditions in each nation and on the
conflict’s nature and intensity. However, three essential
prerequisites have been identified for national
reconciliation: truth, reparation and justice.
In the search for truth and reparation in particular,
civil society has an important role. Owing to the need
for truth as an element of reconciliation, so-called truth
commissions have been established in many postconflict situations. The merit of such commissions is,
or should be, to bring to light what has been hidden
during a period of violence and what has not been
widely perceived or acknowledged in a nation’s daily
political discourse following a conflict. That
clarification is indispensable to provide collective
moral support to the national social reconstruction
process. A second precondition for the reconciliation
process to be consistent is the compensation of
innocent victims and the rehabilitation of areas affected
by conflict. Included in that also are former
combatants, who should benefit from programmes of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration into
policy and society. Experience until now has indicated
that compensation, which is one of the most important
points, is an area where resources are most needed, but
for which they are the scarcest. There is a scarcity of
resources at the national level as well as at the
international level.
Local and global non-governmental organizations
have an active role to play in assisting the mobilization
of these resources, to use them for victims’
compensation, the reconstruction of affected areas and
the reintegration of former combatants, thereby
transcending the important efforts of humanitarian
assistance alone that characterize their action during
conflict. Non-governmental organizations and civil
society can help direct the best use of international
assistance and resources of the United Nations
Development Programme, as they are part of the
national society. They can also advocate for flexibility
in the policies of the International Monetary Fund and

the World Bank, particularly where highly indebted
poor countries are concerned.
With regard to justice, the third precondition for
reconciliation, it is not necessary to recall the
importance for civil society particularly not to leave
unpunished violations of human rights, ethnic
cleansing and genocide.
Civil society is also a factor in building a bridge
between the reconciliation process, to which I referred
earlier, and the future reconstruction of a collapsed
State, which has been referred to as nation-building
activity. In other words, civil society is relevant to
creating conditions of governance and the building of
democracy, achieving situations that promote dialogue
and consensus in these post-violent societies. As a
whole, national non-governmental organizations, by
virtue of being part of the same society that has been
traumatized by violence, are the most appropriate ones
to cooperate with complex United Nations
peacekeeping operations in restoring the social and
political fabric of a collapsed State.
National reconstruction and post-conflict peacebuilding is therefore a concerted and complex effort
that requires the efforts of the United Nations, the
Security Council, regional organizations and the
flexibility of international financial institutions, but,
above all, the commitment of civil society and local
non-governmental organizations. We believe efforts
must be made to ensure that the Security Council is not
only familiar with peacekeeping operations through
reports made by United Nations officials themselves or
by Member States, but also with how civil society and
national non-governmental organizations think and
respond to the tasks of complex peacekeeping
operations being carried out by the United Nations in
their countries.
The Security Council cannot assume its
peacekeeping responsibility of ending conflict and
establishing the foundation for national reconstruction
of collapsed States without having contacts with civil
society. Those contacts should be with prestigious,
global non-governmental organizations such as Doctors
Without Borders, CARE International, Amnesty
International or the International Centre for
Transitional Justice. However, above all, contacts must
be established with national civil society, with the nongovernmental organizations that are part of the society
that have experienced conflict. To that end, the

7

S/PV.4993 (Resumption 1)

respective special representatives of the SecretaryGeneral or the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme could be made responsible
for systematically reporting and communicating the
opinion of local civil society, of local nongovernmental organizations, on peace processes under
way. For example, in the case of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where important members of
Congolese civil society appear not to have a favourable
opinion of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, it would be
interesting to know the opinion of those elements of
Congolese society.
The relationship between the Council and civil
society should be basically practical, in keeping with
the Arria formula. To that end, extending that practice
to include civil society and local non-governmental
organizations of societies in conflict should serve to
bring the actions of peacekeeping missions more in line
with national realities. We therefore welcome the
current visit by a Security Council delegation to West
Africa, where members of the delegation will certainly
have the opportunity to meet with the local civil
society of the countries they are visiting.
In conclusion, allow me to recommend that the
Security Council be aware, through reports of special
representatives of the Secretary-General or in the
manner the Council considers most appropriate, of the
viewpoint regarding and the reaction of local civil
society to current peacekeeping operations, and
particularly that such a practice be made systematic in
order to assess the renewal of peacekeeping operation
missions, particularly complex ones. Without knowing
what civil society thinks, we cannot be realistic about
the mandates of such missions and, lacking this
knowledge, we cannot carry out national reconstruction
and consolidate peace.
The President: I thank the representative of Peru
for his kind acknowledgement of our initiative to
discuss the role of civil society in post-conflict peacebuilding during our presidency of the Council.
I now call on the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Kim Sam-hoon (Republic of Korea): Before
beginning my statement on the topic at hand, I am
extremely grateful to you, Madam President, for your
very thoughtful statement on behalf of the members of
the Security Council on the sad news of the execution

8

of a Korean citizen by a terrorist organization earlier
today in Iraq.
I also cannot but express the deepest sorrow and
outrage of my people and my Government upon the
killing of an innocent civilian, Mr. Kim Sun-il. The
Government of the Republic of Korea condemns the
perpetrators of that act and all heinous acts of
terrorism, and expresses its strong hope that the
international community will work together to find and
bring these criminals to justice. The international
community must not remain silent about atrocities
being committed by terrorist criminals on a nearly
daily basis. All Member States must redouble their
efforts to demonstrate unmistakably that acts of
terrorism will not be tolerated, in order to ensure the
safety and the security of innocent civilians from the
scourge of terrorism around the world. For its part, the
Republic of Korea believes strongly in the efforts of
the international community to rebuild a free and
democratic Iraq and remains committed to that noble
goal.
Turning to today’s topic, I wish to extend my
appreciation to you, Madam, for convening this open
debate on the role of civil society in post-conflict
peace-building. To my knowledge, this is the first
opportunity the Council has had to formally reflect on
the key role that civil society plays in the
transformation from war to lasting peace. We hope that
today will be the beginning of an ongoing fruitful
discussion.
As noted in the annex to your letter to the
Secretary-General, in the 1990s non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) began playing a key role in
peace-building efforts in post-conflict countries. At the
same time, these crises saw the traditional mandate of
NGOs expand significantly beyond humanitarian relief
and the protection of vulnerable populations to
resource mobilization and the delivery of assistance for
post-conflict reconstruction. In many cases, their
forward-looking advocacy and tireless efforts have led
to momentous policy changes at both the governmental
and the intergovernmental levels. Through this
enhanced role, NGOs have been transformed and
empowered from important but secondary actors to key
partners in the process of post-conflict reconstruction.
This is a transformation that my delegation fully
supports.

S/PV.4993 (Resumption 1)

Just in time for our debate today, the SecretaryGeneral’s Panel Of Eminent Persons on United
Nations-Civil Society Relations issued its report
yesterday. We have yet to fully digest the extensive
content of the report, but, on the matter of Security
Council interaction with civil society, we endorse the
report’s recommendation that Council members further
strengthen their dialogue with civil society through
various measures.
As the Panel’s report notes, today’s conflicts are
complex situations requiring on-the-ground knowledge,
new tools and skills in cultural analysis, and the active
involvement of communities and their leaders. Civil
society organizations are often uniquely positioned to
fill these roles, and we are convinced that a deepening
of the Council’s engagement with civil society in
peace-building situations will benefit all actors and the
peace process itself.
Some of the measures proposed to achieve this
outcome include increased meetings between Security
Council field missions and local NGOs; convening
independent commissions of inquiry, with civil society
participation, after Council-mandated operations; and
holding an experimental series of Security Council
seminars attended by civil society. We believe that
these are all worthy proposals and we look forward to
seeing their implementation.
My delegation would just like to add that gender
perspectives must be incorporated into all of these
efforts. The Republic of Korea is a strong supporter of
Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace
and security, and expects the spirit of the resolution to
extend fully into the Council’s expanded interaction
with civil society. Indeed, we believe that women’s full
and equal participation and the integration of gender
perspectives should be incorporated at governmental,
intergovernmental and non-governmental levels to
ensure the success of efforts in conflict prevention and
resolution, peace processes and post-conflict peacebuilding.
Peace-building today is a complex process that
involves multiple actors and diverse interests, and
constructive coordination among all actors is essential
to any successful peace-building effort. The first steps
often begin with humanitarian confidence-building
measures, such as prisoner exchanges, free passage and
resettlement for refugees, or the vaccination of
children. In all of these tasks, the active participation

of civil society organizations is essential, as they are
often already established in crisis areas and possess the
kind of local knowledge that can be gained only by
residents of the affected areas themselves.
In conclusion, the Republic of Korea believes that
if post-conflict peace-building is to be successful, the
vigorous participation of civil society in all aspects of
the process is fundamental. We hope that the Council
will remain strongly committed to strengthening the
role of civil society in post-conflict peace-building and
we pledge our firm support towards that end.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Republic of Korea for highlighting the important role
of women in peace processes and post-conflict peacebuilding.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Japan.
Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): Before I speak on
today’s debate, I wish to express our heartfelt
condolences to the bereaved families, as well as to the
Government and people of the Republic of Korea, for
the brutal execution of their fellow countryman. The
news was so sad and shocking. We join you, Madam, in
condemning this barbaric act of terrorism.
I would like to commend you, Madam, for your
leadership in convening this open debate on the role of
civil society in post-conflict peace-building in the
Security Council. It is particularly timely in the light of
the fact that the report of the Secretary-General’s Panel
Of Eminent Persons on United Nations-Civil Society
Relations was just released yesterday.
The report States that Governments alone cannot
resolve today’s global challenges. This is also true with
regard to post-conflict peace-building. It is not realistic
to expect that Governments and international
organizations alone can respond fully and effectively to
everything the process of peace-building requires in
such broad and varied fields as the repatriation and
resettlement of refugees, the restoration of public
security based on the rule of law, economic
reconstruction, rehabilitation of local communities,
national reconciliation and so on. Civil society
organizations which have been engaging for a long
time and with strong commitments in those fields of
activities have an important role to play in the peacebuilding process. Not only are they precious additional
assistance forces, but they oftentimes have intimate

9

S/PV.4993 (Resumption 1)

knowledge and valuable experience that can be useful
for effectively carrying out aid activity. I believe that
cooperative interaction between those civil society
organizations
and
humanitarian
and
resident
coordinators of the United Nations agencies makes it
easier to achieve our common objective: to create an
environment in which the people of a post-conflict
country can have the hope that they will be able to
enjoy better lives tomorrow.
As we speak of the role of civil society
organizations in the post-conflict peace-building
process, I wish to emphasize two additional points
which I consider important. The first point is that civil
society organizations can serve as educational forums
for the members to deepen understanding of their
relations to the international community. Through
participation in the activities of such civil society
organizations, ordinary people come to realize how
deeply they are connected to the international
community and develop stronger commitment to
international cooperation. Thus, civil society
organizations can be reliable supporters and valuable
partners of the Governments which are promoting
peace-building in a post-conflict society. Where there
is not much history of civil society organizations,
therefore, it is sometimes appropriate to nurture and
strengthen their local civil society organizations, while
respecting
their
status
as
non-governmental
organizations.
As an example, I would like to mention our
experience with the Japan Platform, a system to
provide more efficient and quick emergency relief, in
which non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
business, and the Government participate in an equal
partnership.
In 1999, some Japanese NGOs began considering
assistance to Kosovo refugees. However, they soon
realized that they lacked sufficient financial resources
and personnel with experience on the ground.
Therefore, four NGOs planned a joint project to
construct refugee camps, searching for ways to
overcome their weak points through cooperation with
the Japanese Government. In the process, it became
widely recognized that it is better to broaden
cooperation not only between NGOs and government
but also with other actors such as business, media and
academia.

10

This recognition led to the creation of the Japan
Platform, through which the parties concerned
coordinate and cooperate for quick and effective
implementation of emergency relief, making full use in
an equal partnership of the strengths and resources of
each party. In this new system, the Government makes
financial contributions, business and individuals make
donations, the business circle provides technology,
equipment, personnel and information, and relevant
actors in the media, private foundations and academia
participate and cooperate in order to enhance
accountability. The NGOs participating in the Japan
Platform are vigorously engaging in humanitarian
assistance activities aimed at post-conflict peacebuilding in Afghanistan, Iraq, Iran, Liberia and other
countries.
The second point I wish to mention is the unique
and important role that local civil society organizations
can play. Peace-building cannot succeed without the
ownership by the people of a post-conflict country. The
activities of the civil society organizations of that
country are nothing but an eloquent expression of such
ownership, in our view. They are often very effective in
the peace-building process as well, since they know
their local situation best. For example, a group of
traditionally respected figures in a society may be able
to persuade perpetrators of human right abuses to admit
their guilt and to apologize publicly to the victims for
their past wrongdoings. This can be a direct
contribution to national reconciliation. I understand
that the Bashingantahe of Burundi used to effectively
play such a role. Another example is a case in which
child soldiers gradually accepted disarmament in
response to repeated appeals from a women’s
association in the community.
The promotion of local civil society organizations
also enhances the sense of ownership of the people in a
country by providing them with the means to rebuild
their society by themselves. Fostering a sense of
ownership is also essential for the empowerment of
individuals and local communities, and, as a
consequence, for the promotion of human security. It is
thus important that local civil society organizations
develop their activities in post-conflict countries; I
believe that the United Nations and the international
community should provide assistance to that end. For
its part, Japan intends to work together with local civil
society organizations in the implementation of projects
through the United Nations Trust Fund for Human

S/PV.4993 (Resumption 1)

Security, as well as Japan’s grass-roots human security
grant aid.
In establishing the panel on United Nations
relations with civil society organizations, the
Secretary-General pointed out that there was less
participation in United Nations affairs by NGOs from
developing countries than from those from the North.
The difference in participation may be a reflection of
countries’ differing appreciation of the role of civil
society organizations. I do hope, however, that today’s
open debate will contribute to the creation of a
common recognition of the important role that civil
society organizations can play in the post-conflict
peace-building process.
The President: I thank the representative of
Japan for his kind words in commending my delegation
for convening this important open debate on the role of
civil society in post-conflict peace-building, here in the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Bangladesh.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Bangladesh
compliments the Philippines for a most skilful
leadership of the Council during the current month and
for the apt choice of the topic for today’s deliberations.
In our view, your presence, Madam President, has lent
a special significance to our current debate. We recall
most warmly your recent successful visit to my
country. We congratulate you on a good start to your
tenure as Foreign Minister. My delegation also
welcomes the participation in today’s discussions of
the representative of CARE International and the
International Centre for Transitional Justice.
As a nation of 135 million, which values
pluralism so greatly, Bangladesh is one of the largest
democracies in the world. We take pride in the fact that
our country hosts and promotes a vibrant and globally
proactive group of civil society organizations, all of
which are homegrown and products of our indigenous
ethos. Support to civil society organizations and
forging partnerships with them in pursuit of common
goals is at the heart of Prime Minister Khaleda Zia’s
Government’s policies.
Numbering over 20,000, some of the Bangladeshi
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) are the largest
in the world and have had the greatest global impact.
Grameen and BRAC are household words in most parts

of the world. Even as I speak, a network of these civil
society organizations are providing primary education
to one more girl child, giving microcredit to one more
woman in a post-conflict society and making available
to another poor woman the wherewithal of
empowerment. They are immunizing or rehydrating
one more child born in conflict, ameliorating the
sufferings of one more sick person by extending her
basic medical care and generating employment for one
more ex-combatant, helping his social rehabilitation.
These activities bring solace and succor to millions
around the world and replace their sense of despair
with the promise of hope.
In this positive spirit, let me reflect with you on
how we could facilitate the role of civil society through
collective efforts in assisting and buttressing postconflict peace-building.
There exists a wide recognition that NGOs and
civil society organizations can and do play a significant
advocacy and operational role in multilateral efforts to
assist post-conflict societies in achieving sustainable
peace and stability. They have a well-recorded
potential to connect grassroots to global governance,
mobilize public opinion and add a fresh voice to global
decision-making. They have acted collectively in
global campaigns, influenced the outcomes of global
conferences, reacted promptly to grave humanitarian
crises and fought for justice and reconciliation. The
United Nations Charter has envisaged their role in the
Organization’s work; yet little progress has been
achieved in creating institutional mechanisms for
making their voices heard in the United Nations and its
principal bodies. We must therefore translate the
rhetoric into concrete action and develop permanent
mechanisms for fostering a United Nations-civil
society organizations partnership. This is my first
thought.
Secondly, the Economic and Social Council, as
the principal intergovernmental body mandated to
promote policy processes in addressing deep-rooted
socio-economic, cultural, environmental or structural
causes of conflict, should be the lead institution in
involving civil society organizations in post-conflict
peace-building policy recommendations. It should
engage NGOs effectively through its consultative
mechanisms, its subsidiary commissions and its ad hoc
advisory groups on post-conflict countries. It must act
as a United Nations system-wide conduit for the
transmittal of early warnings and best practices to the

11

S/PV.4993 (Resumption 1)

Security Council and to the General Assembly. Now is
the time for greater involvement of the Economic and
Social Council and the General Assembly in conflict
prevention and in peace-building, with a system-wide
coordination involving the United Nations agencies,
the Bretton Woods Institutions, the private sector and
civil society organizations. As a member of the
Economic and Social Council, Bangladesh will leave
no effort unexplored to achieve this goal.
Thirdly, the field experience of NGOs involved in
the operational delivery of rule of law, human rights,
justice and humanitarian services, as well as social
rehabilitation of ex-combatants and child soldiers, must
be incorporated, where appropriate, in the integrated
planning process for new peacekeeping missions. Also,
NGOs with well-known credentials for women’s
empowerment and gender justice must be involved in
post-conflict peace-building policy development, as
empowering women economically and politically helps
marginalize extremist thought and action. Bangladesh
also advocates that for peacekeeping to lay a strong
foundation for long-term peace-building, the two
processes must evolve in tandem in a coherent and
comprehensive manner involving all partners,
including the United Nations, the intergovernmental
bodies, the private sector and the civil society
organizations.
Fourthly, it is essential to develop a bond of
mutual trust and confidence among the NGOs, civil
society organizations, the United Nations system and
intergovernmental and governmental processes in order
to have an effective collective partnership and to
achieve a consensual approach to peace-building. We
encourage the NGO community to explore their
potentials and to ensure that their own mandates focus
on prevention of conflicts and post-conflict rebuilding.
Also, the debate over the NGOs lacking the legitimacy
and accountability of elected Governments must be
tempered by fostering an institutional mechanism for
greater NGO accountability, transparency and a code of
conduct in their governance.
Finally, the significantly low representation of
NGOs and civil society organizations from developing
countries enjoying consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council or association with the
United Nations Department of Public Information must
be improved. Bangladesh fully supports global
coalition and networks of issue-based civil society
organizations for strong global advocacy. We also

12

encourage a regional or a South-South perspective in
NGO networking in post-conflict peace-building. After
all, social transformations must come from within and
cannot be imposed from outside. Cultural sensitivities
and local values must be taken into account in peacebuilding. Examples from comparable societies must be
shared.
As a country deeply involved in the shepherding
and implementation of the United Nations Programme
of Action on a Culture of Peace, it is our firm belief,
indeed faith, that the civil society is the voice and the
ears of the grassroots. It has the capacity to educate the
masses about the value and dividends of peace and
non-violence. It must be embraced as an equal partner
if our common aspiration for peace and prosperity is to
translate from hope to fruition. We call upon the
Security Council to garner the political will to invest
today in the civil society, a tested partner in peace and
development, to avoid costly wars tomorrow. That is a
categorical imperative that we would ignore with great
peril and sad consequences.
The President: I thank the representative of
Bangladesh for his kind words addressed to me, and for
sharing with us concrete and positive contributions to
our current debate on the role of civil society in postconflict peace-building.
I now call on the representative of Australia.
Mr. Dauth (Australia): Madam President, let me
immediately join you and others in both condemning
the barbaric terrorism demonstrated in the beheading of
a Korean citizen in Iraq today and in extending to our
Korean colleague, the victim’s family and all Koreans
the heartfelt condolences of all Australians. As close
friends of Koreans, we will feel this act of barbaric
terrorism very keenly.
But let me also thank you very much, Madam
President, for convening this meeting and offer you
what you will know are my most sincere and personal
congratulations. You are a wonderful advertisement for
your country, as you have demonstrated over many
years in mine.
I wish also to welcome today the participation in
this debate of our friends from the International Centre
for Transitional Justice and from CARE.
On the basis of our own first-hand and recent
experience, Australia very much welcomes the
opportunity to address the Council on this important

S/PV.4993 (Resumption 1)

subject. Through our involvement in peace-building
efforts in Timor-Leste, Bougainville and the Solomon
Islands, Australia has seen and encouraged the crucial
role that civil society plays in post-conflict situations.
An important example is the role civil society has
played in post-conflict peace-building in Timor-Leste
since the earliest days of the international response to
the 1999 humanitarian crisis. Such cooperation was
identified as a major objective of the Australian
Government’s
interim
country
strategy
for
development cooperation with Timor-Leste. Through
its development assistance programme Australia has
provided support to local organizations in Timor-Leste
to build their capacity to deliver essential services to
the people. We have assisted in the development of
civil society advocacy and watchdog groups, for
example, through the key civil society coordination
body established after the crisis, the NGO Forum. That
we see as an essential part of building and maintaining
stability in the young State. A well-informed and
dynamic civil society helps to ensure that societal
tensions and conflicts can be resolved in constructive
and non-violent ways.
We welcome the fact that strategic dialogue on
the role of civil society is a regular feature of the
planning and review of implementation of the TimorLeste
Government’s
core
multidonor-funded
transitional support programme. A recent World Bank
study on governance issues in Timor-Leste reconfirmed
the importance of developing the role of Timor-Leste’s
civil society as a critical element of a system of checks
and balances to ensure good governance and prevent
public corruption.
Bougainville is a less well-known example.
Australia is a strong supporter of both the Bougainville
peace process and the role that civil society has played
in successful peace-building there. Through our
leadership of the four-country regional Peace
Monitoring Group (PMG) and, more recently, the small
civilian Bougainville Transition Team (BTT), Australia
has been closely involved in peace-building efforts,
working closely with the United Nations Political
Office on Bougainville.
In Bougainville, with the encouragement and
support of the PMG and the BTT, representatives of
civil society were able to promote peace and
reconciliation at the grassroots level. Members of the
Bougainville Constitutional Commission — a broad-

based body that included representatives of women’s
groups, churches, traditional leaders and youth — were
among those responsible for developing a draft
constitution for the autonomous government. The
involvement of civil society brought a perceived
neutrality, shared experience and local knowledge to
peace-building activities such as reconciliation and
trauma counselling.
The Solomon Islands is an even less well-known
example, but it is every bit as important as Timor-Leste
and Bougainville. Australia, through its involvement in
the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands
(RAMSI), has been engaged with civil society there
from the outset. There is a broad range of wellorganized civil society groups in Solomon Islands
comprising all sections of the community, including
churches — crucially, women — and youth. Many are
well organized in regional areas. RAMSI regularly
consults with these groups.
A striking example is RAMSI’s relationship with
the National Peace Council, an important indigenous
organization striving for peace and reconciliation for
the benefit of all Solomon Islanders. The National
Peace Council has worked tirelessly throughout
Solomon Islands with RAMSI. It facilitated the
removal of guns from communities across the country,
which resulted in the hand-in or confiscation of some
3,700 weapons, which have now been destroyed.
Our experience is, of course, not unique. As we
have heard today, the critical contribution of civil
society to post-conflict situations is well documented
in other examples around the world — indeed, often
better documented, frankly, than the three of which I
have spoken today. The challenge before the Council is
how to apply lessons learned, how to incorporate them
into the design of mandates and how best to involve all
the United Nations agencies more closely with civil
society organizations. Our experience and that of our
neighbours provides important textbook material.
The President: I thank the representative of
Australia for his kind and warm words addressed to
me. I know only too well Australia’s significant
contributions to developing civil society groups in
post-conflict peace-building in our immediate region.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Uganda.

13

S/PV.4993 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Butagira (Uganda): First of all, let me,
Madam President, congratulate you on the able manner
in which you are chairing this meeting and congratulate
the Philippines presidency on organizing this important
debate.
Uganda joins you, Madam President, and the
members of the Security Council in expressing disgust
and shock at the death of the national of the Republic
of Korea, and especially at the brutal way he was
killed. Terrorism is a menace to the international
community, and the international community must join
hands in fighting this menace. Whatever political
motivation the terrorists have, the end does not justify
the means.
In 2001, I was a member of the mediation team in
the peace talks between the Government of the Sudan
and the Sudanese People’s Liberation Movement and
Army. We visited southern Sudan to assess the conflict
on the ground. We visited an area called Thiet. The
effect of merciless wars was evident. There were no
services, schools or health centres to speak of. There
was no government. The surviving population was
hungry, and children were undernourished and in rags.
In that desolate situation there was a ray of hope, and
that was the limited service provided by a nongovernmental organization, World Vision. They
provided water by sinking boreholes and digging dams.
They built health centres. In fact, we stayed overnight
in their camp. They cooperated with the Sudanese
People’s Liberation Army, which had an effective
presence on the ground. The officials of the
organization lived in fear of aerial bombardment, and
all around their camps they had dug shelters. Yet,
because of their call to serve humanity, they risked
their lives to work in southern Sudan. I have given this
example to illustrate the important role played by civil
society in conflict areas.
The United Nations and, indeed, the Security
Council have recognized the important role played by
civil society organizations in post-conflict peacebuilding and reconstruction. Their role in providing
humanitarian assistance and relief is well known. They
have provided social infrastructure such as schools,
dispensaries and sanitation.
However, to be successful in post-conflict
situations, civil society organizations must be partners
with
Governments.
Their
role
should
be
complementary to that of Governments. They should

14

not engage in activities that would undermine their
impartiality and thus be seen in some quarters as spies
or as siding with subversive elements.
Civil society organizations should engage in
activities that would promote reconciliation, peace and
stability. For instance, their role in promoting good
governance and the observance of human rights can be
crucial, such as their participation in election
monitoring, illiteracy campaigns and civic education.
More attention should be paid to the role of women in
post-conflict
peace-building.
Civil
society
organizations can organize women’s groups and set up
micro-financing institutions to finance women’s
enterprises in agriculture and industry in the
developing countries. They could also organize
vocational training.
However, a proliferation of civil society
organizations should be avoided. In some cases, postconflict peace-building has become an industry. All
manner of civil society organizations have sprung up,
some with dubious credentials. There should be
coherence and relevancy. To achieve this, concerned
countries should put in place a regulatory framework
which would provide harmonization and effectiveness
without interfering in the internal structure of such
organizations. Non-governmental organizations should
not behave as if they were governments unto
themselves. They can play a vital role in providing
useful information and advice to Governments in
fashioning effective post-conflict policies. For that
purpose, there should be a forum in which
Governments and civil society organizations can
exchange ideas. The results of those exchanges could
lead to informed decisions, including legislation.
Aside from partnering with Governments, civil
society organizations should work closely with United
Nations agencies in the field in building post-conflict
institutions. It would be useful, for example, to have a
dialogue with the relevant civil society organizations
before peacekeeping missions are sent into the field, in
order to work out effective programmes.
Before I conclude, I would like to thank civil
society organizations for their role in providing
humanitarian assistance to the people displaced in
northern Uganda as a result of the untold atrocities
visited on the population by Joseph Kony’s murderous
rebel group.

S/PV.4993 (Resumption 1)

Once again, we call on the international
community to rein in Mr. Kony and his gang so that
their crimes do not go unpunished. The Government of
Uganda has provided substantial resources for postconflict reconstruction in northern Uganda as it closes
in on Mr. Kony and his bandits. For instance, all
children going to secondary school whose parents are
in displaced persons camps are to have free education.
Children in primary schools in the area, and indeed
throughout the country, are to be provided with a free
lunch of porridge and milk. Money has been set aside
for renting tractors to engage in agricultural
production. The Government invites civil society
organizations to take part in those and other
reconstruction programmes by providing personnel and
funds.
The President: We note the representative of
Uganda’s words of caution and concern on the
proliferation of civil society organizations.
Mr. Rock (Canada): Before anything else, permit
me to express on behalf of the Government and the
people of Canada our sense of horror and our
condemnation of the brutal and barbaric act of
terrorism that today has taken the life of the citizen of
the Republic of Korea in Iraq. We also express our
sincere condolences to the family of the victim and to
the people of Korea in this difficult hour.
Madam President, it is a pleasure to see you
presiding in this Chamber. I thank you and your
Government for the initiative of putting this important
subject on today’s agenda and for the very helpful
paper that you have provided to members.
Madam President, your paper, coupled with the
publication yesterday of the report of the Panel of
Eminent Persons on United Nations-Civil Society
Relations appointed by the Secretary-General
(A/58/817) underlines the importance of our collective
and ongoing consideration of the role of civil society in
post-conflict peace-building.
Canada welcomes the recommendations of the
Panel, in particular its recognition of the need for
stronger mechanisms to permit interaction between
non-governmental organizations and members of the
Security Council. We are pleased at the trend towards
more frequent resort to the Arria-formula meetings. We
welcome the recommendation for Security Council
seminars with non-governmental organization (NGO)
participation, and we support it. It seems to us that

such sessions can enable NGOs to make timely and
effective interventions when the Council is dealing
with a range of issues and a range of countries. Recent
conflicts have demonstrated the importance of civil
society organizations having access to the Council to
highlight concerns, especially with respect to violations
of international law and of human rights.
Access by NGOs to the Security Council is
essential not only in the context of active conflicts but
also in cases of fragile peace. The involvement of civil
society organizations has proven essential in a number
of contexts, many of which have been referred to by
my colleagues in their presentations this afternoon. The
range of areas in which civil society organizations has
been helpful is truly impressive. Whether it has been in
disarmament, demobilization or reintegration efforts or
by actually developing ceasefire or peace agreements,
whether it has been in post-conflict confidencebuilding or peacekeeping, it is clear that they have a
unique contribution to make.
In addition to galvanizing global support for
causes such as the Ottawa Convention banning antipersonnel landmines or the creation of the International
Criminal Court, civil society organizations have also
been instrumental in generating sustained international
attention on issues such as the plight of children
affected by armed conflict; women, peace and security;
and the proliferation and misuse of illicit small arms
and light weapons. In each of those areas, civil society
organizations have galvanized efforts to take concrete
measures at the national and international levels.
While the number of inter-State conflicts has
declined in the last 25 years, we have seen a
proliferation of civil conflicts within States, and
civilians are paying the heaviest price for that change.
In that context, peace-building from the top down is a
recipe for failure. Stable futures must be built from the
level of the community up. Involvement of civil society
is therefore a natural and fundamental element if those
efforts are to succeed.
In that respect, one area that Canada would draw
to the attention of the Council is the vital role of
women in conflict prevention, in humanitarian action
and in the process of peace-building. Understanding
and addressing gender differences and inequalities is
fundamental to both building sustainable peace and
identifying effective responses. For that reason,
Canada’s efforts to build sustainable peace place great

15

S/PV.4993 (Resumption 1)

emphasis on the inclusion of women as equal partners
in all aspects of conflict prevention and resolution and
in peace-building.
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) is, of
course, a landmark. We all know about its impact. That
resolution not only provides us with a framework for
supporting the participation of women, including
displaced women and local and international women’s
groups, but it also obliges us to use that enormous
resource. Canada stands firmly behind those
commitments, and we will continue to work with our
colleagues to consistently make women’s equal
participation in all post-conflict peace-building efforts
a reality.
(spoke in French)
Before concluding, I should like to emphasize
another important aspect of the peace-building process,
one in which civil society plays a pivotal role and in
which women’s participation is particularly crucial —
that is, democratic institution-building.
Democratic governance is key to building a
society that can manage conflict without resorting to
violence — a society in which opposing points of
views can be expressed, debated, and even passionately
disputed, without undermining the system as a whole; a
society in which differences can be managed
peacefully.
In fragile post-conflict situations, institutions and
procedures designed to manage differences and
potential conflicts in a non-violent manner and in a
spirit of compromise are particularly essential.
As is highlighted in the Panel’s report, one of the
key principles of representative democracy is
connecting citizens to the decisions that affect them
and ensuring public accountability for those decisions.
In post-conflict societies, if citizens are not connected
to their Government; to the peace processes that will
deeply affect their future; or, no less importantly, to
one another, new sources of grievance and conflict will
emerge.
(spoke in English)
Time and again we see that leadership and
advocacy for democracy comes from civil society at
the local level. When that is complemented with
support from, and dialogue with, the international

16

community, effective and positive energy
demonstrated for post-conflict peace-building.

is

As the General Assembly has already
acknowledged, civil society is a powerful force for
peace-building and conflict prevention. Let us together
ensure that its full potential is mobilized in the cause of
sustainable peace, the search for which unites us all.
The President: I thank the representative of
Canada for his statement and for highlighting the need
to build stronger mechanisms that would link civil
society and the United Nations. I welcome his
emphasis on the special contribution of women to
sustainable peace.
I give the floor to the representative of Senegal.
Mr. Badji (Senegal) (spoke in French): Allow
me, before beginning my statement, to express to the
delegation of the Republic of Korea the deep empathy
of the delegation of Senegal in these difficult
circumstances. We vigorously condemn the barbaric act
that took the life of an innocent Korean citizen. We
extend our most heartfelt condolences and sympathy.
Madam President, after welcoming your presence
here among us, I should like warmly to congratulate
you and your delegation on the outstanding manner in
which you have been presiding over the Security
Council this month and also to convey to you the
appreciation and gratitude of the delegation of Senegal
for your praiseworthy initiative in organizing, within
this forum, a public debate on the role of civil society
in post-conflict peace-building.
Despite the laudable efforts of the international
community and the deep involvement of our
Organization in conflict resolution and in pacifying
hotbeds of tension, the volatile situation in the field in
many conflict-affected countries and regions has often
promoted a resurgence of such conflicts. That is why,
more than ever, there is an imperative and urgent need
to harmonize the actions of all of the players in the
crucial phase of post-conflict peace-building, in
accordance,
moreover,
with
one
of
the
recommendations contained in the annex to General
Assembly resolution 57/337 of 3 July 2003 on conflict
prevention.
Given their presence in the field, their proximity
to the players and their familiarity with political,
economic and social realities, civil society
organizations can, in a symbiotic relationship with

S/PV.4993 (Resumption 1)

Governments and international organizations, play a
decisive role, at least during two stages linked to
peace-building: the phase of the creation of objectives
and the period of the implementation of such
objectives.
My delegation believes that there is a crucial need
for the United Nations and in particular the Security
Council to invite civil society organizations fully to
participate in defining transition mandates even before
peacekeeping operations conclude. The idea is to
combine the global, regional or subregional vision of
any United Nations approach and the local perspective
inherent in the activities of civil society organizations.
Such an inclusive approach would allow those
organizations to provide first-hand information on the
milieu in which they are developing and to participate
actively in the definition of objectives and peacebuilding means by spelling out their areas of
preference.
Moreover, the contribution of civil society
organizations can be even more decisive in the phase of
active peace-building, since they seem to respond more
swiftly than other actors in carrying out certain tasks,
such as assistance for refugees and displaced persons
or their reintegration into their lands. However, the
assignment of such missions to civil society
organizations must be preceded by adequate financing
and by a division of tasks to be agreed upon with the
official United Nations representative in the country
concerned.
With regard to the African continent — battered
by so much violence and by so many armed
conflicts — the civil society organizations already
present on the ground are in a position to better play
their role at this sensitive stage of peace-building. That
is, they would stand to benefit from the international
community’s moral, material and financial support, so
that many of them would no longer be merely passive
and powerless witnesses to unspeakable human
tragedies, but actors in the redemption of the
communities they wish to serve.
In conclusion, I should like to clarify that at this
critical stage of peace-building, active complementarity
— I would even say active solidarity and positive
cooperation — on the part of all the various players
must prevail. In that regard, the Security Council
would be well advised to lay the foundation for a
normative framework defining the responsibility of all

actors — including those of civil society — with a
view to promoting a coordinated, consistent and swift
response to the imperatives of peace-building.
The President: I thank the representative of
Senegal for the kind words he addressed to me and to
my delegation regarding our presidency of the Council,
as well as for his acknowledgement of our initiative to
discuss the role of civil society in post-conflict peacebuilding in the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Nepal.
Mr. Sharma (Nepal): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Madam, on your delegation’s
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and conducting the Council in an
outstanding manner. My delegation also appreciates the
fact that you have convened this interesting debate and
have provided an excellent background paper on the
role of civil society in post-conflict peace-building.
Post-conflict peace-building helps countries
emerging from conflict to get back on their feet and to
prevent their relapse into violence. In Nepal’s view,
peace-building is as much a conflict prevention
measure as it is a building block for durable peace, for
which overall economic and social development is
absolutely critical.
The
Security
Council,
responsible
for
international peace and security, is right to explore all
avenues to fulfil its obligations. My delegation has
viewed this debate in that light, not as an endeavour of
the Council to expand its role into every nook and
cranny just because it could. We trust that this debate
will inspire the Council to work coherently with the
pertinent organs and agencies of the United Nations —
such as the Economic and Social Council — that have
mandates and competence in the domain of
development, and not to usurp their roles.
For quite some time, civil society organizations —
such as non-governmental, religious, private sector and
community organizations — have been important
partners in efforts to promote peace and development
in the world. They have rallied against wars and
weapons; they have provided early warnings of
gathering storms by exposing gross human rights
violations and injustices; and they have helped us to
understand conflict situations from their perspective.
Many times, those organizations have been able to

17

S/PV.4993 (Resumption 1)

coax the conflicting parties to the negotiating table,
have worked as objective arbiters and have actively
delivered humanitarian assistance to the victims of war.
Civil society actors clearly stand out in their
contributions to post-conflict peace-building. They
reach out to the most difficult areas and to the most
deprived people, and they make a palpable impact with
limited resources through social mobilization. These
outfits encourage the process of healing and foster
social harmony. They help build capacity and empower
people by helping them to rebuild their shattered lives
and to strengthen their institutions. Civil society does
its job with the utmost efficiency, agility and
effectiveness.
Undoubtedly, the United Nations must tap into
these positive potentials of civil society with respect to
consolidating peace. It could involve civil society more
effectively in planning, implementing and monitoring
peace-building activities in war-ravaged societies. Civil
society organizations could be asked to monitor the
implementation of peace agreements in order to build
confidence and promote reconciliation between the
conflicting parties and to make them accountable for
their actions. That could be part of an exit strategy for
the United Nations.
That said, the role that civil society can play in
peace-building should be understood in its context.
Civil society has been very powerful in advocacy, and
its role in reconstruction efforts has been remarkable
but limited. The limited role of civil society in peacebuilding is understandable. Unfortunately, not all postconflict situations are accorded the significance they
deserve by the world community. More often than not,
when peace is restored in a war-torn country, the
international community moves on to the next trouble
spot. As a result resources for peace-building dry up,
leaving both civil society and the country in question
high and dry. Civil society is forced to follow the tide
and to go where it finds a piece of action and the
resources to make a difference.
The main point here is this: what can the United
Nations do to change this situation, and how can the
Security Council help to sustain peace-building efforts?
There ought to be a seamless transition from
peacekeeping to peace-building to development. The
Security Council should ensure that peacekeeping
operations are followed by a reduced and reconfigured
United Nations presence with adequate resources until

18

the country emerging from conflict is fully able, with
the help of development agencies and donors, to absorb
all activities undertaken by the closing peacekeeping
operation and until that country begins to move
forward on the road to reconciliation and economic
recovery.
In the peace-building phase, the Council should
promote cooperation in a spirit of partnership with the
organs and agencies of the United Nations that have
competence in the development realm. Working
together with civil society and Governments, the
various relevant organs of the United Nations will be
able to foster synergy and fulfil their respective
obligations and mandates. I hope that the Security
Council will want to look into that possibility.
Finally, one firefight after another has not
brought durable peace so far, and it will not in the
future either. Lasting peace requires increased
investment in economic and social transformation and
the energy and the efforts of all key stakeholders,
including civil society, to remove the root causes of
conflict such as poverty, hunger, deprivation and, of
course, injustice.
The President: I thank the representative of
Nepal for his contributions to this debate. I also thank
him for his expression of appreciation of the
importance and the relevance of this particular open
debate on the role of civil society in post-conflict
peace-building during our presidency of the Security
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the Secretary General
of CARE International, Mr. Denis Caillaux, to respond
to comments and questions raised during the debate.
Mr. Caillaux: I will certainly not try to
summarize the very rich discussion we had throughout
the day. I will just limit myself to three central points
that I have gotten from this discussion.
The first one really is the focus on the local level
and the importance of what you yourself, Madam
President, have defined as the healing power, the
healing potential of civil society. I think this is what it
is all about in the peace-building process we have been
discussing. You have expressed that very, very well.
Certainly for an organization like the one I represent,
this is the core of our mandate. Our mandate is
fundamentally to facilitate the process of emergence of
this local civil society and then to gently recede into

S/PV.4993 (Resumption 1)

the background and support them in whatever way we
can.
That leads me to my second point, which has
been raised by some speakers. Indeed, we — civil
society organizations — have to work hard at our own
accountability, particularly our accountability to our
beneficiaries. It is certainly a process that we are
getting into with seriousness and dedication, and I am
privileged to have initiated, at the beginning of the year
with about dozen like-minded organizations, what we
call a humanitarian accountability partnership, whereby
at our humble level we look seriously and honestly at
our own accountability to our beneficiaries. I think it is
a very healthy process that is absolutely fundamental if
we are to really be genuinely part of the kind of role
that has been discussed here today.
But I guess, above all, I will leave this debate
reassured that Council members and Member States
generally will be firm in setting and enforcing the rule
of law, thereby creating a secure environment and
ensuring the protection of civilians that is required to
enable their own energies and skill to really flourish in
the building of peace.
The President: I thank the Secretary General of
CARE International for his comments, and we
welcome in particular his concerns for accountability.
I shall now give the floor to the Vice President of
the International Centre for Transitional Justice,
Mr. Ian Martin, to respond to comments and questions
that may have been raised during the debate.
Mr. Martin: I think that any representative of a
civil society organization who had heard the whole of
today’s debate would feel, as I do, very gratified by the
strength of the consensus that has been expressed
around this table regarding the importance of the role
of civil society in post-conflict peace-building. It is
striking to have heard Member States voice support for
a very considerable range of initiatives that the
Security Council itself could take or encourage others
to take, all of which are also in the spirit of the report

of the Cardoso Panel, which in such a timely manner
has informed the debate. As we have heard, these
initiatives have included the enhanced used of the Arria
formula, and I think that, particularly because I am
from an organization working at the international level,
I would stress again the importance of the Arria
formula being more open to those from developing
countries, from our local partners.
The measures have included the holding of
seminars between the Security Council and civil
society. As we have, many members have stressed the
importance of contacts in the field, which can be more
open to local civil society during Security Council
missions, engaging civil society in peace settlements,
mission planning and needs assessments, the utility of
appropriate references in Council resolutions and
mandates to engagement with civil society,
encouraging special representatives of the SecretaryGeneral to engage in regular consultation with local
civil society, the possibility of NGO coordinators in
missions, and the communication back to the Council
of the point of view of civil society on peacekeeping
operations.
I am certain, without purporting to speak for
them, that our local partners would warmly welcome
moves in all those directions. But most of all I think
they would welcome, as I do, simply the spirit of this
debate of openness and cooperation between the
Council and civil society. I thank you, Madam
President, and your Government for providing the
opportunity and for setting the tone for that debate.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank you
all for your positive and constructive contributions to
this open debate. We in the presidency of the Council
are heartened by the thoughts, comments, suggestions
and, most of all, your support in making our theme a
truly relevant and meaningful one. We look forward to
similar future cooperation.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

19
