S/2013/237

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 April 2013
Original: English

Letter dated 15 April 2013 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to presidential statement S/PRST/2011/19 on
security sector reform, in which the Security Council requested that I submit, by
early 2013, an assessment of the United Nations support for security sector reform,
including efforts in Africa, and make recommendations on how best to strengthen
the United Nations comprehensive approach to security sector reform.
Currently, security sector reform management activities are being conducted in
peacekeeping operations, special political missions and other settings, as mandated
by the Security Council or recommended by the General Assembly. Security sector
governance remains one of the most rapidly expanding areas of the United Nations,
which is also reflected in numerous resolutions of the Council.
Since July 2012, the Security Sector Reform Unit of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations has organized a number of consultations, in compliance
with the request of the Security Council. These consultations have taken into
account the linkages between United Nations assistance and conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. The views of relevant United Nations organs and actors have also
been taken into account in the process of preparing the assessment.
The initial consultations included the inter-agency senior security sector
reform practitioners’ workshop held in July 2012; the High-level Panel on the
Challenges and Opportunities for Security Sector Reform in East Africa and the
second High-level Forum on African Perspectives on Security Sector Reform, both
held in October 2012; a high-level meeting of the Group of Friends of Security
Sector Reform held in Geneva in December 2012; and a high-level United Nations
practitioners’ meeting held in Geneva in March 2013. Many of those events were
hosted by or organized in partnership with Member States and regional
organizations, including the African Union. I have also sought the views of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, whose most recent annual report
was released in September 2012.
In addition, the Secretariat is now seeking to consult a broad range of
stakeholders, with an emphasis on African experiences and the lessons learned from
the elaboration of the African Union Policy Framework on Security Sector Reform,
which was adopted by African Heads of State and Government at the African Union
summit held in January 2013.
Furthermore, the United Nations Inter-Agency Security Sector Reform Task
Force developed its first set of five integrated technical guidance notes on security
13-30227 (E) 190413

*1330227*

S/2013/237

sector reform, launched in December 2012. Some of the core elements contained in
the guidance notes will form the basis for my comprehensive security sector reform
assessment.
In order to provide the Security Council with a full overview of the rapidly
developing elements highlighted in the above-mentioned presidential statement, and
in the light of the need to conduct further in-depth consultations within the United
Nations Inter-Agency Security Sector Reform Task Force and its field counterparts,
it is expected that my report to the Council containing the assessment will be issued
by 30 September 2013. I therefore request an extension of the report time frame.
The Secretariat would be ready to provide the Council with an update at a mutually
agreed time before the revised deadline.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2

13-30227
