S/2001/434

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 May 2001
Original: English

Letter dated 30 April 2001 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
The Security Council, in the statement of its President of 21 December 2000
on the situation in Guinea (S/PRST/2000/41), welcomed my decision to dispatch an
Inter-Agency Mission to West Africa. The Security Council supported its earliest
possible departure, and indicated that it looked forward to the Mission’s report and
recommendations.
I have the honour, therefore, to submit herewith for the consideration of the
Security Council the report of the Inter-Agency Mission, which visited 11 West
African countries from 6 to 27 March 2001. I have also submitted the report to the
President of the Economic and Social Council, as proposed by the members of the
Security Council during the briefing of the Security Council on 10 April 2001 on the
outcome of the Mission.
I should be grateful if you would bring the report to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

01-35901 (E) 040501

*0135901*

S/2001/434

Towards a comprehensive approach to durable and sustainable solutions
to priority needs and challenges in West Africa
Report of the Inter-Agency Mission to West Africa

I. Introduction
1.
The Security Council mission to Sierra Leone,
which also visited Guinea, Mali, Nigeria and Liberia
between 7 and 14 October 2000, concluded, in its
report (S/2000/992), that the highest priority must be
given to the coordination of a comprehensive strategy
with clear objectives to address the different aspects of
the crisis in Sierra Leone and its underlying causes. It
noted that only when all stakeholders — the
Government and people of Sierra Leone, the region and
the international community — act together through an
agreed and interlocking approach will the latent
potential for the country and the region to emerge from
crisis be fulfilled. It was further observed that no
lasting progress can be made in Sierra Leone without
comprehensive action to tackle the current instability in
the West African subregion, in particular in the Mano
River Union member countries.
2.
Subsequent to that report, the Secretary-General
established an inter-agency Task Force on the West
African Subregion, coordinated by the Department of
Political Affairs, to provide recommendations
concerning a coordinated and coherent United Nations
response aimed at addressing the multifaceted
problems confronting the subregion, taking into
account initiatives under way or being proposed by
various actors.
3.
The Task Force comprises representatives of the
Department of Political Affairs, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Department for
Disarmament Affairs, the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR), the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, the Office of the United
Nations Security Coordinator, the United Nations
Development Group, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Population
Fund (UNFPA) and the World Food Programme
(WFP).

2

4.
Following its establishment, the Task Force met
weekly and has monitored the developments in the
subregion, in particular the situation along the borders
between Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. In this
regard, it has brought to the attention of the Executive
Committee on Peace and Security developments
requiring the urgent attention of the Secretary-General
and the Security Council.
5.
In December 2000, the Secretary-General decided
to dispatch an inter-agency mission to West Africa, to
be led by the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Ibrahima Fall. On 21 December, in a statement
by its President on the situation in Guinea
(S/PRST/2000/41), the Security Council welcomed the
proposed mission, supported its earliest possible
departure and indicated that it looked forward to its
report and recommendations.

II. Establishment and activities
of the Mission
6.
The Inter-Agency Mission was composed of
representatives of the Department of Political Affairs,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department for Disarmament Affairs, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, OHCHR, the
Economic Commission for Africa (ECA), UNDP, the
United Nations Development Group, UNHCR,
UNICEF and WFP, and the secretariat of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). Within
the framework of the partnership between the United
Nations and ECOWAS, the ECOWAS secretariat was
kept informed about the activities of the Task Force
and was involved in the preparations for the Mission.
The Mission’s terms of reference were the following:
• To take stock of priority needs and challenges in
the West African subregion in the areas of peace
and security, humanitarian affairs and economic
and social development, including the interlinkages between them.
• To consult with Governments in the subregion
and with ECOWAS on ways and means of
enhancing cooperation with the United Nations in

S/2001/434

order to better
challenges.

address

those

needs

and

• To make recommendations on elements of a
subregional strategy to be implemented by the
United Nations, in cooperation with ECOWAS, to
help address the needs and challenges identified.
• To make recommendations on mobilizing the
provision of international support and assistance
for the elements of the proposed subregional
strategy.
7.
Considerable prior planning was undertaken for
the work of the Mission. A committee was established
which researched a range of issues relevant to its terms
of reference concerning the countries to be visited and
also the subregion, for the production of a briefing
book for the participants. A second committee
produced questions tailored for the government
officials, United Nations country teams, representatives
of civil society and other interlocutors in each country
to be visited, which were sent for their consideration in
advance of the arrival of the Mission.
8.
A number of criteria were established to
determine which countries in the subregion should be
visited. These included countries facing particularly
difficult internal problems and where conflicts were
occurring or where there was a risk of conflict breaking
out. Some countries were selected because of the
spillover effects on them of the internal problems of
other countries in the subregion. The Mission visited
those countries viewed as being particularly influential
in the subregion, among which were those whose heads
of State hold leadership positions in regional and
subregional organizations.
9.
The Mission visited Senegal (7 and 8 March),
Nigeria (9-11 March), Togo (11 and 12 March), Liberia
(12 and 13 March), Côte d’Ivoire (13-16 March),
Ghana (16 and 17 March), Sierra Leone (17 and
18 March), Guinea (19 and 20 March), Guinea-Bissau
(21 March), the Gambia (21 and 22 March) and Mali
(22-27 March). It was not possible, because of time
constraints, for the Mission to visit all of the countries
of the subregion, even though some of the countries not
visited fitted the set criteria. The list of participants is
annexed to this report.

head of State. In the other countries visited, it held
extensive working sessions with the heads of State. In
Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea, Mali, Senegal and Togo, the
Mission also met with the Prime Ministers and in all
countries visited it met with a number of cabinet
ministers. Its other interlocutors included the United
Nations country teams, members of the diplomatic
corps, parliamentarians, political party representatives,
religious leaders, representatives of civil society groups
and non-governmental organizations. It met with the
Executive Secretary and staff of the ECOWAS
secretariat, staff of the Mano River Union secretariat
and the Chairman of the Commission of the West
African Economic and Monetary Union (UEMOA), the
President of the African Development Bank and the
Governor of the Central Bank of West African States
(BCEAO).
11. During the Mission’s meetings, the idea of a
comprehensive and integrated approach to the priority
needs and challenges of the subregion was extensively
discussed. Within that context, views were exchanged
on a range of issues including in the areas of peace and
security,
governance,
national
reconciliation,
promoting
political
dialogue,
human
rights,
humanitarian issues, subregional integration and
enhancing cooperation with ECOWAS and other
subregional organizations. Additionally, the Mission
discussed social and economic issues including the
HIV/AIDS pandemic, alleviating poverty and the
external debt, as well as debt reduction or cancellation
measures. Other issues discussed were the problem of
illegal arms trafficking and its connection to the sale of
“conflict diamonds”, the proliferation of arms and
militias, landmines, and issues affecting children,
including the problem of child soldiers.
12. Country-specific issues discussed included the
introduction of sharia law in northern Nigeria and the
economic upheaval in the Niger delta, the conflict in
the Casamance region in Senegal, the situation in Côte
d’Ivoire and the problems being faced in GuineaBissau. Other issues were the situation in Sierra Leone
and its impact on the other Mano River Union member
countries and the border crisis between Guinea and
Liberia, including prospects for dialogue between
Presidents Lansana Conté and Charles Taylor on the
issue.

10. The Mission held frank and open discussions with
all its interlocutors, in line with its terms of reference.
In Ghana, the Mission was received in audience by the

3

S/2001/434

III. Findings of the Mission
A. Peace and security issues
1. General overview
13. Throughout the Mission’s visit the gravity of the
political and security situation in the West African
subregion and the potential for the rapid spread of
insecurity and instability, unless urgent steps are taken
to address the causes of conflict and turmoil in several
countries, were repeatedly underscored. Most
interlocutors foresaw a deterioration of the situations in
the Mano River Union countries, Côte d’Ivoire,
Guinea-Bissau and the Casamance region of Senegal,
with serious attendant implications for the whole
subregion, if progress was not urgently made towards
addressing the political, economic and social
dimensions of the problems faced. The possibility of a
“domino effect”, with instability spreading rapidly
from one country to another within the subregion is a
source of deep and widespread concern.
14. The importance of approaching conflict
prevention and resolution from a regional rather than a
national perspective was stressed to the Mission.
Conflicts can no longer be viewed in isolation, nor can
humanitarian problems within single countries in the
subregion be viewed as specific and internal. It was
repeatedly noted that the problems in the subregion
have been compounded by a lack of political dialogue
among leaders and lack of national reconciliation,
persistent economic decline and high levels of poverty,
the trade in arms and proliferation of militias, narcotics
trafficking, disease, resource scarcity and the often
violent and aggressive attempts at transnational control
of natural resources by state and non-state actors. In
some countries, the Mission noted wide disparities in
perception of the situation between the Government
and other interlocutors.
15. The conflicts in the subregion have been marked
by widespread human rights abuses which have left
families dispossessed, individuals traumatized and
communities in a state of virtual collapse. Ethnic
affinities, which transcend national boundaries, in
countries such as Senegal, the Gambia, Guinea-Bissau,
Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia, have in a number of
ways helped to mitigate the humanitarian effects of
conflicts in the subregion. However, they have also
contributed to the rapid spread of conflicts in border
areas, especially in areas where militia groups and

4

other actors have carved out territories for control, with
tragic implications for civilians.
16. The rising tensions between the Mano River
Union countries (Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone)
and possible escalation of the conflict between Guinea
and Liberia were issues of wide concern among the
Mission’s interlocutors. The importance of efforts by
ECOWAS leaders and the United Nations to promote
reconciliation between the leaders of the three
countries and the need for the development of a
concerted approach by the three Governments to the
conflicts in the area was stressed. Concern was
expressed at the alleged involvement of state and nonstate actors in providing support for the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) in Sierra Leone. Several
interlocutors were of the view that such support was
being provided by Governments, both within and
outside the subregion, and actors such as dealers in
conflict diamonds, mercenaries and international arms
dealers. Political and social turmoil in Côte d’Ivoire
since the overthrow of the Government of President
Henri Konan Bédié in December 1999, exacerbated by
the disputes over national identity, and rising
intolerance have resulted in the departure from the
country of thousands of West African workers, with
far-reaching repercussions for the country and
subregion.
17. The democratic transition in Guinea-Bissau has
yet to yield tangible results. With little technical
expertise within government institutions, deep levels of
poverty, an undeveloped private sector with few
prospects for inward investment, few avenues for
employment, coupled with an over-sized army which is
dependent on the State for resources, the situation in
Guinea-Bissau is very fragile. Without national
political will to overcome internal divisions and
without concerted international support, this situation
may lead to the collapse of the State, with tremendous
security
and
humanitarian
implications
for
neighbouring countries. The potentially negative
effects of continuing instability in Guinea-Bissau on
Guinea, the Gambia and the Casamance area and the
need for concerted assistance to be provided to the
country by the international community was repeatedly
stressed.
18. Regarding the Casamance, the signing of peace
agreements by the Government of Senegal and
representatives of MFDC (Mouvement des forces
démocratiques de Casamance) in March 2001, and the

S/2001/434

reinvolvement of the Gambia in the peace process, are
welcome developments. However, splits that have
occurred within MFDC are likely to complicate efforts
to implement the agreement, despite steps by the
Government of Senegal to bridge those divisions.
Initiatives planned by the Dakar-based Friends of the
Casamance group, comprising United Nations
agencies, donors and non-governmental organizations,
for providing additional resources for economic and
social development in the area, could provide impetus
for the implementation of the agreements and
consolidating peace. Concerns were expressed
concerning the impact of continuing religious and
ethnic strife in Nigeria and the importance of providing
support to help ensure the success of the country’s
nascent democracy was stressed. Additionally, while
armed rebellions in northern Mali and the Niger have
been resolved, concerns remain regarding the possible
resurgence of security threats in the Sahara strip from
northern Mali and northern Niger to Chad, mainly
because of the unresolved problems of reintegration
and development.
19. The victims of modern-day conflicts in West
Africa have been predominantly civilians. Child
soldiers have been used by all sides and special
attention needs to be paid to their rehabilitation. Aid
workers have become targets of attacks by rebel forces.
In the conflict in the Mano River Union countries all
sides have used and continue to use mercenaries.
20. An issue frequently stressed to the Mission was
the repercussion of ineffective demobilization and
reintegration programmes following the disarmament
of former combatants. Of particular concern are the
large numbers of former combatants from the Liberian
civil conflict, which came to an end in July 1997
following the elections. They did not receive adequate
reintegration assistance, and have largely remained
unemployed, posing a security problem both within
Liberia and for the subregion as, lacking other
opportunities, many have resorted to banditry or are
involved in mercenary activities. An urgent situation
exists in Guinea-Bissau, where 12,000 former
combatants remain within the national army, awaiting
the execution of a comprehensive and effective
demobilization and reintegration programme.
21. A vicious circle has been created between armed
conflict and the proliferation of arms with a mutually
reinforcing effect. It is estimated that more than half of
an estimated 5 million illicit weapons that circulate in

West Africa are used in activities such as internal
insurgencies, armed robberies, drug trafficking and
illegal diamond smuggling. Small arms are readily and
cheaply available in West Africa. Their use has
exacerbated a spiral of violence, obstructing conflict
resolution, peace-building and sustained economic and
social recovery in West Africa.
22. In an effort to address the scourge of small arms
in West Africa, in October 1998, ECOWAS heads of
State signed a three-year renewable Moratorium on the
Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of Small
Arms and Light Weapons in West Africa. To assist
ECOWAS in the realization of the objectives of the
Moratorium, UNDP established the Programme for
Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development. It operates within the framework of the
United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Africa, at Lomé.
23. In the Mission’s view, greater effort and resources
are needed to investigate the dynamics of arms flows in
West Africa. There is widespread concern about the
volume and sophistication of arms in private hands that
are being illegally imported into the subregion and the
concomitant increase in the rate of violent crimes in
many West African countries. The report of the Panel
of Experts on Sierra Leone Diamonds and Arms is a
very useful first step. Similar initiatives are needed to
gain a better appreciation of the dimensions of the
problem throughout the subregion and to promote
accountability of those involved in illicit arms
trafficking.
24. There was a movement towards democratization
during the 1990s throughout the subregion, which had
varying degrees of success in different countries.
Notable progress has been made in this area which
underpins political stability. Many new political parties
and groupings emerged and large numbers of people
have participated in multi-party elections. However, in
several countries, conflict between Governments and
opposition parties remains a serious obstacle to durable
peace and stability. Meanwhile, in several countries the
effective functioning of parliaments and parties is
limited by the inexperience of representatives and lack
of capacity and resources. A significant development at
the subregional level was the recent establishment by
ECOWAS of a 120-member Community Parliament
and a Community Court of Justice.

5

S/2001/434

25. The problems associated with weak governance
were identified as issues of major concern by
interlocutors throughout the subregion. It was
acknowledged that many Governments had formulated
programmes to address a range of governance-related
issues, often in cooperation with the United Nations,
bilateral
donors
and
some
non-governmental
organizations. Little progress has been made, however,
on such issues as combating corruption, building
institutional capacity, promoting inclusive political
processes and popular participation, as well as
decentralization and strengthening the judiciary and
rule of law and respect for human rights. Considerable
international assistance and support is needed to help
improve governance practices.
2. ECOWAS initiatives
26. In 1999, ECOWAS adopted the Protocol on the
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management,
Resolution, Peacekeeping and Security, which provided
for the creation of several organs including the
Mediation and Security Council, the Council of Elders
and a department in the secretariat charged with
responsibility for peace and security issues. The
Mediation and Security Council has met several times
at the ambassadorial, ministerial and summit levels,
including on the situations in Côte d’Ivoire, Sierra
Leone and the border area between Guinea and Liberia.
The Mechanism also provides for the creation of an
early warning centre and situation room at the
secretariat in Abuja. This will be linked to observation
centres with zonal headquarters in Benin, Burkina
Faso, the Gambia and Liberia, which will monitor
political,
social
and
economic
developments
throughout the subregion. These centres are in the
process of being set up. Interlocutors noted that
international assistance would be required to improve
the early warning capacity of the secretariat and that
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Mechanism should be enhanced considerably to help
ensure that it becomes fully operational.
27. Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Mali,
Mauritania, the Niger, Senegal and Togo are bound by
the Accord de non-aggression et d’assistance en
matière de défense (ANAD) which was signed in 1977.
It has had some success in promoting peaceful relations
among its signatories. A process is now under way to
implement the decision made in 1999 by the ECOWAS

6

heads of State for ANAD to be harmonized with and
absorbed into ECOWAS.
28. An important and innovative element of
ECOWAS initiatives within the past decade to enhance
peace and security in the subregion has been its
deployment of peacekeeping forces to several of its
member States where conflict had broken out. Between
1990 and 1997, the Monitoring Group of ECOWAS
(ECOMOG) undertook a peace maintenance operation
in Liberia and it has been generally credited with
playing a vital role in the peace process that brought
the eight-year civil conflict to an end. ECOMOG was
also deployed in Guinea-Bissau and Sierra Leone. The
possible deployment of an interposition force along the
borders between Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone to
help prevent the armed incursions occurring in the area
remains under active consideration by ECOWAS.
29. However, in carrying out peacekeeping
operations, ECOWAS is severely hampered by lack of
financial resources and secretariat capacity to plan,
monitor, direct and sustain a force in the field. Other
problems include the lack of funds to organize,
maintain and effectively run peacekeeping training
institutions that it has established. ECOWAS countries,
therefore, urgently need international assistance for the
provision of technical assistance and operational
equipment for fielding troops both for ECOMOG and
for
United
Nations
peacekeeping
missions.
Government officials also need to be fully informed
about United Nations policies and procedures regarding
peacekeeping operations, particularly those regarding
reimbursement for troops and wet and dry lease
arrangements for equipment.
30. It was stressed to the Mission that the political
will exists among ECOWAS member States to help
contribute towards peacekeeping both through
ECOMOG or within United Nations peacekeeping
operations. They felt that, particularly for operations
within the region, West African troops were at an
advantage, being familiar with the culture, terrain,
climate and a number of other factors. However, lack
of equipment, training, logistical and technical
capacities were major inhibiting factors. It was felt that
the United Nations could do much more to help
countries in the subregion which were willing to
contribute troops to fulfil such shortfalls in
requirements. Several interlocutors stressed the
considerable economic strain that was placed on West
African troop-contributing countries and argued that

S/2001/434

those Governments should not have to use their own,
already meagre resources, for equipping troops for
peacekeeping operations.

at promoting peace and security within the Mano River
Union member countries.

31. With regard to the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) several interlocutors
indicated that, in view of the exigencies of the
situation, the force’s mandate should be changed to
peace enforcement. While the need for UNAMSIL to
deploy in strength into RUF-occupied areas in Sierra
Leone was generally acknowledged, the perceived
slowness in the further deployment of the force
throughout the country was widely criticized.

B. Human rights issues

3. Civil society initiatives
32. It was reaffirmed to the Mission that
representatives of civil society, often frustrated by their
perceived lack of power, are increasingly looking to the
United Nations, the international community, and
regional and subregional organizations for assistance
and partnerships to strengthen their ability to undertake
conflict prevention and resolution measures in their
own countries or areas. In some cases they have
adopted effective, multi-dimensional, coordinated and
regional collaborative approaches which build on the
use of local, national and regional resources including
traditional leaders and social networks. This is aptly
demonstrated by the Mano River Union Women’s
Peace Network, which links women from Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone, working at various levels, to
promote peace in the area. Network representatives
have recently met with the heads of State of Guinea,
Sierra Leone and Liberia to urge them to work together
to resolve the conflict in the Mano River Union area.
At the community level, a variety of initiatives are
under way, often using traditional cultural links, aimed
at cultivating a culture of peace.
33. Cooperation
between
intergovernmental
organizations within the subregion with civil society
organizations in the areas of conflict prevention and
management remains limited and could be strengthened
considerably. However, many of these organizations
remain in great need of international assistance to
increase their effectiveness which is often limited by
factors such as lack of resources and institutional
capacity. In this regard, the Economic Commission for
Africa, as part of the Mano River Basin initiative
which it is leading, is developing a project which
would provide support to civil society initiatives aimed

34. The Mission found that reports of violations of
human rights were widespread within the subregion.
Such violations ranged from the broader rights of
peoples to peace, security and development to abuses
against the rights of individuals. Human rights
defenders and members of opposition parties in several
countries have often been victims of arbitrary arrest,
unfair trials, torture and extrajudicial executions, or are
often forced to exile. While there are a number of
political parties, exercise of the right to demonstrate is
often met by disproportionate use of force by security
forces. The problems of mercenary activities,
especially in conflicts in the Mano River Union
countries, need to be addressed. Non-state entities,
including the business sector, must be held accountable
for illicit activities related to areas of conflict,
including arms trafficking and mineral resources
smuggling.
35. The importance of ensuring human rights
protection at all times, including during periods of
political transition and conflict situations, was
recognized. In this regard, the situation at the border
between Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia, including
the lack of access to the population and large numbers
of refugees and internally displaced persons, is a matter
of grave concern.
36. The need to ensure that there is no impunity for
human rights violations was raised by several
interlocutors. Particular reference was made to the need
for truth and justice in Sierra Leone, as part of a
national reconciliation process, in view of the atrocities
against civilians that had, and continue to be,
perpetrated there, particularly by RUF, during the
decade-long conflict. In this regard, the decision to
establish a Truth and Reconciliation Commission and
the prospect of the establishment of the Special Court
are welcome. However, the confusion about who might
be prosecuted by the Court and the delays that might be
caused by the decision to fund it through voluntary
contributions were voiced as issues of concern.
37. With regard to some country-specific situations,
the international commission of inquiry for Côte
d’Ivoire, which the Secretary-General was requested by

7

S/2001/434

the Government of Côte d’Ivoire to establish, to
investigate human rights violations, including mass
extrajudicial executions, during the presidential
elections in October 2000 started its work in February
2000. The absence of institutional measures to address
the issue of truth and justice in Liberia is still
considered by many to be a major handicap in the
country’s transition to democracy and the rule of law.
38. Ethnicity, religion and citizenship have been
issues behind recent conflicts in several countries. This
has been the case in Nigeria, following the
proclamation of sharia law in several northern states.
Also, serious incidents of communal violence have
occurred in Lagos and elsewhere. In Côte d’Ivoire, the
concept of ivoirite has been perceived by many,
especially Muslims and people from northern parts of
the country, as an attempt to deny their right to
citizenship and participation in public life, raising the
spectre of ethnic and internal tensions. Violence against
foreigners has provoked the return of many West
Africans to their countries of origin, with consequences
for security and stability within the subregion.
39. The difficult situation in several West African
countries means that numerous groups of people are
particularly vulnerable to human rights violations,
including internally displaced persons, ethnic or
religious minorities, refugees, women and children.
Thus far the rights of victims of human rights
violations during armed conflicts or political
transitions have not been adequately addressed. Child
soldiers are still being actively recruited for armed
conflict. For children in certain areas, there is only
limited protection against trafficking and sexual abuse
and the number of homeless children is increasing.
Despite growing awareness, violence against women,
especially in armed conflicts, continues unabated as
many are subjected to sexual slavery, torture and
domestic violence and forced into prostitution. In the
field of economic and social rights, particular attention
was drawn to the lack of access to adequate education,
employment and health care in the subregion. This is a
particular problem for young people, who, lacking
education and employment opportunities, may be
drawn towards making a living through illicit
activities.
40. The six major United Nations human rights
treaties as well as the African Charter on Human and
Peoples’ Rights have been ratified by most of the
countries in the subregion. In practice, the

8

implementation of these standards has been lacking,
however. Many Governments have difficulty in
meeting the reporting obligations to international
supervisory committees on the measures taken to give
effect to the provisions of human rights treaties to
which they are parties. In addition, human rights
education remains weak and does not take fully into
account positive traditional values.

C. Economic development and regional
cooperation
41. The economies of the countries of West Africa
are generally very fragile and in some cases are
continuing to deteriorate. This is the situation despite
the abundant natural resource endowments which could
be harnessed to spur economic growth. Within the
subregion, the States members of the West African
Economic and Monetary Union (Benin, Burkina Faso,
Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, the Niger, Senegal
and Togo) have outperformed the other ECOWAS
countries, with an average growth rate of some 5 per
cent over the past 10 years. The repercussions of the
decline in economic performance in the past year in
Côte d’Ivoire, which normally constitutes 40 per cent
of the combined economic activity of UEMOA
countries, continues to be felt in countries throughout
the subregion. Contributory factors include the
departure from Côte d’Ivoire of thousands of workers
from other West African countries and the reduced free
circulation of goods and people.
42. The reduction in the price of many export
commodities from West African countries in recent
years and their high debt service obligations were also
noted as factors contributing to the economic decline.
Decreased import revenues have reduced the resources
available for development projects. For example,
interlocutors in Guinea-Bissau expressed concern about
the 40 per cent drop in the world market price of
cashew nuts, the main export commodity. In Togo
similar concerns were expressed regarding the price of
phosphates.
43. The issue of the external debt burden was raised
as a major concern by both government and nongovernmental interlocutors. It was noted, for example,
that the total eternal debt of Nigeria, at some $40
billion, is almost identical to its gross domestic product
(GDP). In Guinea-Bissau, the external debt stands at
more than 100 per cent of GDP. The ECOWAS member

S/2001/434

countries devote an average of between 20 and 60 per
cent of export revenues to external debt servicing. In
that context, interlocutors in most of the countries
visited viewed the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
(HIPC) programme as a useful initiative. Several felt
that the programme should reduce debt servicing
obligations substantially, so as to release resources for
economic and social development. In Guinea-Bissau,
Mali and Nigeria it was particularly stressed that,
without considerable assistance from the international
community, including savings from the HIPC
programme, progress towards democratization would
be undermined and democratic systems in place would
be threatened or at risk.
44. The subregional economic growth rate has lagged
behind the rate of population growth in past years, with
little to indicate that the situation will improve in the
near future, so that already high poverty levels are
likely to worsen. This is the case across the subregion,
from Côte d’Ivoire, where 18 per cent of the population
is living below the poverty line, to Guinea-Bissau,
where more than 80 per cent of the population lives in
poverty. The other indicators of social and economic
development, such as access to basic social services
including education, health services and potable water,
have also been severely constrained by the lack of
economic growth. The situation is even worse in
countries which have recently emerged from wars or in
which conflict continues. They are among the countries
in the world with the least capacity to provide their
citizens with access to basic services. For example,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra Leone are
among the 10 countries at the bottom of the UNDP
Human Development Index, a composite measure of
life expectancy and access to basic health and
educational services. Optimism was expressed by
several interlocutors, both within and outside
Government, that the economic situation would
improve in the near future. However, both state and
non-state actors must exhibit considerable political will
and commitment to implement reforms and initiatives
if the declining trends are to be arrested.
45. The serious problems associated with high rates
of unemployment in West African countries, in
particular youth unemployment, was generally stressed
to the Mission. This is viewed as a major factor
contributing to instability. It was noted that the
informal sector, which continues to flourish, is the
main source of current employment and is the area

which holds the strongest potential for future job
creation.
46. The causes of persistent economic stagnation and
the attendant increase in poverty and unemployment
levels are numerous and interrelated. The Mission
noted three factors of particular importance, the first
being the issue of governance and internal national
political dynamics. Prospects for economic growth are
generally higher in countries with more open and
participatory democratic systems, in large measure
because of the establishment of environments
conducive to business. For example, despite some
current difficulties in the economic and social areas,
Ghana, Nigeria and Senegal exemplify this
commitment to democratization and its corresponding
economic benefits. Conversely, inconclusive and
protracted political transitions, such as those taking
place in Côte d’Ivoire and Guinea-Bissau, in several
ways negatively affect prospects for stability and
economic growth. In Liberia and Togo, lack of political
dialogue between the Government and opposition
parties, problems of bad governance and human rights
problems which have led to the suspension of
economic assistance by some donors have further
worsened prospects for economic growth in the near
term.
47. A second factor is the weak institutional capacity
of most of the countries in the subregion. Most lack
qualified human resources and policy tools to respond
appropriately and in a timely manner to changing
domestic and international circumstances. Donors have
made important contributions to efforts to address some
of these capacity issues. A number of government and
civil society interlocutors pointed out the failure of
structural adjustment programmes in reducing poverty
and spurring economic growth. Consequently, alternative
and complementary programmes were being explored,
such as the poverty reduction strategies sponsored by
the World Bank and other partner-supported programmes
in governance and capacity-building.
48. The civil conflicts in several West African
countries constitute the third major factor constraining
economic growth and development. Years of civil war
in Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra Leone have
resulted in widespread destruction of social, economic
and physical infrastructure, the departure of many
skilled personnel, problems concerning control over
natural resources etc., so that capacity for economic
recovery has been drastically reduced. The importance

9

S/2001/434

of adequate international resources to assist such
countries to recover was mentioned by many
interlocutors. Without adequate intervention, the spiral
of instability in those countries, resulting from fragile
political institutions and weak economic growth, was
seen as likely to continue, with contagious effects
throughout the subregion.

of ECOWAS as the pre-eminent subregional
organization.
Several
interlocutors
saw
the
implementation of ECOWAS integration plans as one
of the surest ways to improve economic growth in the
subregion, improving the ability of West African
countries to effectively compete in the world market
and benefit from globalization.

49. The ECOWAS countries have shown resilience in
the face of the difficulties outlined, giving cause for
some optimism. Individually, through country-based
mechanisms, and collectively through subregional
mechanisms, particularly under the auspices of
ECOWAS and UEMOA, efforts are being made to
redress the situation. Regarding the country
mechanisms, a commitment by the Governments of the
Gambia, Ghana, Mali, Nigeria and Senegal to
implementing economic stabilization and reform
programmes necessary to facilitate economic growth is
manifest. Several interlocutors underscored the
importance of strengthening democracy, transparency
by government, political dialogue, and good
governance if further economic decline is to be halted.

52. In articulating the ideas of regional integration
and the mechanisms for its advancement, it was widely
felt that UEMOA, the Permanent Inter-State
Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel (CILSS)
and other subregional entities should become
specialized centres within the umbrella of ECOWAS.
They were seen as becoming complementary poles of
expertise to provide specific services to ECOWAS.
This arrangement could further accelerate the
integration of the countries in the subregion and
existing institutions within the ECOWAS secretariat.

50. A number of interlocutors expressed concern that
demands being made by international financial
institutions on the Government of Guinea-Bissau to
undertake fiscal reforms, combined with other factors,
could contribute to destabilizing the country unless
special efforts were made to simultaneously provide
support to address the mounting internal debt
accumulation and a comprehensive disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme. Similar
concerns were expressed concerning demands being
made on the Governments of Côte d’Ivoire and Guinea.
Several interlocutors felt that, while political dialogue
and respect for human rights in Côte d’Ivoire should be
encouraged, protracted delays in resuming economic
assistance might result in the unravelling of the
country’s economy, with grave implications for the
subregion. A holistic approach was called for which
simultaneously addressed the issue of political
dialogue, inclusion, security and stability as well as
economic support.
51. ECOWAS and UEMOA provide a framework of
mechanisms relating to the economic and social
spheres. These mechanisms aim to reinforce
subregional cooperation and integration and cover
issues including a common currency, freedom of
movement, trade, transport, agriculture and energy and
also security and defence, and the eventual emergence

10

53. It was affirmed to the Mission that ECOWAS had
made considerable progress towards the abolition of
visas and the establishment of borderless zones. The
two-track approach to currency convergence, which is
scheduled to permit the adoption by Ghana and Nigeria
of a common currency by the end of next year, and to
make it possible for the whole subregion to do the
same by the end of 2004, has made considerable
progress. Institutions have been set up in the subregion
to address aspects of these critical issues on which
discussions are continuing between ECOWAS,
UEMOA and other partners. ECOWAS has also
launched sector initiatives covering transnational roads,
the establishment of a power pool and a gas pipeline
linking Nigeria, Benin, Togo and Ghana, as well as a
common agricultural policy.
54. The weaknesses of the existing subregional
mechanisms, particularly regarding capacity and
financial and human resources, were acknowledged.
The need for cooperation among donors, both bilateral
and multilateral, across sectors and subregionally, to
provide adequate support to the ECOWAS secretariat
and its integration mechanisms was stressed. Currently,
donor response to the subregion, including that of the
United Nations system and the World Bank, was seen
as mainly country focused, delivered through a range
of bilateral and multilateral support programmes, with
very limited regional interventions.
55. The European Union’s regional programmes were
welcomed and collaboration among donors in such

S/2001/434

efforts across sectors and in collaboration with
ECOWAS was urged. In this regard, the new initiatives
by the World Bank, the African Development Bank and
USAID to implement regional strategies in the
subregion were well received and encouraged. It was
conveyed to the Mission that support for regional
cooperation and integration and the strengthening of
ECOWAS institutional capacity is critical to assist the
subregion to better deal with the challenges of
globalization in a rapidly changing world. A movement
from the current country-focused approach, even in the
implementation
of
subregional
and
bilateral
programmes, to a subregional approach was generally
urged, given the need for ECOWAS to be the main
engine of growth and stability in West Africa.

D. Humanitarian issues
1. Refugees, internally displaced persons and
population movements
56. Just over a decade ago, West Africa was a
markedly different place. There were about 20,000
refugees and a negligible number of internally
displaced persons. Today the situation is very different.
There are well over half a million refugees and over
670,000 internally displaced persons, all victims of
conflict in the subregion. The political and social
landscape, in particular that of the three Mano River
Union countries, is characterized by instability. Out of
a population of approximately 15 million people in
those countries, over 1.1 million are either internally
displaced persons or refugees. Sadly, all signs suggest
that, without concerted efforts to resolve what are
deepening rifts in the area, further deterioration is more
than likely to happen. Guinea, which is generously
hosting around 420,000 refugees from Liberia and
Sierra Leone, some for over a decade, has recently
become embroiled in conflict with Liberia, a situation
that has resulted in the displacement of 150,000 of its
own citizens.
57. The refugee caseload in Guinea constitutes
approximately 10 per cent of that country’s population.
Sierra Leone hosts 6,000 Liberian refugees and
500,000 internally displaced persons, while Liberia
hosts 70,000 refugees from Sierra Leone and 20,000
internally displaced persons. The 17-year-old conflict
in the Casamance area of Senegal continues to threaten
the stability of both Senegal and Guinea-Bissau, and
has itself produced over 41,000 internally displaced

persons. Landmines in both Casamance and GuineaBissau will prove a long-term hazard for civilians.
Senegal, while attempting to cope with the needs of its
own conflict-affected citizens, is making contingency
plans for possible refugee flows from Guinea, if the
conflict continues to spread. Additionally, GuineaBissau is beginning to see an inflow of Sierra Leonean
refugees from Guinea. While the Mission was aware
that the potential for a massive complex emergency,
not unlike that which is consuming the Great Lakes
region, has heightened significantly over the last six
months, the urgency of this situation was widely and
repeatedly stressed by the Mission’s interlocutors.
58. Until recently, refugees in the subregion have
been relatively sure that they could depend upon some
degree of protection from their hosts, with many of
whom they share ethnic affinities. As the political
tension has heightened between specific leaders, the
subregion is experiencing not only donor fatigue but
also host fatigue, which is emerging as tensions have
mounted within host communities that have often
shared their resources with refugees over the past
decade. Host communities are also aware of the
dangers of armed elements within their midst who have
infiltrated the refugee communities and put both host
and refugee communities at risk.
59. Insecurity has, in a number of areas, severely
constrained humanitarian operations. In the “parrot’s
beak” area of Guinea, lack of humanitarian access has
dramatically affected over 180,000 Sierra Leonean
refugees, 10,000 internally displaced persons and
60,000 civilians who are trapped and stranded with few
prospects for resettlement. Delivery of food and basic
supplies is proving exceedingly difficult. Targeting of
refugees by armed elements has led to many moving
from that area to Sierra Leone and further north into
Guinea. Protection of refugees and internally displaced
persons poses a major challenge for the humanitarian
community. Allegations of human rights abuses and
violations of international humanitarian law by armed
actors, the targeting of civilians, widespread looting of
food and belongings, the use of child soldiers, forced
conscription, the use of civilians as human shields, all
characterize the situation. A climate of impunity
prevails as the rights of refugees and internally
displaced persons are often violated. Armed groups
have also targeted humanitarian workers, through
hostage-taking and the recent killing of humanitarian
personnel.

11

S/2001/434

60. In recognition of these threats, UNHCR has
recently called for “safe corridors” to enable refugees
and internally displaced persons to flee the combat
areas to safety further north. Improving the physical
protection of refugees started by agreeing with the
Guinean authorities upon the necessity of ensuring
“safe access” and the “safe passage” of refugees
entangled in the war-torn areas of Guinea in order to
relocate them in safer areas of the country and provide
food and other basic assistance.
61. Internally displaced persons are also badly in
need of assistance. This was starkly apparent when the
Mission visited Pamelap in Guinea, once a rich and
dynamic town on the border with Sierra Leone, where
attacks by armed elements from Sierra Leone in recent
months have resulted in most of the residents fleeing
and the destruction of a great deal of property.
62. The Mission noted that most assistance to
Liberian refugees had been discontinued in Côte
d’Ivoire, Ghana and Guinea despite the fact that many
refugees have been compelled to remain in their host
countries because of insecurity and the absence of a
conducive environment for their return. As these
refugees receive very limited assistance, they are
competing with the host communities for scant
resources and have thus placed an enormous burden on
host Governments. Government officials in Côte
d’Ivoire and Ghana illustrated for the Mission how this
has aggravated an already fragile situation and has led,
in many instances, to security problems.
63. This lack of support for protracted refugee
caseloads poses what is a perceptible crisis of
conscience for humanitarian workers and creates a
sense of inequity in the camps that could contribute to
future problems. Of concern, in this regard, is the
possible recruitment of young refugees by rebel
groups, increased criminality among refugees, and
participation of some refugees in weapons trafficking
or other illegal smuggling, which could prove very
difficult and expensive to address in the long term.
2. HIV/AIDS pandemic
64. The HIV/AIDS pandemic poses a serious threat
to the development of Africa south of the Sahara.
Nearly 25 million Africans are living with HIV/AIDS
while another 14 million have already died from AIDS.
The consequences of HIV/AIDS in the social and
economic spheres have been devastating, as much of

12

the progress made in those areas in recent decades has
been severely undermined, or shattered. The
movements of people across borders as a result of
massive displacements contributes to the spread of the
disease, and easily renders preventive measures
ineffective, particularly as over 80 per cent of those
infected are unaware that they are carriers.
65. In West Africa, prevalence rates have been
increasing in some of the larger countries. Côte
d’Ivoire is already among the 15 worst-affected
countries in the world and the epicentre of the
epidemic in the subregion, with an adult prevalence
rate of close to 11 per cent. In Nigeria, over 5 per cent
of all adults have HIV, and in Ghana the infection rate
among the adult population is 3.6 per cent. The impact
of conflict in countries like Sierra Leone poses a
particular threat, in terms of a further spread of the
epidemic. In Sierra Leone, the adult prevalence is
currently close to 3 per cent. The prevalence rate in
other West African countries remains below 3 per cent.
In Senegal, government commitment to combating
AIDS, including through public awareness campaigns
which involve a wide range of national partners, has
helped to slow the spread of the disease.
3. Problems in the delivery of social services and
humanitarian assistance
66. In many countries an already overburdened
capacity to deliver social services is further stretched
by the persistent deterioration of living conditions in
rural areas, and an increase in urban poverty which
creates new problems in a resource-constrained
environment. Because of the economic crisis and
decreased job opportunities, self-employment, which
has been the most promising social adjustment
response along with the coping strategies of the
traditional culture, appears to have reached its limits.
The safety net constituted by family and
neighbourhood patterns of solidarity no longer
prevails. As a result, vulnerable social groups,
including female-headed households, children and the
elderly, have been forced to make a living in often
hostile environments plagued by crime, political unrest,
social violence and declining social services.
67. The consequences have been devastating and will
continue to be so for the foreseeable future, if political
will and initiative do not walk hand in hand with
humanitarian assistance and targeted economic and
social development programmes that can turn the tide

S/2001/434

of violence in countries in crisis in the subregion. In
this regard, the Mission noted with concern the
following issues:
• Weak coordination between humanitarian agencies,
government authorities and peacekeeping operations.
• Lack of adequate resources and appropriate
programmes that could be rapidly put in place to
stabilize post-conflict situations by efficiently
bridging the gap between the end of emergency
relief and the beginning of development assistance.
• Lack of a proper strategy by United Nations
humanitarian agencies to develop the institutional
capacity of local non-governmental organizations,
particularly in the management of emergency
situations.
• The poor interaction between international and
national non-governmental organizations in
complex emergency operations such as in Guinea.
68. In meetings with representatives of Governments
and civil society as well as with refugees, the Mission’s
attention was repeatedly drawn to the stark disparities
between the relatively meagre assistance provided for
humanitarian emergencies in Africa and the largesse
generated for such emergencies in Europe. A sense of
cynicism prevailed about the goodwill of the
international community towards helping solve the
critical structural problems and ensuring that the gap
between emergency relief and development is closed.

IV. Assessment and recommendations
69. One of the principal messages conveyed to the
Inter-Agency Mission to West Africa, by heads of State
and a range of other governmental and nongovernmental
interlocutors,
was
that
greater
subregional integration in the political, security,
economic and social spheres, with ECOWAS as the
main engine for the process, is a prime factor in
addressing the priority needs and challenges of the
subregion. There was a concerted call for international
partners to provide substantial assistance to ECOWAS
activities and initiatives in those spheres. Furthermore,
it was recommended that such assistance should be a
central focus in their policy, strategy, institutional
arrangements and programmes in West Africa, through
a holistic and well-coordinated approach. Several
interlocutors expressed the view that the United

Nations, as an impartial and objective actor, was the
most appropriate organization to effectively mobilize
the international community to work with the countries
of the subregion in promoting integration.
70. The linkages that exist between peoples and
communities in West African countries and the porous
nature of borders have resulted in a long tradition of
free movement and settlement of people across national
frontiers. This is particularly prevalent in areas where
people of the same ethnic groups are artificially
divided by borders. ECOWAS agreements that allow
for the free movement of West African citizens within
the subregion without visa requirements have
reinforced this trend.
71. In the past two decades, in particular, factors such
as conflicts and political instability have precipitated
large movements of people from one country to another
and also caused significant numbers to become
internally displaced. As a result, enormous pressures
have come to bear on communities’ facilities,
infrastructure and the environment in a number of
countries, straining their resources as they struggle to
cope with the situation.
72. These phenomena have created new, and often
conflicting, political security and human development
dynamics and precipitated serious security problems
and humanitarian crises in several countries. These
problems, together with those of economic
development and integration, transcend national
boundaries, affecting the entire subregion, with the
result that national programmes and sectoral
approaches have proved inadequate in mitigating them
and bringing about durable solutions. An integrated
subregional approach by the international community
has therefore become urgently needed to help prevent
the further emergence of conflicts, restore peace and
stability and promote economic and social
development. This was reinforced by many of the
Mission’s interlocutors who stressed the importance of
the United Nations and international partners
developing such a subregional approach to addressing
the priority needs and challenges facing West Africa.

A. A United Nations response
73. Integrated,
multifaceted
approaches
are
emphasized in the programmes of various United
Nations agencies and their relevance has been

13

S/2001/434

reinforced in the report of the Secretary-General on the
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa (A/52/871S/1998/318) and the Millennium Declaration and by
various global conferences organized by the United
Nations.
74. Several agencies, operational funds and
programmes within the United Nations system already
use
integrated
programming
approaches
in
implementing national and subregional programmes.
This approach has been facilitated by the decentralized
presence in West Africa of a number of United Nations
agencies, departments and programmes. For example,
the regional offices of key humanitarian actors such as
UNHCR, WFP and UNICEF were able to rapidly
identify the needs and obstacles and respond quickly,
and in a concerted manner, to the crisis in the Guinea
border area when it began in September 2000.
75. In another example of an integrated subregional
initiative, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, in response to the grave
dimensions of the humanitarian crisis in the subregion,
launched in 2001 its first subregional United Nations
Inter-Agency Appeal for West Africa, which addresses
needs in Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea, Liberia and Sierra
Leone. Humanitarian intervention is in the sectors of
nutrition, health, protection, water and sanitation, and
education. The Appeal does not only target refugees
and internally displaced persons, but has also taken an
innovative position with regard to assistance to host
communities and contingency planning for future
crises. Flexibility has also been built into the Appeal to
ensure that regional managers can redirect resources
from one country to the other or from one activity to
another, according to need. The principle of the Appeal
is that resources should follow and meet the needs of
beneficiaries wherever they are.
76. The development and implementation by the
United Nations system of a fully integrated,
comprehensive and broad-based subregional approach
to addressing the multifaceted problems and challenges
being faced in West Africa, as proposed by the
Mission, has a number of implications, particularly
regarding strategy and policy setting, institutional
arrangements and programme activities, for both the
United Nations and its partners.

14

B. Strategy and policy setting
77. It is the Mission’s view that the different strategy
and policy-setting mechanisms of the United Nations
system, in particular those of the agencies operating
within the subregion, should be streamlined to enhance
capacity for developing and implementing national and
subregional strategies and policies. These approaches,
policies and strategies should be developed and
implemented in partnership with ECOWAS.
Recommendations
• A mechanism for systematic and regular
consultations among entities of the United
Nations system for defining and harmonizing
national and subregional policies and
strategies should be established. Both national
and subregional concerns should be reflected
in programming strategies to facilitate holistic
programme development.
• In addition to Governments, United Nations
agencies, departments and programmes in the
subregion should consult more fully with
ECOWAS
and
other
subregional
organizations, international and national
partners and civil society in developing
cohesive strategies.

C. Institutional arrangements and
mechanisms
78. Effective implementation of a subregional
strategy requires the enhancement of working
arrangements within the United Nations system at the
subregional level. In this regard, a system of
collaborative mechanisms and periodic consultations
should be formalized.
79. It was evident to the Mission that the United
Nations urgently needs to enhance its capacity to
continuously monitor and to influence the political,
security, economic and social situations in West Africa.
In this context, the United Nations should further
develop frameworks and institutional arrangements that
would allow it to intensify its collaboration with
ECOWAS and other major actors in the subregion with
regard to conflict resolution and management and in
addressing other major issues.

S/2001/434

Recommendations
1. United Nations office for West Africa
• To enhance United Nations capacity and
collaboration in the subregion, and to
complement existing activities, a United
Nations office for West Africa should be
established. The office, to be headed by a
Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, would have the following main
functions:
• Assisting Headquarters and subregional
offices of the United Nations system in
setting integrated policies and strategies for
activities in West Africa;
• Monitoring and reporting on political,
security, human rights, humanitarian and
development issues in the subregion;
• Ensuring harmonization of United Nations
system activities in the political, security,
human rights, humanitarian and development
areas with those of ECOWAS and other
subregional and relevant organizations,
focused on addressing priority needs and
challenges in the subregion, as identified by
the United Nations, ECOWAS and other
relevant organizations;
• Monitoring and supporting the relevant
decisions and activities of ECOWAS and
other subregional organizations;
• Lending support to national and subregional
peace-building efforts and promoting the
integration of a conflict prevention dimension
in national and subregional activities.
2. Integrated mission task force
• The Secretary-General’s Inter-Agency Task Force
on the West African Subregion at Headquarters
should be transformed into an integrated mission
task force on West Africa. The integrated mission
task force, which will be discontinued once the
West Africa office has become operational, would
focus on implementation of key recommendations
in this and other related reports and work closely
with the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for West Africa and backstop the
activities of his or her office at the beginning of its
operations.

D. Programming approach
80. A more fully integrated and broad-based
subregional approach by the United Nations system
should emphasize programming strategies undertaken
in partnership with subregional organizations,
Governments, international partners, non-governmental
organizations and civil society groups. Common
frameworks should be developed bringing together the
United Nations system, including the Bretton Woods
institutions, in a unified approach at both the national
and subregional levels. The protocols of collaboration
and memoranda of understanding already existing
between some agencies represent a positive step in that
direction. The various country level United Nations
development assistance frameworks, common country
assessments and poverty reduction strategy papers
should be harmonized and should form the basis for
developing a subregional approach. Harmonization and
coordination need to be a prime focus in collaboration
between all agencies.
81. United Nations country teams, Governments and
development partners should strive to work together
through collaborative processes such as the
development assistance frameworks, at the national and
subregional level, so as to facilitate the development of
complementary and comprehensive programmes.
United Nations country teams should involve all
partners in the preparation of common country
assessments and in the preparation of the national
frameworks. Subregional offices, working with
partners, should prepare common subregional strategies
and frameworks, preferably based on existing
instruments such as the consolidated appeal, common
country assessments and development assistance
frameworks.
Recommendations
• Consideration should be given to the
development of a subregional United Nations
development assistance framework that would
particularly target issues of a cross-border
nature. This umbrella subregional development
assistance framework should complement
national common country assessments and
development assistance frameworks.
• Steps should be taken to ensure complementarity
in national development assistance frameworks,
common country assessments and poverty

15

S/2001/434

reduction strategy papers when dealing with
common cross-border issues and priority areas
so that they form the basis for developing a
subregional development assistance framework.
• The subregional development assistance
framework should include a plan for strategic
peace-building and recovery activities, which
should serve for the mobilization of resources.
• The United Nations office for West Africa should
coordinate the development of a subregional
development assistance framework.
• Steps should be taken to ensure that country
teams, operating in countries where unstable
political and security conditions persist, are
strong and appropriately staffed. The Resident
Coordinator unit should be reinforced to
ensure strong leadership and coordination.

E. Specific issues
82. The Mission’s further recommendations for
action relate to specific issues within the following
general areas: peace and security; governance and
human rights; humanitarian assistance; and economic
development and regional integration.
1. Peace and security
(a) Conflicts in the Mano River Union area
83. The situation in Sierra Leone and its effects on
Liberia and Guinea, including the border areas between
the three countries, is a core issue in the general
framework of peace and security in West Africa. Most
interlocutors stressed that achieving a peaceful
resolution of the conflict in the Mano River Union
countries is crucial in any approach aimed at
addressing priority needs and challenges in the
subregion.
84. The difficulties and uncertainties of the situation
in Sierra Leone were apparent from the discussions that
the Mission held there. The six-month extension of the
mandate of the Government of Sierra Leone provided
by Parliament will terminate in September 2001.
Meanwhile, the prospects for successfully holding
elections in December 2001, as proposed by President
Kabbah, and the legitimacy of the elected candidate
remains uncertain while RUF still occupies a

16

significant part of the country’s territory and around
half the population are refugees or internally displaced.
Furthermore, the preparations for the elections will
need to be urgently expedited if the proposed date is to
be met. It is the Mission’s view that presidential and
legislative elections should be planned and organized
to ensure inclusive participation by all the political
groupings, including RUF. However, it is unclear how
much power the new political and military leadership
of RUF is able to exert over the whole group, at a time
when key decisions need to be made.
85. The deployment of UNAMSIL is still constrained
by the availability of troops. Also, issues regarding its
mandate as a peacekeeping or peace-enforcement
operation continue to be the subject of discussion in the
subregion. Meanwhile, it appears that the Government
is increasingly looking towards abandoning the twotrack approach and favouring a purely military option.
Such a solution would be difficult to achieve, given the
insufficient training and lack of combat experience of
the Sierra Leone army, the unpredictability of RUF
strength and the nature of guerrilla warfare in a highly
forested country. Another question that remains to be
answered is the future of the Lomé Peace Agreement:
whether it will be resuscitated as a whole or partially. It
is not clear whether the political aspects of the
Agreement, such as power sharing and the
transformation of RUF into a political party, can be
reconciled with the fact that RUF has not respected the
provisions of the Agreement and that many of its
leaders are suspected of committing gross violations of
human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law. In addition, there is a need for truth,
justice and accountability, if a process of national
reconciliation is to succeed. Moreover, the possible
further six-month extension of the mandate of the
Government or, alternatively, the establishment of a
transitional government until elections can be held are
issues to be given due consideration.
86. The uncertainty in Sierra Leone is echoed by
uncertainty in relations between Liberia and Guinea
and the risk of the further spread of conflict within the
Mano River Union countries. The alliance between the
Guinean army and ULIMO-K has proved to be
unpredictable and the indiscriminate bombing of border
areas of northern Sierra Leone by Guinean forces has
implications in terms of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Sierra Leone and the effects of the bombing
on the civilian population in that country. There is also

S/2001/434

uncertainty about the fate of the large population of
Sierra Leonean and Liberian refugees, owing to
difficulties in ensuring their safe return and in finding
safe areas for their resettlement in Sierra Leone and
Liberia. The reported recent flare-up of fighting in
Lofa County on the northern border of Liberia with
Guinea is an added source of concern.
87. In view of the nature of the conflict along the
borders of the Mano River Union countries, the
expansion of the mandate of UNAMSIL to cover
Guinea and Liberia might need to be considered,
particularly given the urgent need to place an
interposition force along the border areas between the
Mano River Union countries and ECOWAS plans to
deploy such a force, and given the request by President
Taylor for the deployment of a force to monitor the
borders of Liberia and to verify compliance with the
recent sanctions being proposed by the Security
Council. This issue needs to be carefully considered by
the appropriate departments of the United Nations
Secretariat.
Recommendations
• The United Nations and the Government of
Sierra Leone should maintain the two-track
approach to the resolution of the Sierra Leone
conflict.
• Consideration should be given to the possible
consequences for the peace process of the plan of
the Government of Sierra Leone to hold
presidential and legislative elections in December
2001.
• Consideration should be given to the expansion
of the mandate of UNAMSIL to cover the three
Mano River Union countries to take into account
the interrelations between the implementation of
the Lomé Peace Agreement and implementation
of United Nations sanctions on Liberia and the
monitoring of the borders between the three
countries.
• The three heads of State of the Mano River
Union countries should continue to be urged to
meet without further delay and devise ways to
resolve the crisis peacefully.
• An international conference for the mobilization
of donor support for Guinea should be convened
as soon as possible to enable it to cope with the

current humanitarian crisis, which is also posing
a threat to its sovereignty and territorial
integrity, as well as the country’s political
stability.
(b) Conflict prevention and resolution
88. The political turmoil and civil conflicts in several
West African countries and the potential for the rapid
spread of instability within the subregion underlines
the need for the development of a comprehensive
approach which would focus, through a range of
activities, on addressing the many interlinked root
causes of these problems. Concerted international
attention, support and assistance, combined with
political will and determination by national actors to
bring about peaceful change, could do much to turn the
situation around.
89. It is the Mission’s view that much more could be
done to improve capacities within the subregion in the
area of conflict prevention and resolution. In this
regard, the proposed United Nations office for West
Africa, which would improve the United Nations
reporting and policy development capacity and enhance
collaboration with ECOWAS, would play an important
role. In particular, steps should be taken to assess the
needs and identify the specific areas of collaboration
between the United Nations and the ECOWAS
secretariat in the area of early warning. Additionally,
the strengthening of the capacity of the ECOWAS
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management,
Resolution, Peacekeeping and Security would do much
to enhance the organization’s capacity to respond more
effectively and provide the assistance necessary to
prevent the emergence of further conflict or to bring
about peaceful conflict resolution.
Recommendations*
• The United Nations system and the
international community should take steps to
strengthen the ECOWAS Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management, Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Security.
• Cooperation with the United Nations system
should be enhanced for the development and
implementation of the ECOWAS early
* In addition to those made during the meeting between the
United Nations and regional organizations held in New
York in February 2001.

17

S/2001/434

warning system including the central observer
office and the zonal bureaux. Support should
be given to enable the ECOWAS secretariat to
provide logistical and technical electoral
assistance to member States.
• Support should be provided for the
development of ECOWAS public outreach
capacities.
• Greater support should be provided for civil
society initiatives in the area of conflict
prevention.
• To prevent the recurrence of conflict in
Guinea-Bissau, where the political and
security situation remains volatile, urgent
financial and capacity-building assistance by
international development partners, including
the Bretton Woods institutions, is required.
The United Nations (Department of Political
Affairs) and UNDP should jointly organize a
round-table donor conference to mobilize
resources for Guinea-Bissau, as a follow-up to
the one organized at Geneva in May 1999.
• A more active role should be played by the
United Nations United Nations in ameliorating
the relationship between Côte d’Ivoire and its
neighbours.
(c) National reconciliation
90. Lack of national reconciliation is a major cause of
conditions of political instability and insecurity
affecting several West African countries. It is,
therefore, one of the priority challenges to be addressed
within the framework of a subregional approach to the
problems faced by the subregion.
91. In countries experiencing political instability,
genuine dialogue between government leaders and
opposition groups on a range of political, human rights,
rule of law and socio-economic issues is often needed
so that progress can be made towards democratization
and implementation of good governance practices.
Such dialogue will often necessitate compromises,
particularly on the government side, so that a
deterioration of the situation into civil conflict can be
averted.
92. In Togo, for example, for a number of years,
several factors, principally the one-party State culture
and a lack of confidence between the ruling and

18

opposition parties, have resulted in a lack of will on
both sides to engage in meaningful dialogue. This
meant that differences on a number of important issues,
such as those necessary for the organization of
presidential and legislative elections and other steps to
improve governance practices, were not resolved. The
resulting lack of progress led to several, often violent,
crises erupting in the country in recent years. In this
regard, mediation by the European Union, the
international organization of La Francophonie and
other organizations has been instrumental in paving the
way for the presidential elections, which were held in
June 1998, and the legislative elections scheduled for
October 2001.
93. In Côte d’Ivoire , the policy of ivoirité, pursued
by the Government of President Henri Konan Bedié,
since it came into power early in 1994, has been a
prime factor contributing to the division of the country
along ethnic, religious and geographical lines and the
political instability which led to that Government’s
overthrow by the military in December 1999. The
policy, which also prevented the former Prime
Minister,
Alassane
Ouatarra
from
contesting
presidential elections in October 2000, has also
strongly contributed to the instability during the
transition from military to civilian rule. Pressure from
the European Union, bilateral development partners
and the international community has since helped pave
the way for the national reconciliation efforts currently
being undertaken by the Government and the
opposition parties. The United Nations has repeatedly
urged the Ivorian leadership to engage in genuine
national dialogue.
94. In countries emerging from conflict, or where
conflict is ongoing, the need for dialogue and national
reconciliation is particularly pressing. This is evident
in Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra Leone,
where such efforts are urgently needed if the necessary
conditions for durable peace and stability are to be
achieved.
95. Some West African countries have taken steps to
resolve internal crises through a process of national
reconciliation. The Governments of Mali and the Niger
successfully resolved conflicts with Tuareg groups in
the northern parts of their countries. The national
reconciliation
process
involved
reintegration
programmes for former combatants, decentralization of
governing structures and greater political inclusivity of
representatives of the group so that there is greater

S/2001/434

local autonomy. Democratization has also made
particular progress in Benin, Cape Verde, Ghana,
Nigeria and Senegal, where commendable efforts are
being made to promote democratic governance as a
foundation for peace and stability.
Recommendations
• The proposed United Nations office for West
Africa, in partnership with other entities of the
United Nations system, ECOWAS and other
international partners, should make national
reconciliation an important part of a
comprehensive
approach
towards
the
challenges facing the subregion.
• The United Nations should be more actively
involved in activities aimed at promoting and
supporting national reconciliation, as soon as
early warning signs of a potential crisis in any
West African country are evident.
• The United Nations should support and follow
up on the efforts of national leaders, in
particular those of Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra Leone, to
honour their commitments to reconciliation
with opposition groups.
(d) Peace-building
96. The need to improve capacity for preventive and
post-conflict peace-building activities, in a cohesive
and multidimensional manner, was frequently stressed
to the Mission. To be truly effective, peace-building
must be based on a cohesive and coordinated United
Nations approach at the country and subregion levels,
building on existing infrastructures and instruments.
United Nations agencies and departments in the field
need to establish appropriate mechanisms to link with
the programming and analysis, concerning early
warning and prevention measures, which are carried
out at Headquarters.
97. Peace-building processes need to begin well
before a particular conflict has subsided. Greater
collaboration between Governments and their national
and international partners, and more flexibility on
financial conditionalities from those partners, are
needed to address the many problems impeding the
maintenance or restoration of peace and sustainable
development. The capacity of Governments and
subregional institutions needs to be strengthened to

enable those bodies to contribute more effectively
towards promoting peace and development.
Recommendations
• Preventive and post-conflict peace-building
measures should be among the primary
activities of appropriate national and proposed
subregional programmes, in particular the
common country assessment, United Nations
development
assistance
framework
and
consolidated appeal processes.
• International financial institutions should review
their procedures concerning conditionalities
related to financing arrangements for countries
in transition, or where conflicts are ongoing,
taking into account the range of problems such
countries face.
• Particular emphasis should be placed on the
political dimensions of peace-building as a tool
for conflict prevention, including in those
countries where there is no peace-building
support office.
• In developing subregional peace-building
programmes, there should be close collaboration
with Governments, national and international
partners and especially subregional institutions.
The capacity of Governments and subregional
institutions to develop and implement peacebuilding activities should be strengthened.
• In countries where the situation is particularly
unstable, the common country assessment and
development assistance framework processes
should be flexibly adapted, as necessary, to
meet the challenges of the situation.
Representatives of all relevant United Nations
agencies and departments should participate
in a joint United Nations analysis and recovery
plan.
(e) Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
98. A number of complaints were voiced over the
failure
of
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration programmes carried out in the subregion
because of the inadequacy of the reintegration
programmes. As a result of failure to provide sufficient
integration assistance, many demobilized former

19

S/2001/434

combatants had rearmed and regrouped into new
militias or were resorting to banditry.
99. The view was widely held that many of these
militias were supported by some state and non-state
actors and are being used to destabilize Governments
in some countries and to cause insecure conditions in
certain areas in order to facilitate the illegal
exploitation of mineral resources and conduct arms and
drugs trafficking.
100. In countries where disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes are to be implemented,
the reintegration aspects should feature as priority
areas in joint analysis and recovery plans, common
country assessments and development assistance
frameworks, and form part of country-level
programmes of United Nations agencies. To reinforce
the
effectiveness
of
reintegration,
economic
revitalization should be undertaken simultaneously in
the country emerging from conflicts so as to provide
prospects of employment and economic growth.
Recommendations
• Owing to the zonal nature of conflicts in the
subregion, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes should be conceived
and implemented simultaneously in postconflict situations in the countries affected by
the conflicts and should involve all the parties
concerned. Such zonal programmes would be
particularly
applicable
to
post-conflict
situations in the Mano River Union countries
and in the complex situation prevailing in
Guinea-Bissau and the Casamance area of
Senegal.
• Adequate and sustained funding should be
provided for job training, job creation,
counselling, rehabilitation and resettlement
programmes for all ex-combatants.
• Support should also be provided to family
members
accompanying
demobilized
combatants as well as to the host communities.
• Reintegration aspects should feature as
priority areas in any joint analysis and
recovery plans, common country assessments
and development assistance frameworks, and
should form part of the country-level
programmes of United Nations agencies.

20

• Special attention should be paid to economic
revitalization
programmes
in
countries
emerging from conflict.
(f) Stopping the proliferation of arms in the
subregion
101. Widespread concern was expressed about the
proliferation of small arms and new militia groups
throughout the subregion. Existing mechanisms to
monitor and to curtail the illegal flow of arms are
grossly inadequate. Consideration should be urgently
given to strengthening the capacity of ECOWAS,
working with its member States, to monitor and curb
the illegal flow of arms and the formation of militia
groups. This should entail the better integration of
mechanisms such as the Programme for Coordination
and Assistance for Security and Development into
ECOWAS and the establishment of additional
complementary mechanisms.
102. Such mechanisms would need to focus on the
supply as well as the recipient side of arms flows into
the subregion. Those involved in the illicit arms trade
need to be particularly targeted. States Members of the
United Nations, in general, and members of the
Security Council, in particular, should act individually
and collectively to identify and prevent suppliers
operating in their own countries from illegally
supplying arms to actors in conflict areas. International
agreements aimed at preventing illicit arms flows and
prohibiting the use of mercenaries should be fully
enforced. Sanctions or other appropriate measures
should be applied against countries contravening the
terms of these agreements.
Recommendations
• The United Nations system and the
international community should develop and
adopt policies and activities aimed at
strengthening the capacity of ECOWAS to
monitor and curb the illegal flow of arms and
the formation of militia groups.
• The Programme for Coordination and
Assistance for Security and Development and
other mechanisms aimed at stemming the flow
of arms should be better integrated with
ECOWAS. Adequate financial assistance
should be provided to ECOWAS to that effect.

S/2001/434

• Concerted measures should be taken by the
appropriate United Nations organs, including
the Security Council, and international and
national partners to identify those engaged in
the illicit trade of arms to West Africa and to
stem their activities.
• Member States should ensure compliance with
international agreements prohibiting the use of
mercenaries. Consideration should be given to
the imposition of sanctions against countries
contravening such agreements.
• A self-enforced code of ethics concerning the
activities of legitimate business operations in
areas where conflicts are occurring should be
developed.
• The United Nations should urge all States that
are either maintaining or assisting militias to
immediately end their support and disband
them.
(g) Ending the use of child soldiers
103. Children make obedient and cheap soldiers
capable of instilling terror in civilians and opposing
forces alike. Some are forced to fight while others
volunteer, motivated by a desire to escape poverty.
Adolescent youth in the throes of identity formation are
particularly vulnerable to the lures of combat. Those
who survive are often physically injured and
psychologically scarred, having lost years of schooling
and socialization.
104. Tens of thousands of children have, in
contravention of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, had a direct role in the fighting in Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone. Tens of thousands more have
been displaced, lost one or both parents, or otherwise,
been affected by the disruption and insecurity visited
upon their young lives.
105. In conformity with the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, the Accra Declaration on War-Affected
Children in West Africa and the related Plan of Action,
there is an urgent need for ECOWAS and the
international community to (a) ensure that those who
recruit and arm children or deliberately harm and target
them are held accountable and do not profit from such
actions; and (b) incorporate child rights and the
protection of children in armed conflict into trading

programmes for military forces and other security
agencies.
Recommendations
• State and non-state actors using children as
combatants should immediately take steps to
disband all groups in which child soldiers are
operating. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for West Africa, working in
cooperation with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict and other appropriate United
Nations institutions and ECOWAS, should
certify that such disbanding has taken place.
• The adoption of sanctions against countries
using child soldiers should be considered.
• All
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration programmes should include
education and vocational training and other
appropriate assistance for child soldiers.
• Mechanisms for reuniting children with their
families should be strengthened.
• The United Nations, together with ECOWAS,
should devise military training manuals and
programmes
incorporating
international
human rights and humanitarian law, focused
particularly on children’s rights.
• Governments should ensure that training
programmes for military forces and other
security agencies include the issue of children’s
rights.
• Technical and financial support should be
provided to the ECOWAS secretariat’s Child
Protection Unit, which is dedicated to the
protection of war-affected children, emergency
assistance, humanitarian and human rights
issues, including early warning capacity and
adequate vocational training for children.
• The capacity of ECOWAS to monitor the
implementation of, and adherence to,
international instruments on the rights of the
child, and to monitor contraventions of the
provisions of those conventions, should be
strengthened.

21

S/2001/434

(h) Child trafficking and child labour
106. Trafficking of children for economic purposes is
widely practised in several West African countries. In
the underworld of human trade, children are used for
purposes such as prostitution, begging and soliciting,
construction work, as workers in shops, factories and
plantations and as domestic servants. These children
are often abused, exposed to hazardous working
conditions, confined in the workplace, denied
education, basic health care, adequate nutrition, leisure
time and the safety and security of their families. Many
lose their lives in the process. All lose their basic
human rights.
107. In West Africa, millions of young people are
affected by this brutal trade. Child trafficking is a
complex reality and trafficking networks are generally
informal and secretive in nature, making information
gathering and the identification of networks and
traffickers extremely difficult. In addition, it is often
difficult to distinguish between illegitimate and
legitimate movements of children across borders.
108. Studies have revealed established trafficking
routes, involving private individuals and groups,
through Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Côte
d’Ivoire, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Mali, the Niger,
Nigeria and Togo. Some of these countries are
suppliers of the children, others are receivers and
transit countries, while some are both suppliers and
receivers. Only limited data are available on crossborder movement patterns and mechanisms, and even
less on trafficking within countries.
Recommendations
• Governments should be urged to sign and/or
ratify all appropriate conventions and relevant
optional protocols.
• Vigorous advocacy campaigns should be
mounted, aimed at high-level decision makers,
and support provided for studies to strengthen
knowledge about child trafficking.
• Governments should be urged to establish
institutions to combat child trafficking within
the framework of appropriate mechanisms,
such as national commissions.
• Transit, supplier and recipient countries of
trafficked children should be encouraged to
reconfirm the outcome of the subregional

22

consultation on child trafficking, held at
Libreville in February 2000, and to adopt
national plans of action to stem child
trafficking both within and across national
boundaries.
• Strong partnerships should be forged among the
key players — non-governmental organizations,
Governments, regional and international
organizations and the private sector — at the
local and international levels. In this regard, it
is important to expand such partnerships to
the cocoa and chocolate industry through a
compact and a code of ethics for child-labourfree products.
• In order to prevent traffickers from
perpetrating their trade with impunity, the
countries of West Africa should adopt
legislation with appropriate sanctions to serve
as deterrents to traffickers and their
collaborators. Key partners in the effort to
achieve harmonization of legal provisions
could be ECOWAS and the International
Organization for Migration.
(i) Women and armed conflict
109. The
effects
of
armed
conflict
fall
disproportionately on women. The numbers of
households headed by women increases significantly
during conflict, as many are widowed through war, lose
contact with their husbands, or have husbands who are
themselves actors in the war arena. Women are often
forced into long-term sexual relations and/or forced
labour by more powerful men who are in control of
their fate, and prostitution is a common feature of
conflict situations.
110. In Sierra Leone, since the signing of the Lomé
Peace Agreement in July 1999, although the conflict
has generally subsided, civilians have been victims of
human rights abuses, women and girls being subjected
to systematic rape, particularly by rebel forces. In
recent weeks, Sierra Leonean refugees trying to move
from Guinea border areas through RUF-held territory
on their way to safer areas have been subjected to
abuse by RUF forces. Women returnees report many
cases of abduction, rape and other forms of sexual
abuse.
111. The important role played by women within the
subregion in the areas of conflict resolution,

S/2001/434

management and reconciliation was acknowledged by
the Mission. A number of women’s groups are well
organized and have established links with groups in
other countries with whom they are developing
common action plans, in addition to mobilizing civil
society to bring pressure to bear on political and
military leaders to peacefully resolve conflicts.
Recommendations
• There should be greater consultation between
the United Nations system and women’s
groups, along with civil society in general, in
developing programmes and initiatives.
Through such partnerships, direct involvement
in conflict resolution and recovery activities of
women’s groups should be enhanced.
• The capacity of women’s groups, which is
often limited by lack of expertise and
resources, should be enhanced so that they can
play the fullest possible role in initiatives
aimed at promoting peace, security, respect for
human rights, and development. This capacitybuilding dimension should be integrated into
all United Nations peace-building and
development activities in the subregion.
(j) Peacekeeping
112. Several interlocutors were critical of a number of
United Nations peacekeeping policies, in particular, its
approach to peacekeeping initiatives within the
subregion.
This
criticism
included
perceived
inadequacies of mandates, delayed response to
emergencies and inadequate support to African
contingents operating in peacekeeping efforts in the
subregion. Many felt that the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone should be
strengthened or changed to peace enforcement.
113. Troop-contributing countries provide contingents
to United Nations peacekeeping operations either under
the so-called “wet” or “dry” leasing arrangements.
Under the wet leasing arrangement, the troop
contributors must fully equip and sustain their troops
and they are reimbursed for this, whereas under the dry
leasing arrangement varying degrees of support are
provided by the United Nations. Many West African
troop contributors have opted for a wet leasing
arrangement when a dry leasing arrangement would
have been more within their means. Due to the strain

on already overstretched resources associated with the
provision of peacekeepers by Governments, a number
of interlocutors stressed the need to review the
arrangements for systems of support to peacekeeping
contingents so that major equipment and logistical
assistance are provided by the United Nations. The
experience in Sierra Leone has demonstrated that the
wet lease arrangement with the African contingents has
not worked. Under instructions from the SecretaryGeneral, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
has been working to address this problem together with
troop-contributing countries. Several interlocutors also
complained that the procedure for obtaining
reimbursements from the United Nations is unduly
cumbersome and that there are inordinate delays in
receiving payments.
Recommendations
• The United Nations and the international
community should do more to assist West
African countries that are willing to provide
peacekeeping troops but find that meeting
United Nations requirements regarding
equipment and sustainment are unduly
burdensome.
• Representatives of potential troop-contributing
countries should be adequately informed about
United
Nations
rules
and
regulations
governing the wet and dry leasing policies. The
dry lease option, which is more commensurate
to the means of West African countries, should
be systematically proposed.
• The United Nations should strengthen the
capacity of ECOWAS to implement its
programmes and plans in the area of
peacekeeping,
including
through
the
strengthening of ECOWAS headquarters
arrangements, training centres and the
provision of logistical and technical support,
when required.
(k) Implementing targeted sanctions
114. The recent adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 1343 (2001), regarding Liberia, was
discussed with interlocutors in the context of the
current crisis in the Mano River Union countries. The
belief was generally expressed that, despite the arms
embargo imposed by the Security Council on Liberia

23

S/2001/434

since 1992, arms were widely circulating inside the
country. Regarding the sanctions on Liberia adopted by
the Security Council in resolution 1343 (2001), several
interlocutors were of the view that the threat of such
sanctions might be more effective than their actual
imposition. Concerns were voiced by Liberian civil
society representatives that the Liberian people and not
just the Government might be adversely affected by the
proposed sanctions. They felt that steps should be
taken to ensure that the effect of the sanctions on the
population as a whole was minimized, including on
diamond miners working in Liberia. In this regard, they
stressed that the sanctions being proposed should be
well targeted to ensure that they do not worsen the
already difficult humanitarian and socio-economic
situation in Liberia.
115. It was widely felt that, in dealing with Liberia,
close cooperation would be needed between the
Security Council and ECOWAS, and that it was
necessary to adopt a two-track approach, involving
punitive action and dialogue with the Government of
Liberia, in order to achieve the required results.
Recommendations
• The Security Council should dispatch a
monitoring mechanism to Liberia to verify the
country’s compliance with the terms of the
resolution prior to the deadline of 7 May 2001,
after which the sanctions could come into
effect.
• There should be close collaboration between
the monitoring mechanism, and other
mechanisms established by the United Nations,
and the monitoring committee recently
established by ECOWAS.
• Should the sanctions be imposed, the United
Nations should work to ensure that they are
effectively implemented, including through
cooperation concerning their implementation
among the countries of West Africa, both
individually and collectively.
• Any sanctions imposed should be well targeted
to ensure that their impact on the general
Liberian population is minimized

2. Governance and human rights
116. Poor governance and human rights violations are
among the main causes of conflict in the region. It is
important that local communities and people are
empowered in a democratic process to ensure that they
have a voice and can be effective participants in the
governance of their countries. Dialogue between
Governments and opposition parties, as well as
dissident groups, needs to be encouraged to promote a
genuine process of national reconciliation, including
the issue of accountability where gross violations of
human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law might have occurred.
117. Judicial systems need to be reinforced, the
independence of judges and lawyers promoted and
their impartiality protected. This will help ensure
respect for the rule of law and protection of the human
rights of all, without discrimination. Freedom of
association and freedom of the press need to be
ensured. Respect for human rights is non-negotiable.
118. It was particularly highlighted in Ghana, GuineaBissau and Nigeria that democratization ran the risk of
failing if people did not perceive that they were gaining
any “dividends”, in particular improvements in the
economic and social conditions, from the adoption of
democratic principles. An essential tool for conflict
prevention and management is the support given to
States in transition to allow adequate delivery of social
and economic programmes to ensure that social
discontent does not jeopardize the democratic process.
119. Human rights concerns cut across the issues of
peace, security and development. A human rights
dimension should be part of all activities aimed at
conflict prevention, management and resolution
programmes at the subregional and national levels.
Support should be provided to subregional institutions
for the promotion of human rights. Support and
assistance should be provided in the field of human
rights education including a culture of tolerance and
raising awareness about human rights through
information
campaigns
and
new
information
technologies. The development of subregional and
national plans of action and the establishment of
subregional institutions for the promotion and
protection of human rights will strengthen national
capacities and requires United Nations support.
120. Greater partnership with civil society groups will
be essential in developing programmes to promote

24

S/2001/434

participatory democracy, respect for human rights and
better governance practices by Governments. In this
regard, the United Nations should do more to support
relevant activities of subregional civil society groups,
including women’s, youth and religious organizations.
121. A situation exists of impunity for gross human
rights violations and war crimes as well as economic
crimes. Justice and truth are essential to national
reconciliation and must be sought, especially in
countries in transition. Non-governmental entities and
the business sector need to be held accountable for
illicit activities which often help to prolong conflict.
122. Under the United Nations programme of technical
cooperation in the field of human rights, OHCHR
works with Governments, civil society and national and
regional institutions on institutional capacity-building
for the promotion and protection of human rights. A
technical cooperation project has been designed to
strengthen the capacity of ECOWAS to integrate
human rights in all activities and assist in organizing
and developing a subregional action plan focusing on
vulnerable groups and conflict prevention.
123. Religious, ethnic and regional tensions in several
West African countries, particularly Côte d’Ivoire, the
Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Nigeria and Senegal, are a
threat to peace, stability and development in the
subregion. West African countries should make use of
the preparation for, and follow-up to, the World
Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, to be held at
Durban, South Africa from 31 August to 7 September
2001, to stimulate national discussions on these issues
and take practical steps to combat ethnic, religious and
other kinds of discrimination.
124. Cooperation with the human rights machinery,
including the mechanisms of the Commission on
Human Rights and the treaty monitoring system, could
provide useful tools for the countries to take stock of
problems and devise strategies. For example, visits by
Special Rapporteurs on mercenaries, summary
executions, religious intolerance and the right to
education could be requested by Governments in the
subregion. Civil society should be educated on the use
of the international procedures for the promotion and
protection of human rights.

Recommendations
• Education programmes on the fundamentals of
the democratic process should be further
developed and implemented.
• Strong support should be given to States in
transition for social and economic programmes
to help prevent levels of social discontent that
would jeopardize the democratic process.
• Judicial systems need to be reinforced to help
ensure the effective application of the rule of
law and justice and prevent human rights
abuses.
• A human rights dimension should be part of
national and subregional programmes of
conflict
prevention,
management
and
resolution.
• Assistance should be provided to subregional
institutions for campaigns for the promotion of
human rights, including through new
information technologies.
• Assistance should be provided for the
development
and
implementation
of
subregional and national plans of action, and
subregional institutions for the promotion and
protection of human rights should be
established.
• The role of non-State actors, including the
business sector, in zones of conflict in West
Africa should be carefully examined. Steps
should be taken to hold these entities
accountable for any illicit activities which
exacerbate conflict.
3. Provision of humanitarian assistance
(a) Refugees
125. Concern was expressed about the presence of
large numbers of refugees close to the border between
Guinea and Sierra Leone. As experience has shown in
countries in conflict, such as Burundi, Liberia,
Rwanda, Senegal and Sierra Leone, this situation not
only poses threats to the security of the host country
but also involves the risk that the refugees may be
infiltrated or attacked by armed groups. Corrective
steps need to be taken, from the outset of any refugee
movements into neighbouring countries, so as to ensure

25

S/2001/434

enforcement of international and OAU conventions
regarding the settling of refugees far enough from the
border for their security. In keeping with those
conventions, it is imperative and urgent that the Sierra
Leonean refugees, currently in the “parrot’s beak” area
of Guinea, continue to be moved to safer areas.
126. In transferring the refugees, effective measures
should be taken to ensure that militia groups or armed
elements do not infiltrate their ranks and to prevent the
enlistment of refugees by militias within the camps. To
this end, the Government of Guinea should do its
utmost to guarantee safe haven to the refugees and the
international community should provide the necessary
assistance and support.
127. The Mission noted that assistance to Liberian
refugees has been significantly reduced in Côte
d’Ivoire, Ghana and Guinea. The official reason given
for this was that the prevailing conditions in the
country were conducive to their return and that Liberia
had been at peace for three years. Many refugees have
chosen to remain in the host countries, however, since
they do not consider that the security conditions in
Liberia and the environment are conducive for their
return. As the Liberian refugees receive very limited
assistance, many are in competition with the host
community as they strive to meet basic needs, putting
an undue burden on host Governments. This has also
aggravated an already fragile situation, sometimes
causing security problems. The criteria which have
caused this reduction in assistance to these Liberian
refugees now appear obsolete and should be reviewed.
128. As already noted, many Governments and civil
society interlocutors, including representatives of
refugee communities, were highly critical of the
inclination of international donors to provide much
higher levels of funding for humanitarian emergencies
and assistance programmes for refugees and internally
displaced persons in Europe than in Africa, where large
gaps between needs and funding were invariably found.
Recommendations
• In conformity with the relevant international
and OAU conventions, refugees in the
subregion should be settled far enough from
borders of host countries to ensure their
security.
• In this regard, Sierra Leonean and Liberian
refugees, currently in the “parrot’s beak” area

26

of Guinea, should continue to be moved to
safer areas. Adequate and timely support will
have to be provided to the Government of
Guinea and all agencies concerned to ensure
the smooth implementation of this process.
• Effective measures should be taken to ensure
that militia groups or armed elements do not
infiltrate the ranks of refugees being
transferred to safer areas and that refugees are
not enlisted by militias within camps.
• The Government of Sierra Leone should
ensure that adequate preparations are made
for the reception of refugees opting for
voluntary repatriation including through the
identification of safe repatriation zones within
Sierra Leone, in close cooperation with
UNHCR
and
UNAMSIL,
and
other
international and national partners.
• Assistance needs to be targeted to both refugee
and host communities.
• The Government of Guinea should do its
utmost to guarantee safe haven to the refugees,
with the international community providing
necessary assistance and support.
• The criteria which have caused the reduction
in assistance to the Liberian refugees in Côte
d’Ivoire, Ghana and Guinea should be
reviewed. In the meantime, assistance should
be provided immediately in those cases where
the conditions for safe and voluntary return of
these refugees to their communities of origin
are not met.
• International donors should particularly
review
their
practices
for
funding
humanitarian programmes for refugees and
internally displaced persons to ensure that
there is consistency in covering requirements
and needs wherever they occur worldwide and
that disparities are eliminated.
(b) Ensuring safe access and safe passage
129. In view of the security situation along the borders
between Guinea and Liberia, the Mission noted that the
targeted emergency response of humanitarian agencies
in addressing the security concerns of both refugees
and staff is welcomed. The principle of “safe access
and safe passage for refugees” must be applied in order

S/2001/434

for humanitarian agencies to provide effective
assistance to refugees, internally displaced persons and
host communities. To this effect the commitment of
both the host Government and militia groups is
essential. It is therefore recommended that agreement
be reached at the subregional level, which would
guarantee the application of this principle. The
principle of adequate protection and “safe passage”
also applies to all humanitarian workers.
Recommendations
• All fighting forces should commit themselves
to ensure safe access and safe passage to
refugees, internally displaced persons and
humanitarian agencies.
• Agreement should be reached at the
subregional level, which would guarantee the
application of this principle.
(c) Internally displaced persons and
host communities
130. In addition to the meagre resources devoted to
African refugees and internally displaced persons, the
severe impact on them is now threatening the
traditional offering of hospitality by West African
communities. It has also contributed to “asylum
fatigue” on the part of host communities and countries.
Recommendations
• United Nations agencies and concerned
Governments should design and implement
area-development programmes that would
cover basic social services including the health,
nutrition, education, water and sanitation
needs of returning refugees, internally
displaced persons and the host communities.
• National capacities will need to be reinforced
to better manage and service both internally
displaced persons and host communities.
• To meet funding requirements for these
initiatives,
consolidated
appeals
should
explicitly include programmes to meet the
needs of both internally displaced persons and
host communities.
• Effective reintegration and resettlement of
internally displaced persons should be treated
as an important component of any peace

process in accordance with the
Principles on Internal Displacement.

Guiding

(d) Security of humanitarian personnel
131. Concern over the security and protection of
humanitarian workers operating in the subregion has
risen in recent years. Incidents of hostage-taking,
killing and the abduction of humanitarian workers in
Guinea in the past several months have highlighted this
concern. Rebel groups operating in conflict zones
generally do not heed the principles of internationally
recognized conventions or rules concerning warfare.
Often it is difficult for United Nations agencies to
operate as the Organization is seen as being “on the
side” of the Government or that of an opposing entity.
Recommendations
• The safety of all humanitarian workers has to
be guaranteed by all parties to conflict so that
humanitarian assistance can be provided to
people in need.
(e) Funding
132. The
Mission
noted
with
concern
the
consequences of funding shortfalls on the provision of
humanitarian assistance and the security of
humanitarian workers. Assistance in such critical
sectors as education, income generation, community
services and capacity-building and those ensuring basic
life-sustaining activities for refugees and internally
displaced persons is being reduced or cut. This trend
needs to be reversed by raising donor awareness of the
long-term negative impacts of funding reductions on
peace, stability and security. United Nations agencies
have a critical role to play in raising this concern with
key donors.
133. The Mission noted that in West Africa, as
elsewhere, there is a reluctance on the part of the
international community to devote resources to conflict
prevention and peace-building measures even though
huge costs are involved in dealing with situations after
conflicts have erupted.
Recommendations
• Adequate and timely funding should be
provided by donors to support conflict
prevention and humanitarian assistance and
development programmes.

27

S/2001/434

• Funding should be sufficient to meet the
security needs of humanitarian workers.
4. Economic development and regional integration
(a) The poverty environment
134. Poverty is pervasive in the subregion, with about
50 per cent of the population living on less than $1 a
day. The ongoing crisis in the Mano River Union
countries and political instability in several other
countries make prospects for arresting the economic
decline uncertain. In addition, approximately 50 per
cent of the population in the subregion are less than 15
years old and state investments in education and health
care are very low. This high poverty level constitutes
an ever-increasing crisis for youth as it is accompanied
by high unemployment and diminishing opportunities
for the involvement of youth in economic growth and
development. This dismal situation provides a breeding
ground for the recruitment of youth into militias and
their involvement in other illicit activities.
135. Several interlocutors noted the sizeable increase
in unemployment and poverty in recent years in urban
areas. For example, over the past 10 years, the part of
the population living below the poverty line in Abidjan
has risen from 1 to 20 per cent. The prospects for an
improvement in the situation for the urban poor
appears bleak, with the stagnation in job creation in the
formal sector and the near saturation in the informal
sector. Programmes to assist in accelerating economic
growth, coupled with debt reduction measures, would
go a long way in reversing these negative trends.
136. Several interlocutors noted the negative effects of
corruption on the development of the subregion. Some
interlocutors, referring to the debt problem, indicated
that some of the loans contracted by previous
Governments and for which the citizens and
Governments are now being held accountable were not
used for the benefit of the countries concerned. It was
considered that corrupt governmental officials and
others had siphoned off large amounts of money into
private ventures and their own bank accounts. Those
interlocutors, while condemning corruption in their
own countries, also criticized the imposed obligation of
paying for debts which had not been used to benefit
their countries.
137. Many civil society interlocutors were of the view
that many socio-economic problems were compounded

28

by corruption among government officials, past and
present, and individuals who abetted them. They were
of the view that corruption which was rampant in many
Governments in the subregion had contributed to the
prevailing
conditions
of
poverty
and
underdevelopment. They cited, for example, failed
privatization programmes which transferred national
assets to government officials and those abetting them.
They were also very critical of unscrupulous business
people who continue to assist some Governments and
non-state actors to exploit raw materials in the
subregion, the profits from which did not benefit
national treasuries. The interlocutors also expressed the
view that government expenditures should be allocated
to reflect the priority needs of the people. They called
for a reduction in military expenditures and an increase
in development spending.
(b) Economic integration
138. The Mission is of the view that special attention
should be paid to issues concerning subregional
integration, in particular those relating to the
realignment of subregional institutions working on
integration and the harmonization of donor
interventions
to
respond
comprehensively
to
subregional initiatives promoting integration.
139. Regarding the realignment of subregional
institutional groupings working on different facets of
integration, the Mission noted that most interlocutors
saw ECOWAS emerging as the main centre for
integration. It was acknowledged that the strength and
efficiency of ECOWAS institutions and mechanisms,
and its ability to respond effectively to all the
challenges of integration in a reasonable time frame,
depended on commitment to support them.
140. Interlocutors envisaged a central role being
played by ECOWAS in subregional integration with
complementary roles by UEMOA, BCEAO, CILSS,
ANAD, the Mano River Union and other such
groupings. The argument conveyed to the Mission and
worthy of support is that ECOWAS should be
strengthened to emerge as the pre-eminent
organization, while at the same time other subregional
institutions should be assisted to allow them to evolve
into service centres, providing specific support services
within an ECOWAS-led integration process. In this
regard, for example, it was mentioned that UEMOA
and BCEAO, which are more advanced than ECOWAS
in issues of financial and economic integration, could

S/2001/434

be instrumental in providing service and technical
support to ECOWAS. The interlocutors recognized the
need to support ECOWAS in those areas that would
improve its capacity as a driving force towards
integration. Support is needed for capacity-building in
the secretariat itself and to revitalize and enhance
mechanisms dealing with the broader issues of early
warning and conflict prevention, law, judiciary and
human rights, common currency and economic issues,
including tariff structures and freedom of movement, as
well as investments in infrastructure that will broaden
economic space and markets.
141. A second matter, linked to the issue of
integration, is the harmonization of support and
approaches by international actors. In this regard, there
was general endorsement of the need to develop
holistic and comprehensive approaches to a variety of
issues, including conflict prevention and management.
For example, several interlocutors felt that any
approach to the crisis in the Mano River Union
countries should use a holistic and integrated approach,
and might require a larger role for subregional
organizations. The need for harmonization of support
and approaches will require the United Nations system
and the international donor community to work
together more closely in designing programmes that
respond to the needs of the subregion. The institutional
arrangements at headquarters and in the subregion
should also be geared towards supporting collaborative
and comprehensive interventions generally using a
subregional or zonal approach.
142. Several interlocutors expressed appreciation for
efforts already under way in subregional programming,
such as those of USAID, the European Union and
several United Nations agencies including the World
Bank and ECA. In their view, such efforts would
accelerate the integration process if they reinforced
mechanisms and initiatives already launched by
ECOWAS which are at various stages of
implementation, including initiatives in the areas of
peace and security, energy and transport, policy
harmonization and freedom of circulation of people
and goods. Coordinated support to ECOWAS initiatives
would enhance the organization’s capacity to accelerate
integration and, by working through or alongside
ECOWAS initiatives, would enhance collaboration
among all partners and ECOWAS within a shared
framework.

Recommendations
• Strategic intervention programmes should
focus on economic growth and a lessening of
the debt burden, as a critical means to create
an enabling environment for economic growth
and development. Poverty reduction can only
occur as a direct result of accelerated and
equitable economic growth in a relatively debtfree environment.
• Socio-economic intervention programmes must
be geared, in particular, towards alleviating
the growing youth unemployment crisis.
• The international community should consider
the strengthening of EOWAS in those areas
which better enable it to act as a driving force
towards subregional integration.
• The international community should support
efforts by ECOWAS, UEMOA and other
subregional institutions to create a framework
for integration in which ECOWAS occupies a
central position.
• Support should be provided for capacitybuilding in the ECOWAS secretariat, as well as
to revitalize and enhance mechanisms dealing
with the broader issues of early warning and
conflict prevention, law, judiciary and human
rights, common currency and economic issues,
including tariff structures and freedom of
movement, as well as investments in
infrastructures that will broaden economic
space and markets.
• Institutional arrangements at headquarters
and in the subregion should also be geared
towards
supporting
collaborative
and
comprehensive interventions generally using a
subregional or zonal approach.
• To enhance the capacity of ECOWAS to
accelerate economic integration, development
partners should support the organization’s
mechanisms and activities in the following
general areas:
Agricultural development and food security
Industry, science, technology and energy
Environment and natural resources
Transport, communications and tourism

29

S/2001/434

Trade, customs and statistics
Education programmes for women and
enhancement of their roles in promoting peace
and development.

V. Follow-up
143. The Inter-agency Mission recommends that the
present report be communicated to ECOWAS, the
Organization of African Unity, the World Bank, the
European Union and major international bilateral and
other multilateral partners and that appropriate
arrangements be made to further the discussion with
those organizations and partners on the implementation
of a subregional comprehensive approach to addressing
the multi-faceted problems facing West Africa.
144. Following successful implementation in West
Africa, subregional comprehensive approaches should
be explored in other parts of Africa, in close
cooperation with OAU and relevant African
subregional organizations.

30

S/2001/434

Annex
List of participants
The mission was led by the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Ibrahima Fall.
Department of Political Affairs
Godwin Jituboh, Senior Political Affairs Officer
Margaret Vogt, Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary-General
Kathryn Jones, Political Affairs Officer
Monique Zabal, Administrative Assistant
Department of Peacekeeping Operations
Major General Martin Luther Agwai, Deputy Force Commander, United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
Nancee Oku Bright, Chief, Africa Section, New York
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
Bacre Ndiaye, Director, New York Office
Economic Commission for Africa
Solomon Akpata (consultant), Regional Office for West Africa, Niamey
United Nations Development Programme
Anthony Ohemeng-Boamah, Country Programme Adviser, West Africa
Division, New York
United Nations Development Group Office
Paul Ares, Associate Director, New York
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Hervé Ludovic de Lys, Executive Assistant to the Regional Director for West
and Central Africa, Abidjan
Dillah Doumaye, representative in Dakar*
Abou Moussa, Regional Director for Central and West Africa, Abidjan**
United Nation’s Children’s Fund
Ndolamb Ngokwey, Deputy Regional Director for West and Central Africa,
Abidjan
* Mr. Doumaye participated in meetings in Guinea-Bissau.
** Mr. Abou Moussa participated in meetings at Bamako.
31

S/2001/434

World Food Programme
Felix Bamezon, Deputy Director, Liaison Office, New York
United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament, Lomé
Ivor Fung, Director
Economic Community of West African States secretariat, Abuja
Roger Lalcupo, Director, Legal Affairs Division

32
