Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

taken upon that report by the General Assembly at its
current session,1' to prepare for the twenty-fourth session of the Trusteeship Council a report on the early
establishment of. such information centres in which the
responsible positions would be occupied preferably by
indigenous inhabitants of the Trust Territories, and
further requests the Council to report on this matter
to the Assembly at its fourteenth session.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.
1277 (Xlll). Offers by Member States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of
Trust Territories
The General Assembly,
Having examined chapter VII, section C, of part I
of the report of the Trusteeship Council11 and the report
of the Secretary-General on offers by Member States
of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Trust
Territories, 15
Recalling that, in its resolutions 753 (VIII) of 9
December 1953, 1063 (XI) of 26 February 1957 and
1209 (XII) of 13 December 1957, the General Assembly recommended that the Administering Authorities
of the Trust Territories take all such measures as would
ensure the greatest possible use by inhabitants of the
Trust Territories of the scholarships and training facilities offered by Member States,
Noting that the major part of the scholarships offered
by Member States remain unutilized,
1. Takes not,e of chapter VII, section C, of part I
of the report of the Trusteeship Council and of the report of the Secretary-General on offers by Member
States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of
Trust Territories;
2. Reaffirms its resolution 1209 (XII) of 13 December 1957, and once again invites the Administering
Authorities to take all necessary measures consistent
with the interests and needs of the Territories and their
peoples to ensure that scholarships and training facilities offered by Member States may be utilized by inhabitants of the Trust Territories, and to render every
assistance to those persons who have applied for or
have been -granted scholarships or fellowships, particularly with regard to facilitating their travel formalities;
3. Requests the Member States offering scholarships
to take into account, whenever possible, the need to
provide travel funds to prospective students;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to give such assistance as is possible, and as may be sought by the
Member States concerned and by the applicants, within
the framework of the procedures laid down by the
Trusteeship Council ;
5. Reques.t•s the Secretary-General to include, in his
future reports to the Trusteeship Council, detailed information concerning the actual use of scholarships and
training facilities offered by Member States for the
education of inhabitants of the Trust Territories;
6. Requests the Trusteeship Council to resume, at its
sessions held in 1959, the consideration of this question
"See resolution 1335 (XIII).
uofjicial Records of the Trusteeship Council, Twenty-second
Session, Annexes, agenda item 12, document T /1377.

33

and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
fourteenth session ;
7. Decid86 to place this question as a separate item
on the provisional agenda of its fourteenth session.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.
1278 (Xlll). Economic aid for Somalia
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1206 (XII) of 13 December
1957 in which it requested the Trusteeship Council to
explore the possible means of furnishing, after 1960, the
necessary technical and financial assistance to Somaliland under Italian administration,
Noting the special report made to the Trusteeship
Council by the Administering Authority on the extent
of the assistance which will be necessary, and the estimate made therein of an annual budget deficit of $5
million, 16
Bearing in mind the encouraging trends in the economic development of the Territory, and the statement
of the Government of Somalia17 that these trends may
mean that external financial assistance will be required
for a period considerably less than the twenty years
forecast by the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development,
1. Notes from the report of the Trusteeship Council
that the Administering Authority and the Government
of Somalia are continuing to explore possible sources
of financial aid for the Territory after 1960, and that
they will inform the Trusteeship Council, when conditions in the Territory are next considered, regarding
the results of these consultations ;
2. Welcomes the statement of the representative of
Italy9 in regard to the various sources from which assistance has been secured or is in prospect, thus indicating that the problem is progressing satisfactorily
towards its solution ;
3. Expresses the hope that, at the appropriate time,
the authorities of the Special Fund, already established
under General Assembly resolution 1240 (XIII) of
14 October 1958, the Secretary-General, the specialized
agencies concerned and the Technical Assistance Board
will give sympathetic consideration to the requests for
assistance made on behalf of the Government of Somalia,
taking into account the needs of the country and the
principles of the Expanded Programme of Technical
Assistance, in accordance with the request made by the
Econor,1ic and Social Council in its resolution 660
(XXIV) of 30 July 1957;
4. Requests the Trusteeship Council at its twentyfourth session to consider the prospects of further assistance from the Special Fund, from the Expanded
Programme of Technical Assistance and from the
specialized agencies, and to report to the General Assembly at its fourteenth session so that the Assembly
may have a complete pictun~ of the economic prospects
of Somalia when that Territory achieves independence
in l 9ro.
782 nd plenary meeting,
.
5 December 1958.
1
• See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirteenth
Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/3822), vol. I, part II, chap. I,
paras. 106-127.
17
See Official Records of the Trusteeship Council, Twentysecond Session, 921st meeting.
