S/PV.8962

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8962

nd meeting
Monday, 7 February 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Polyanskiy/Ms. Evstigneeva. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
General issues relating to sanctions
Preventing their humanitarian and unintended consequenses
Letter dated 2 February 2022 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/86)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

2224425 (E)
*2224425*

S/PV.8962

General issues relating to sanctions

07/02/2022

Expression of thanks to the outgoing President

Ms. DiCarlo: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to address the Security Council on this
important issue.

The President (spoke in Russian): I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to Her Excellency Ambassador Mona Juul,
Permanent Representative of Norway, for her service as
President of the Council for the month of January 2022.
I am sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Juul and
her team for the great diplomatic skill with which they
conducted the Council’s business last month.

Sanctions remain a vital Charter of the United
Nations-based tool available to the Council to ensure
the maintenance of international peace and security. As
stressed when the Council last met to discuss this topic
(see S/PV.8018), they are not an end in themselves.
To be effective, sanctions should be a part of a
comprehensive political strategy, working in tandem
with political dialogue, mediation, peacekeeping and
special political missions.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
General issues relating to sanctions
Preventing their humanitarian and unintended
consequences
Letter dated 2 February 2022 from the
Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General (S/2022/86)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Iraq, Mali,
South Sudan, the Sudan and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; and Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/86, which contains the text of
a letter dated 2 February 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting
a concept note on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
2/28

There are currently 14 Council sanctions regimes.
They support conflict resolution in Libya, Mali, South
Sudan and Yemen. They aim to deter unconstitutional
changes of Government in Guinea-Bissau. They curb
the illicit exploitation of natural resources that funds
the activities of armed groups in the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Somalia. They constrain the proliferation activities of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the
terrorist threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, Al-Qaida and their affiliates.
United Nations sanctions are no longer the blunt
instrument they once were. Since the 1990s, they
have undergone considerable changes to minimize
their possible adverse consequences on civilian
populations and third States. The most-applied targeted
measures include standardized humanitarian and other
exemptions. In the case of arms embargoes, exemptions
are routinely granted for the import of non-lethal
equipment necessary for humanitarian actors to operate
in conflict zones. In the case of travel bans, exemptions
are routinely provided for medical or religious reasons or
to participate in peace processes. Exemptions to assets
freezes allow payment for food, utilities and medicines.
Moreover, the Security Council has instituted
standing humanitarian exemptions in the Somalia
and Afghanistan regimes, as well as case-by-case
humanitarian exemption systems in the Libya, Yemen
and Democratic People’s Republic of Korea regimes.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006), which oversees sanctions on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, has approved 85 of the 100
exemption requests received since 2017. The Committee
has also granted multiple timeline extensions in
recognition of the logistical challenges created by the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
2224425

07/02/2022

General issues relating to sanctions

In recent years, the Council and its sanctions
committees have increasingly sought to obtain firsthand information on possible adverse consequences
for civilian populations and third States. They have
done so through regular briefings by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and by
the Secretary-General’s Special Representatives
for Children and Armed Conflict and on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. Sanctions committee Chairs also
regularly travel to countries under sanctions, and the
committees frequently meet with country as well as
neighbouring officials.
Sanctions are continually adjusted in response to
changes on the ground, with due regard for their impact
on civilian populations. In recent years, the Council
terminated the Eritrea sanctions and significantly
narrowed down the scope of the arms embargo on
the Central African Republic. On the other hand, in
response to a new serious threat to peace and security
in Somalia, in 2019 the Council imposed a ban on
improvised explosive device components.
I should also note that, in the past decade, only one
Member State has reported facing special economic
problems arising from Council sanctions.
The past decade has also shown that sanctions can
do more than limit the influx of arms and ammunition
or the financing of armed groups in conflict-based
situations. Almost all the sanctions regimes supporting
conflict resolution now include designation, or listing,
criteria intended to uphold international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. They have
served as leverage to bring about positive outcomes for
people at risk. For example, the prospect of sanctions
has opened the space for child-protection actors to
negotiate the release of children by armed groups in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Importantly, more than 50 individuals and entities
have been designated or put on sanctions lists by the
Council or its committees for involvement in conflictrelated sexual violence, the use of children in armed
conflict, migrant trafficking, attacks on humanitarian
workers and obstruction of the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, among other international humanitarian
law criteria. They include Sultan Zabin, the director
of the criminal investigation department in Sana’a for
torture and sexual violence in conflict, and Ahmed Ag
Albachar, self-proclaimed president of the humanitarian

S/PV. 8962

commission of the Kidal region in Mali, for obstructing
the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
The imposition of sanctions solely for such acts is
a relatively recent and welcome step. Its use sends an
unmistakeable signal about the Council’s commitment
to ensure accountability for violations and abuses
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
The evolution from comprehensive to targeted
sanctions has marked a sea change in this area of
the Council’s work, but some concerns remain about
unintended consequences and adverse effects of Council
sanctions. De-risking policies and over-compliance are
probably two of the most important problems facing
humanitarian actors. Financial actors and other service
providers may impose additional conditions, increase
their costs or simply refuse to provide the requested
goods and services, thereby inhibiting the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.
The continued difficulty in reviving the banking
channel for humanitarian transfers to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea since its collapse in 2017 is
a prime example of such challenges. Such difficulties
can be compounded when financial actors and other
service providers are obliged to comply with multiple
sanctions regimes as well as counter-terrorism and
anti-money-laundering regulations across the globe.
In trying to abide by a wide range of applicable
measures, such actors sometimes adopt an overly
broad interpretation of what is required by sanctions
regimes, often in contradiction with the interpretation
of humanitarian actors.
More can be done to reduce the possible adverse
consequences of sanctions. The humanitarian
community, and much of the world, warmly welcomed
resolution 2615 (2021), which carves out a humanitarian
exemption to the sanctions regime on Afghanistan.
Similar standing exemptions in other sanctions regimes
could go a long way to respond to the critical needs of
civilian populations.
Various Council resolutions make it clear that
sanctions are,
“not intended to have adverse humanitarian
consequences for the civilian populations”.
Other resolutions require that Member States ensure
that their implementation measures comply with
their obligations under international law, including

22244253/28

S/PV.8962

General issues relating to sanctions

humanitarian and human rights laws, as applicable.
It is extremely important to recall those provisions at
every opportunity.
Member States can further minimize the burden
of additional due-diligence and reporting requirements
on humanitarian actors by keeping their domestic
legislation as close as possible to Security Council
language. In addition, the continued monitoring by
sanctions committees of the possible humanitarian
impact of sanctions is vital. Their Groups of Experts
may assist by gathering information about the possible
unintended impact of sanctions on humanitarian
activities, as appropriate.
It is also essential to increase cooperation with
humanitarian actors and the private sector. The
Inter-Agency Working Group on United Nations
Sanctions, established in 2014, has helped promote a
better understanding of, and a system-wide approach
to, sanctions. My Department, through the Security
Council Affairs Division, has launched other initiatives,
including training, to build capacities and increase
synergies among those key constituencies.
Lastly, allow me to touch briefly on the role of
the Office of the Ombudsperson. Its establishment in
2009 introduced a more robust due-process mechanism
available to individuals and entities seeking to be
removed from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/
Da’esh and Al-Qaida sanctions list. Providing fair
and clear procedures to all other designated entities
and individuals would render the sanctions tool even
more effective.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I thank you very much, Sir, for the
opportunity to speak to the members of the Security
Council today on this very important issue. I respect
the weighty responsibility that the Council holds under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. It
is the Council’s vital prerogative to devise measures
under Article 41 in the pursuit of international
peace and security, as we just heard so clearly from
Rosemary DiCarlo. I thank the Council for its recent
decision to confirm exemptions that have however
allowed humanitarian operations to continue in
Afghanistan, again as we just heard, through resolution
2615 (2021), adopted only in December.
4/28

07/02/2022

Sanctions are a fact of life in many humanitarian
relief operations. They affect our operations directly
and indirectly, as well as civilians, even when those
impacts are unintended. However smart and however
targeted they are, compliance with sanctions is a daily
element in the work of humanitarian agencies. They
can impact our logistics, our finances and our ability
to deliver. They can have such impacts. They can lead
to humanitarian projects delaying or stalling. Some
can threaten the well-being of a wider section of the
population in civilian society. I therefore welcome this
opportunity to provide a perspective on how sanctions
can affect humanitarian needs and our response.
United Nations sanctions and many of those enacted
by Member States are not the blunt instruments of the
past, as we heard clearly from Ms. DiCarlo. I stand with
her on all her assertions. As we also heard, the Security
Council moved from broad economic and sectoral
sanctions to more targeted sanctions in the 1990s.
We have seen cases where sanctions can positively
impact compliance with international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. As Ms. DiCarlo
mentioned, the threat of sanctions has pushed a number
of non-State armed groups to release children from
their ranks in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
United Nations sanctions are also designed to limit
unintended consequences, and I welcome the Council’s
clear consistent signals that they are not intended to have
adverse humanitarian consequences. I also welcome
the Council regular reaffirming that measures to
implement sanctions need to comply with international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
That should translate into ensuring that sanctions do
not indeed impede exclusively humanitarian activities
when conducted by impartial humanitarian actors.
In Somalia and, as mentioned, now in Afghanistan,
the United Nations sanctions regimes have shown
themselves able to adapt and carve out space for
humanitarian activities to continue. Those are two very
welcome examples.
Despite the attention to such risks and frequent
dialogue with the humanitarian community, United
Nations sanctions can nevertheless have negative
consequences for civilians and humanitarian operations.
Sanctions applied by Member States carry similar risks
and, in fact, often have a wider reach than sanctions
imposed by the United Nations.
2224425

07/02/2022

General issues relating to sanctions

Allow me to summarize some concerns over
the use of sanctions in countries already affected
by humanitarian crises, where already civilians are
vulnerable and institutions frequently fragile.
First, humanitarian access and principles can be put
under pressure by the demands of sanctions. Sanctions
can make it harder for humanitarian agencies to engage
and transact with listed individuals or entities that hold
significant control over the lives of entire populations.
In addition, humanitarian independence, neutrality
and, ultimately, impartiality can be undermined — for
example, by demands to vet and, potentially, exclude
individual recipients of humanitarian aid.
Secondly, banks and other commercial operators,
aiming to avoid any risk of penalty or prosecution, can
effectively deny services to humanitarian customers.
They may sever commercial relationships or make
routine transactions excessively slow and bureaucratic,
even when they are well within the permitted rules.
Broad exemptions — for example, those that we
now have on Afghanistan, adopted by the Security
Council and by some States — have provided essential
reassurances to humanitarian organizations. However,
as we again heard from Ms. DiCarlo in the context of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, service
providers and financial flows can remain throttled due
to overcompliance and de-risking.
Thirdly, commercial operators that trade food, fuel
and other necessities can also decide to err on the side
of caution, or overcomply. That can lead to shortages
and price rises. That is especially disastrous in fragile
countries already heavily dependent on food imports
and experiencing a humanitarian crisis.
Humanitarian carveouts, as we now have on
Afghanistan, can allow us to continue our programmes
for those at greatest risk. But, as we have said so vividly
in the case of Afghanistan, those cannot substitute for
commercial imports and basic State services.
Finally, when ministries and departments are
run by listed individuals, sanctions aimed at political
movements and figures can limit the provision of
social services and economic stability. In Afghanistan,
neither the Central Bank nor any Government entity
is sanctioned. Nevertheless, the risk that sanctioned
actors may benefit from transactions led financial
institutions in that case to effectively blacklist the
Afghan financial and commercial sectors. The same
chilling effect led many internationally funded projects

S/PV. 8962

to pause, withholding, for example, the payment of
teachers and hospital workers via ministry accounts.
As we know, a great deal of work and attention have
gone into rectifying precisely that situation. We are
much better off now that we were.
Mitigating the humanitarian impact of sanctions
therefore requires us to continue to review both the
way in which sanctions are designed and how they
are implemented and impact. I would like to suggest
some priorities.
I urge the Security Council and States Members of
the United Nations to ensure that sanctions applicable
in armed conflict do not impede the assistance
and protection activities of impartial humanitarian
organizations for persons who are not fighting,
irrespective of their allegiance or designation. In all
contexts, they should ensure that sanctions do not
restrict the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural
rights, including the right to food, water, shelter and
health. Sanctions should not have cascading secondary
implications that go beyond the focus of the action.
The Security Council and other jurisdictions
implementing sanctions should build comprehensive
humanitarian carveouts into the original legislation
from the outset, rather than through case-by-case
authorization procedures, which can be cumbersome
and inefficient. Carveouts should be smoothly translated
into national legislation to lessen the concerns of
humanitarian donors, non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and private companies. We saw that recently
with the United Kingdom’s very welcome swift
domestication of the United Nations carveout regarding
Afghanistan, which provides broad reassurances to
United Kingdom NGOs and their partners.
However, implementation is sometimes as
important as design, to which I just referred. I welcome
proactive efforts to build confidence — for example,
the European Union’s recent letters of comfort, which
provide reassurance to financial institutions. We also
saw that recently from the United States Administration
with regard to Afghanistan. I recall the United States
guidance that incidental payments and cases of aid
diversion to Al-Shabaab in Somalia would not be a focus
for sanctions enforcement, which was most welcome.
For their own part, humanitarian agencies can also
boost confidence by investing in risk management and
due diligence. Operations in Syria’s north-west — so
often discussed in the Chamber — are highly monitored,

22244255/28

S/PV.8962

General issues relating to sanctions

as the Council knows. That gives confidence that
humanitarian resources are used to provide assistance
to those who need it and not for any other purpose; it is
the essence of principled humanitarian action.
I have frequently used the words “can” and “may”
in these remarks, and I emphasize that the worries that
we have are often about the unintended consequences of
the chilling effect of sanctions where action is needed.
I think that action is beginning to be taken more often.
It is indeed our collective responsibility to ensure
that sanctions can be used to improve compliance
with international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and, equally, to ensure that they do
not have those unintended consequences for civilians
already caught up in humanitarian crises. I look
forward to continuing engagement with Member States
as we pursue efforts to that end.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of the Russian Federation.
I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo and Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths
for their assessments of the humanitarian aspects
of sanctions, which align with our approaches in
many ways.
Security Council sanctions are an important
instrument for the implementation of the functions
vested in the Council for the maintenance of
international peace and security. As one of the
strongest forms of response to threats to peace, such
sanctions must be applied with extreme care, as well as
irreproachably substantiated and nuanced. Leveraging
sanctions as a punitive weapon is unacceptable.
International sanctions should reflect the situation on
the ground and serve to further political processes,
while sanctions regimes should be subject to regular
review and modification, up to and including their full
lifting, where applicable.
We emphatically call for the targeted and flexible
nature of Security Council restrictions to become
standard practice. It is necessary to listen more
attentively to, and heed the views of, the authorities of
sanctioned States, as well to more realistically formulate
so-called benchmarks to prevent their morphing into
deliberately unattainable objectives.
6/28

07/02/2022

Based on our assessments, many of the Security
Council sanctions regimes currently in force no longer
correspond to the situation on the ground, hindering
the plans of national Governments in terms of
State-building as well as socioeconomic development.
Two examples in that vein are the situations in the
Central African Republic and the Sudan. Moreover,
the persisting sanctions against Guinea-Bissau are
completely anachronistic.
The collateral damage resulting from sanctions
measures should be taken seriously, as it manifests in
detrimental impacts on the national economy and the
lives and well-being of the population. That issue has
been further exacerbated against the backdrop of the
raging coronavirus disease pandemic. Unfortunately,
despite declarations that restrictive Security Council
measures should not affect the lives of ordinary
people, in practice international restrictions often lead
to a deterioration in the socioeconomic situation in
countries under sanctions.
In that connection, there is a need to fine-tune
the range of humanitarian exemptions provided for
in Council resolutions, including those that could
be leveraged for humanitarian organizations on a
permanent basis. It would be possible to consider drafting
lists of goods — not individual appellations — such
international commodity classification codes, which
should under no circumstances be listed as prohibited.
In addition, we draw inspiration from experiences
in the early 2000s, when, even before the imposition of
sanctions, preliminary assessments of their humanitarian
consequences were carried out. A daunting obstacle to
the full functioning of humanitarian exemptions are
so-called secondary unilateral restrictions, which are
introduced in addition to Security Council sanctions.
Under the threat of falling under harsh national and
sometimes extraterritorial restrictions, counterparties
refuse to conclude contracts for the procurement of
humanitarian assistance authorized by the Security
Council and transport operators to deliver it. There
are also difficulties with cargo insurance, and
banks say that it is impossible to conduct routine
monetary transactions.
Such problems can clearly be seen in the situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, where
secondary sanctions imposed by large Western
countries created a toxic atmosphere around Pyongyang
and resulted in widespread unwillingness to cooperate
2224425

07/02/2022

General issues relating to sanctions

S/PV. 8962

with it, even in those areas that are not subject to
international restrictions. It is no coincidence that the
Russian Federation, together with the People’s Republic
of China, is putting forward specific initiatives aimed
at overcoming that disastrous trend. If the Council is
truly thinking about ordinary Koreans, and not about
geopolitics, then those proposals warrant support.

measures by individual countries and groups of countries
is of growing concern. We view such measures as an
encroachment upon the prerogatives of the Council,
and thereby as hindering the maintenance of peace.
We interpret the practice of using such restrictions as
an infringement of the sovereignty of States and as
interference in their internal affairs.

It is impossible not to mention the situation
in Yemen, rightly characterized as the largest
humanitarian catastrophe of our time. The sanctionsrelated measures, imposed due to the unwillingness of
stakeholders to abandon their reliance on military force,
have interrupted supplies of food and fuel. As a result,
millions of people are suffering from malnutrition and
have limited access to drinking water.

The trend of the increasing use of unilateral
sanctions undermines the norms and institutions of
international law. Particularly intolerable are those
situations whereby individual countries, demanding
the implementation of their own sanctions restrictions,
target third-country economic operators operating
within the framework of their national legislation.
The extraterritorial implementation of sanctions
runs counter to the most basic norms of international
law — and there are many examples of that.

It is unacceptable for the banking systems of third
countries to profit off of Libya’s frozen assets, which
should be preserved for future generations of the country
in its post-crisis era. It is inhumane for those that are
elderly or terminally ill, who pose no threat to security,
to be forced to waste time waiting for permission to
travel abroad. Do such situations contribute in any way
to the Council’s credibility?
As for Afghanistan, resolution 2615 (2021) was of
key significance in clarifying that humanitarian aid is
not a violation of the sanctions regime provided for by
resolution 1988 (2011). We hope that it will help to avert
a humanitarian catastrophe in the country.
We are convinced that the Security Council
sanctions apparatus requires a strong dose of
humanization. In that regard, it is necessary to consider
ways to minimize the broad interpretation of sanctions
provisions, including perhaps through the fine-tuning
of terminology; by conducting a comprehensive
impartial assessment of the humanitarian consequences
of international restrictive measures; and by mandating
personnel on sanctions committees’ groups of experts
to monitor the impact of sanctions on the humanitarian
situation and increasing the required level of expertise
in that area. The authority to report to the Council on
the negative consequences of sanctions should also
be granted to specific Secretariat bodies, such as, for
example, the United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs.
The Russian Federation is traditionally guided by
the understanding that the only legitimate sanctions
regimes are those of the Security Council. In that
connection, the practice of applying unilateral coercive

The sanctions war against Syria has had an extremely
negative impact on the country’s internal situation,
provoking a further aggravation of the socioeconomic
crisis. Broad sectoral restrictions against Belarus
are aimed at destroying its competitive enterprises
and destabilizing the sociopolitical situation. A stark
example of the discriminatory policy of applying
unilateral coercive measures is the situation in Cuba,
which has withstood the blockade by its northern
neighbour for more than 60 years. Genuine economic
terror was unleashed a few years ago against the country
and legitimate Government of Venezuela, which, owing
to the imposed measures, is not able to contribute to the
United Nations regular budget and is therefore illegally
denied a voice in the General Assembly.
Sanctions pressure also has an adverse impact on
the socioeconomic situation in Iran. The decisions
taken by a number of countries to freeze the Afghan
Government’s accounts in Western banks following the
Taliban’s takeover is a major obstacle to the normalization
of the lives of ordinary Afghans. We view attempts by
certain international actors to leverage the sanctions
stick to put pressure on the leaders of Myanmar and
Mali as illegitimate.
Extraterritorial
unilateral
measures
are
causing enormous damage to developing countries
throughout the world and undermine their ability
to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.
They also run counter to their efforts to combat
climate change. It is supremely inhumane to apply
unilateral restrictions in the current epidemiological

22244257/28

S/PV.8962

General issues relating to sanctions

situation. Our call for the creation of green corridors
for the unimpeded movement of medical personnel and
goods remains in force.
There is an increasingly urgent need for a multilateral
effort to seek collective approaches to curbing unilateral
sanctions in order to avoid a total loss of trust in
international institutions and the irreversible collapse
of the global economy and the long-term deterioration
of the socioeconomic situation of ordinary citizens.
At a minimum, the social and humanitarian sphere
should be exempted from any restrictive barriers.
The Russian Federation has been addressing this
issue at key multilateral forums for a long time. On
the basis of the rejection of the sanctions philosophy,
a broad group of like-minded people who embrace this
approach is forming in the international community.
The Russian Federation has traditionally co-sponsored
draft resolutions introduced in the General Assembly
and the Human Rights Council on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries on the adverse
impact of unilateral coercive measures on respect for
human rights. Similar positions have been advanced by
our partners in the Group of Friends in Defence of the
Charter of the United Nations, whose representatives
will have an opportunity to speak today.
Today’s discussion, even as it was being prepared,
has inspired lively interest among States Members of
the United Nations. We call on the Secretary-General
and other senior officials of the Organization to pay
close attention to the issues raised today and to speak
openly in favour of a sanctions policy that focuses on
individuals and respect for their fundamental rights.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me start by
wishing you, Mr. President, the best for your presidency
this month. I thank Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for
their briefings.
The Security Council has a unique responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
It is right that we make full and judicious use of every
tool at our disposal in the pursuit of this goal. Targeted
sanctions are one such tool, set out in the Charter of the
United Nations. As our briefers said today, they can play
8/28

07/02/2022

an important role as part of a comprehensive approach
alongside diplomacy, peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
The value of sanctions has been proven. In Angola,
Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia and Sierra Leone, they helped to
end conflict and supported the transition to peace and
democracy, following which sanctions were duly lifted.
In the Central African Republic, they have improved
the practices of a mining company. In Somalia, the
arms embargo has enabled the seizure of thousands
of ammunition rounds, anti-tank guided missiles and
sniper rifles reportedly intended for Al-Shabaab.
Today sanctions are an important means of
countering the threat of transnational terrorism and
preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. The Council is deploying them to constrain
the activities of some of the world’s worst terrorists
under the sanctions regime of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities. We
call on all parties to implement fully the sanctions the
Security Council has agreed.
Any use of sanctions has to take account of
humanitarian factors. The United Kingdom was one
of the top five humanitarian donors globally in 2021.
We champion international humanitarian law and
humanitarian access in conflict and crisis situations.
The United Kingdom is committed to minimising any
unintended consequences of sanctions, including on the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. To achieve that,
we advocate for carefully targeted sanctions, aimed at
specific goals, as part of a comprehensive approach to
conflict resolution.
We support a range of humanitarian exceptions
and licensing grounds in the application of sanctions.
For example, and this was mentioned by UnderSecretary-General Griffiths today, we welcome
the unanimous support for the recent adoption of
resolution 2615 (2021), establishing the United Nations
Afghanistan humanitarian exception, which was a
good demonstration of how sanctions regimes can be
tailored to address any unintended consequences as
they emerge, and ensure they do not hinder the delivery
of urgently needed humanitarian assistance.
And domestically, we have a dialogue with banks
and humanitarian actors in the Tri-Sector Working
Group to find legal, safe and transparent ways to ensure
2224425

07/02/2022

General issues relating to sanctions

that humanitarian aid reaches its intended beneficiaries
and is not disrupted by sanctions.
The United Kingdom believes that sanctions are
most effective when adopted multilaterally, but where
collective United Nations action is blocked, the United
Kingdom is prepared to act with allies and partners,
or unilaterally, to apply sanctions aimed at providing
deterrence and accountability to the most severe
behaviours, such as gross human rights violations
or abuses — for example, the Al-Kaniyat militia,
responsible for the torture and murder of civilians in
Libya. For this reason, the United Kingdom has its own
legally robust targeted sanctions regime, which it seeks
to use as part of a broad international response.
Let us not forget that conflict, violence and
economic mismanagement are the main triggers of
humanitarian crises. Sanctions are an important tool of
the Council to help change the behaviour of regimes
or individuals responsible for those conflicts, and to
help us fulfil our collective responsibility to maintain
international peace and security.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate the Russian
Federation on its assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. China will fully
support your delegation’s work, Mr. President. I would
also like to thank Norway for its outstanding work as
President of the Security Council last month.
China welcomes the initiative of the delegation of
the Russian Federation to convene today’s important
meeting. I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for their briefings.
We welcome the participation of the representative of
Venezuela on behalf of the Group of Friends in Defence
of the Charter of the United Nations. We also welcome
the participation of the representatives of the Sudan,
South Sudan, Mali and Iraq.

S/PV. 8962

livelihoods cannot be ignored and increasingly cause
disruptions to normal economic and social activities
of ordinary citizens and third countries. The briefings
of both Under-Secretaries-General also reflect that
phenomenon. The Council has yet to give this issue
its due attention. Today’s meeting is long-overdue and
indeed provides a rare opportunity. We need to seriously
consider how to take steps to improve the design and
implementation of the Council’s sanctions in order to
minimize their adverse impact. In that context, China
wishes to offer several proposals.
First, we must bear in mind that sanctions are a
means to an end and not an end in themselves. Sanctions
are meant to create conditions conducive to a political
solution. They are not a substitute for diplomatic efforts.
The Council should keep in check the impulse to resort
too readily to sanctions or the threat of sanctions and
should give precedence to non-compulsory measures,
such as good offices, mediation and negotiation.
Second, it is important to design sanctions
mechanisms that dovetail precisely with the core issues
at hand and the desired objectives. The intensity and
scope of compulsory measures should be carefully
calibrated, with clear and unequivocal provisions to
minimize collateral damage. Humanitarian assistance
should not be construed as a violation of Security
Council sanctions.
Third, Member States must faithfully implement
the Council’s sanctions. They should not detract from
the value of sanctions by cutting corners or add value
by giving themselves license to interpret or overcomply
with such measures. We are particularly opposed to
diplomatic pressure and coercion against any country
in the name of ensuring compliance with Council
resolutions, to the detriment of the sovereignty and
security of the country in question.

Sanctions are a special tool available to the Security
Council under the Charter of the United Nations. It has
been China’s consistent position that, while all States
Members of the United Nations have the obligation to
implement in good faith the sanctions authorized by the
Security Council, the Council should take a prudent
and responsible approach to the use of sanctions.

Fourth, the Security Council should closely
monitor and comprehensively assess the humanitarian,
economic and social impact of sanctions. The Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
United Nations missions deployed in the sanctioned
countries should be requested to monitor any adverse
impact of sanctions and report such impact to the
Council in a timely manner so that the Council can then
make timely arrangements and adjustments.

For over 20 years, there has been a trend of
expanding the Security Council’s sanctions regimes,
whose adverse impacts on humanitarian issues and

Fifth, transparent, standardized and actionable
extension provisions should be established. There are
three common challenges to this — a high threshold for

22244259/28

S/PV.8962

General issues relating to sanctions

humanitarian exemptions, unclear criteria and a lengthy
application process. Those issues must be resolved as a
matter of urgency. For certain humanitarian agencies
and suppliers, a standing mechanism for humanitarian
exemptions is in order.
Sixth, special arrangements should be made in
certain circumstances or in the case of force majeure,
such as the serious and ongoing coronavirus disease
pandemic. The Council should actively consider lifting
or easing sanctions in order to help mitigate the impact
of the pandemic on the livelihoods and well-being of
the communities affected by the sanctions.
Seventh, as a basic principle, Security Council
sanctions should not be open-ended. Instead, all new
sanctions mechanisms must include a sunset clause. For
existing sanctions, clear and actionable exit benchmarks
should be established, with regular reviews by the
Council and the lifting of sanctions as and when those
benchmarks are met.
Eighth, the experts for Council sanctions
committees must be selected through the consistent use
of the highest professional standards and in line with
the principles of diversity and equitable geographical
distribution. Emphasis should be placed on improving
the representation of candidates from developing
countries. Those experts should perform their duties
impartially and maintain confidentiality during and
after their tenure. Any breach of confidentiality
should be addressed in a serious manner by the
sanctions committees.
Ninth, from 2000 to 2006 the Council had an informal
working group on general issues of sanctions, which
did crucial work in order to help fine-tune and improve
Council sanctions. China proposes that the Security
Council re-establish a working group on general issues
of sanctions, tasked with the comprehensive review of
adverse humanitarian and other impacts of Council
sanctions and the issuance of specific recommendations
for improvement. The Council should request the
Secretariat to submit comprehensive assessment
reports; in turn, the Secretariat should improve the
relevant assessment mechanisms accordingly so that
the assessments are truly comprehensive, impartial and
objective. China believes that, following this meeting,
the Council should have a comprehensive document in
order to guide our next steps.
Speaking of the adverse impact of Council
sanctions, I would be remiss if I did not mention the
10/28

07/02/2022

Council’s current sanctions against the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. Resolution 2397 (2017)
has led to serious humanitarian consequences since its
adoption. The import of humanitarian livelihood goods,
such as agricultural machinery, medical equipment and
water purification pipes, has been severely restricted.
There is a serious food shortage, and the conditions for
medical care leave much to be desired. The Panel of
Experts of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) have reported on
those issues on many occasions.
In October, China and Russia co-sponsored a
draft resolution on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea in the Security Council, aiming to eliminate
the humanitarian and livelihood impacts of sanctions
and to create conditions conducive to the resumption
of dialogue and consultations in support of a solution.
Regrettably, a very few Council members chose to
refuse to discuss the draft resolution. China once again
calls on those Council members to stop avoiding the
issue and to participate in consultations on the draft
resolution in a responsible and positive manner.
As we discuss how to improve the Council’s
sanctions, we should be all the more cognizant of
the harm of unilateral sanctions imposed by certain
countries. That is because unilateral sanctions, often in
the glorified name of implementing Council sanctions,
have led to great disasters and chaos — not only
mistakenly putting the United Nations on the receiving
end of the blame, but also undermining the authority
and effectiveness of Council sanctions themselves.
The humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan following
the withdrawal of foreign troops in August is a case in
point. Some people assumed that the Council sanctions
had been an impediment to humanitarian assistance to
Afghanistan. But after the Council adopted resolution
2615 (2021) in December, clearing the legal obstacles,
there was no significant increase in humanitarian
assistance to Afghanistan. We are informed by facts
on the ground that it is the unilateral sanctions of
certain countries — and not the decisions of the
Council — that have exacerbated the humanitarian
crisis in Afghanistan.
Unilateral sanctions are extremely harmful. It is
a matter of concern that a scant few countries have
not only failed to reign in their unilateral sanctions
but have instead been flinging them about left, right
and centre in a frenzy. They seem to be addicted to
2224425

07/02/2022

General issues relating to sanctions

sanctions. We have seen that unilateral sanctions,
imposed under various names, have thrown a wrench
in the works of economic and social development
and scientific and technological progress of targeted
countries, created and aggravated humanitarian crises,
violated the basic rights of civilians, including women
and children, and caused great damage to the harmony
and stability of international relations. They even affect
the payment of United Nations assessed contributions
and the participation of targeted countries in the work
of the Organization. They have also greatly interfered
with international economic and technological trade
and cooperation.
There is no denying that unilateral sanctions run
counter to the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, have no basis in international law and
are a concrete manifestation of hegemonism and power
politics. We solemnly urge the countries concerned to
immediately cease and desist from the use of unilateral
sanctions and to curb their severe consequences. We
call on the international community to join hands to
come together to resist such unlawful acts.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I want to wish you,
Mr. President, all the best for your presidency. I also
congratulate Norway on an excellent presidency in
January. I would like to thank our briefers this morning
for their valuable briefings.
In a troubled international environment, we
continue to witness serious human rights violations
and terrorist acts where consequences for perpetrators
are often remarkably absent. We believe that sanctions
have a critical role to play in furthering accountability
and in deterring unacceptable behaviour, including
violent repression and violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law.
Sanctions are a vital tool for the promotion and
maintenance of international peace and security.
Importantly, they can also support peaceful transitions
and deter non-constitutional changes.
Sanctions do not and should not operate in a vacuum.
Each time the Security Council has taken the decision to
impose sanctions — some 30 times since 1966 — they
have been applied as part of a comprehensive strategy
of political dialogue, peacekeeping or peacebuilding.
Ireland recognizes that sanctions can inadvertently
affect humanitarian action or have unintended
consequences. Humanitarian organizations have

S/PV. 8962

spoken out clearly about how sanctions can hinder their
work, including with respect to bank de-risking, which
can curtail the financing of humanitarian operations,
burdensome compliance requirements and even the risk
of criminalizing humanitarian activity more broadly.
This is why we believe it is essential that sanctions
be carefully targeted to have maximum impact on
those whose behaviour we seek to influence, while
importantly minimizing adverse humanitarian effects
or unintended consequences.
For Ireland, ensuring that sanctions are targeted is
not only a matter of effectiveness. Carefully targeted
sanctions, particularly where due process is respected,
can serve to reduce unintended consequences. This
ensures compliance with international law, including
international human rights law, international refugee
law and international humanitarian law. In this regard,
Ireland was pleased last year to join the Group of
Like-Minded States on Targeted Sanctions.
A priority for Ireland on the Council has been
to protect the humanitarian space in sanctioned
environments. We were happy to have supported the
recent inclusion of humanitarian language in the context
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central
African Republic, Mali and the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant/Al-Qaida sanctions regimes. As Chair
of the Somalia sanctions committee, I am aware that
humanitarian organizations regard its “humanitarian
carveout” as a best practice among existing sanctions
regimes. The introduction of a humanitarian carveout
in the context of Afghanistan was also a significant
development. Resolution 2615 (2021), agreed last
December (see S/PV.8941), demonstrates that the
Council can and does act when its sanctions risk having
negative impacts.
As a Council member, Ireland will continue to
prioritize enhanced humanitarian safeguards within
sanctions regimes. Ireland will continue to support
the adoption of appropriate mitigation measures and
the development of best practices. In this context, it
is important that the Council listen to the voices of
civilian populations and humanitarian actors. It is the
right thing to do.
The Security Council has a crucial role to play by
including designation criteria to sanction those that
misappropriate or obstruct humanitarian activity and
in providing appropriate exemptions that preserve the
humanitarian space. Ireland welcomes the reduced time

222442511/28

S/PV.8962

General issues relating to sanctions

frames introduced for the exemption approval process
for coronavirus-disease-related requests introduced by
a number of the United Nations sanctions regimes.
As a State member of the European Union (EU),
Ireland also actively participates in the design and adoption
of preventive, targeted and proportionate EU measures.
The targeted nature of EU sanctions — particularly the
use of appropriate derogations and exemptions, and
the case-by-case assessment of designations — are a
key part of minimizing unintended consequences, in
particular for the civilian population. We regularly
engage in dialogue at the most senior level with
international non-governmental organizations and
with the International Committee of the Red Cross to
identify how, at the EU level, we can best design new
sanctions regimes or modify existing regimes to ensure
that humanitarian space is not affected.
We all have an interest in ensuring effective,
targeted sanctions where the humanitarian space is
protected, and due process is respected. Ireland looks
forward to continuing dialogue on this important matter
with Council members and relevant stakeholders.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): The
United Arab Emirates would like to thank the Russian
Federation for organizing today’s debate. A discussion
about the potential humanitarian or other unintended
consequences of sanctions is long overdue. I also
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, and the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Martin Griffiths,
for their briefings.
The United Arab Emirates considers sanctions a
valuable and useful tool for the Security Council to
maintain international peace and security. In certain
situations, they can be effective at achieving the
Council’s objectives without it having to resort to force,
such as supporting peace processes, resolving disputes,
countering terrorism and promoting non-proliferation.
Yet, as history has shown, ill-conceived or illimplemented sanctions can have a severe humanitarian
impact. The United Arab Emirates believes sanctions
measures should not prevent humanitarian actors from
undertaking their essential work, nor humanitarian
assistance from getting to those in need.
As an elected member of the Security Council, and
as a Chair and Vice-Chair of sanctions committees,
12/28

07/02/2022

the United Arab Emirates commits to taking into
consideration the humanitarian imperative in all
decision-making. Accordingly, the United Arab Emirates
would like to highlight several recommendations
to minimize any potential humanitarian or other
unintended consequences of sanctions:
First, the potential humanitarian consequences
of sanctions should systematically be considered
in the design of each and every sanction regime and
addressed wherever applicable. This means, first and
foremost, providing clarity on the scope of sanctions to
reduce risks of overcompliance by Member States and
private actors.
There are currently only a few regimes that include
humanitarian exemptions or carveouts. We should
learn from these examples — what has worked and
what has not — and insert explicit clauses to minimize
unintended consequences on the civilian population.
We stress in this regard that the design may be adapted
on a case-by-case basis to take into consideration the
broader context on the ground. We recognize that
there are other important considerations that we must
integrate into sanctions design, particularly risks of
diversion or looting of humanitarian aid, as we have
seen done by groups and non-State actors to finance
their war efforts or their terrorist and illegal activities.
Secondly, constant re-evaluation and adaptation
of sanctions throughout their life span is necessary to
protect affected populations from unintended adverse
consequences. Such evaluation must be based on
an assessment methodology that is independent and
transparent. We would welcome further discussions
on what would be the most appropriate mechanism
to undertake this important task. In this regard, we
stress that the Council’s responsibility to address the
humanitarian imperative does not end with its initial
design of sanctions. The Council should be responsive to
issues as they arise and seek to address them, including
through adjustments and implementation-assistance
notices, among other means. This would be of benefit to
all — the civilian population of affected countries and
the humanitarian and private-sector actors that operate
within that context, as well as the Member States bound
to implement sanctions.
Thirdly, to better understand the humanitarian
impact of specific sanctions measures on the ground,
sanctions committees should use the various tools
2224425

07/02/2022

General issues relating to sanctions

at their disposal, including through, for example,
committee visits to countries affected by sanctions.
Finally, we stress that the Chairs of sanctions
committees must be more involved in drafting Council
products. Sanctions Chairs can bring a valuable
perspective, including on potential humanitarian
impacts, given their day-to-day understanding
of sanctions regimes and their interactions with
affected countries.
To conclude, we hope that this is the first of many
discussions on this important topic during our term.
As Council members, we all have a duty to ensure
that sanctions measures continue to be an effective
and useful tool for the Council. We must be ready to
constantly readjust, suspend or terminate the measures
that we impose to keep them fit for purpose and
legitimate as well as to protect the civilian population
from unintended adverse impacts. We firmly believe
that this is achievable. We should be able to draw
upon the Council’s ample experience and continue to
innovate and improve the design and implementation
of sanctions.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): At the outset, let me begin by
congratulating the Russian Federation on its presidency
for this month, for which we convey our full support.
I commend Norway on a very successful presidency.
I thank the Russian delegation for having organized
this debate on such an important topic as sanctions
and their humanitarian and unintended consequences.
I also thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs, Rosemary DiCarlo, and the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Martin Griffiths, for their briefings. In addition, I
welcome the presence of countries under rule 37.
As per the Charter of the United Nations, the
maintenance of international peace and security is the
primary responsibility of the Security Council, which
has to act on behalf of all States Members of the United
Nations in the discharge of its duties. Emanating from
that responsibility, the Council imposes measures to
maintain or restore international peace and security.
Those measures are required to be provisional in
nature and not permanent. The Council has since been
imposing non-military prohibitions and restrictions
on Member States. So far, the Council has established
multiple sanctions regimes, including the ongoing 14.
The sanctions regimes have served well in our
fight against terrorism, preventive-diplomacy efforts,

S/PV. 8962

assisting Member States in implementing peace
agreements and against the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction.
However, sanctions regimes must not be an end
in themselves. In their implementation, the sanctions
regimes must ensure that they have the intended
impact and do not further exacerbate the suffering
of the populations at the receiving end. As such, it is
necessary to keep those regimes under constant review
so that they keep pace with the changing situation on the
ground. Sanctions measures should therefore be neutral
in nature and should not become political instruments
of the powerful few.
Of late, the unintended consequences of sanctions
measures, including humanitarian consequences, are
being increasingly emphasized by Member States and
other stakeholders. The Secretary-General has reiterated
more than once that sanctions have exacerbated suffering
in countries confronting armed conflict. The Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has also
referred to those concerns. The unprecedented impact
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has
also added to the miseries of the population in countries
faced with sanctions. There is therefore an urgent need
to credibly address those concerns to ease the sufferings
of the people.
In that regard, my delegation would like to flag the
following six observations.
First, sanctions should always be used as an
instrument of last resort after having exhausted all
other options and in accordance with the provisions of
the United Nations Charter and should not be violative
of principles of international law. The Security Council
should remain respectful of the regional approach
adopted by countries, and, in collaboration with
regional organizations, address challenges related to
peace and security before considering the issuance of
such sanctions.
Secondly, there should be a clear end goal for such
sanctions, and they should not remain perpetually as
millstones around the necks of countries. As such, a
clear timeline and criteria for their phased withdrawal
should be ideally spelt out from the inception stage itself.
Thirdly, every effort should be made to reduce
the negative impact of such measures on the
population of the receiving State. In the context of
the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, that becomes all

222442513/28

S/PV.8962

General issues relating to sanctions

the more important. It is also necessary to ensure
that the legitimate trade and economic activities of
the concerned State and its regional partners are not
impacted adversely. It is therefore important for the
Security Council to fully consult all key countries of the
region before considering any such measures, because
more often than not the impact of sanctions is felt not
just by the country concerned but by the entire region.
Fourthly, regarding the lifting of targeted measures
such as arms embargoes and assets freezes, the Council
needs to prescribe realistic and achievable benchmarks
to encourage Member States to take steps in the right
direction. We have seen that some of the benchmarks
prescribed for conflict-ridden developing countries are
even higher that what some developed countries have
achieved. That is uncalled for.
Fifthly, it is imperative that sanctions not impede
legitimate humanitarian requirements. However, it is
important to exercise due diligence while providing
humanitarian carveouts, especially in cases where
terrorism finds safe haven.
There have been examples of terrorist groups taking
full advantage of humanitarian carveouts, making a
mockery of sanctions regimes, including that of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities. There
have also been several cases of terrorist groups in our
neighbourhood, including those listed by the Council,
rebranding themselves as humanitarian organizations
to evade those sanctions. Those terrorist organizations
use the umbrella of the humanitarian space to raise
funds, recruit fighters and even use human shields.
Under the guise of the humanitarian cover provided
by such exemptions, those terrorist groups continue
to expand their terrorist activities in the region and
beyond. Due diligence is therefore an absolute must.
Sixthly, the sanctions committees continue to
face significant challenges in overseeing the sanctions
measures related to technical violations of the arms
embargo, objections by humanitarian partners to
the reporting requirement, questions about the
working of the Panel of Experts, and, in some cases,
non-cooperation by Member States. The Chairs of the
sanctions committees need to play a more proactive
role in addressing those challenges. To that end, it
is imperative that the archaic and opaque working
14/28

07/02/2022

methods of subsidiary bodies of the Council become
open, transparent and credible.
In conclusion, it is our considered submission that
sanctions regimes are simply a means to an end, that of
the larger goal of maintaining international peace and
security. They cannot become an end in themselves and
therefore should not remain in perpetuity. We need to
review the sanctions regimes regularly and terminate
them as soon as the objective has been achieved.
Towards that end, we need to set realistic and objective
goals and ensure that civilians are protected from the
unintended consequences of sanctions measures. In
that regard, we are ready to work constructively with
all other Members. The recommendations made by the
Informal Working Group of the Security Council on
General Issues of Sanctions in 2006 could be a good
starting point for a renewed deliberations in the Council.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): Norway congratulates
you, Mr. President, and the Russian Federation on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of February. I thank Under-SecretariesGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo and Martin Griffiths for
their useful statements today.
Norway is a staunch supporter of the United Nations
and implements all sanctions adopted by the Security
Council. Sanctions incentivize the relevant actors in
conflict to seek settlement rather than further conflict.
They aim to deter unwanted behaviour and curb the
resources of the targeted actors. Targeted sanctions
are therefore an important tool to address threats to
international peace and security, and they can act as
a deterrent against further violations of international
law, including international humanitarian law, and
violations and abuses of human rights law. Targeted and
well-designed sanctions can also help protect civilians
and prevent and curb sexual violence, as well as the
recruitment and use of children in armed conflict.
Norway attaches great importance to ensuring that
sanctions are well designed and effectively implemented.
That is how we ensure that sanctions achieve their aims
and have the intended results. Members of the Security
Council have the responsibility to ensure that United
Nations sanction measures are adequately adjusted and
kept up to date to reflect changes on the ground.
We are concerned by reports from humanitarian
non-governmental organizations that sanctions may
negatively impact their work. That is why Norway
supports actions such as the unanimous adoption
2224425

07/02/2022

General issues relating to sanctions

of resolution 2615 (2021) at the end of last year, on
humanitarian assistance and other activities that
support basic human needs in Afghanistan. We are
also pleased that the Council, over the past year, has
adopted clear language stressing that sanctions are not
intended to have negative humanitarian consequences
and that international law must be applied when
implementing sanctions.
Going forward, Member States and the Security
Council must continue dialogue with all relevant
actors, in particular humanitarian actors, to ensure
that future measures do not negatively impact the
ability of humanitarian workers to carry out their
work in a neutral and impartial manner. Humanitarian
exemptions must be drafted in a way that provides the
necessary clarity to all relevant actors, from Member
States to humanitarian actors, as well as the private
sector, including the financial sector.
We also need to bear in mind the impact that
counter-terrorism measures may have on humanitarian
activities. But we cannot accept falsely portraying
sanctions as an alternative explanation of serious
problems that are caused by other factors, including
underlying drivers fuelling conflicts. In order to ensure
the effectiveness and legitimacy of United Nations
sanctions regimes, the Security Council should ensure
that there are minimum due-process guarantees for
persons targeted by sanctions. In that respect, Norway
welcomes the Secretary-General’s recent appointment
of a new Ombudsperson to the ISIL (Da’esh) and
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee and would like to see
the Council further reinforce that function and ensure
due-process measures in all of its sanction regimes.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I congratulate
you, Sir, on Russia’s presidency of the Security Council
for the month of February. I thank Under-SecretariesGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo and Martin Griffiths for
their respective briefings.
In convening the Council to discuss this topic, you
are guiding us, Sir, in making the needed self-criticism
on the effectiveness of the mechanisms provided for in
Article 41 of the Charter of the United Nations in the
maintenance or restoration of human peace and security.
Since 1966, the Council has put in place
approximately 30 sanctions regimes, the imposition of
which has proven to be a relatively inexpensive policy
mechanism in comparison to armed conflicts, although
it is virtually impossible to determine the exact level

S/PV. 8962

of action required for a sanctions regime to have an
impact on the policy of the State under sanction.
Increasingly, sanctions are limited to goods or
target individuals and entities. Their scope includes
arms embargoes, boycotts of goods, financial sanctions,
such as assets freezes, bans on the sale of luxury
goods, travel bans, the suspension of memberships in
international or regional organizations and exclusion
from political conferences.
While most sanctions regimes provide for
exemptions to meet the basic needs of those targeted,
the fact remains that their goal is clearly to financially
drain or harm the key economic sectors of the targeted
entities. Such measures often affect the budgetary
revenues of the States on which sanctions have been
imposed and inevitably affect the overall economy and
people’s standard of living. The wager undoubtedly is
aimed at undermining support for the regimes under
sanction in the hope that their people will blame them
for their impoverishment. In most cases, such a wager
is extremely risky. Experience has shown that it is
illusory to hope to spare the population by targeting
only the political leaders.
Sanctions have become a commonly used
instrument and are meted out automatically and
systematically in their implementation. There is a clear
tendency to apply the same tools to dissimilar situations,
the main concern being to act quickly in moulding of
international acceptability. Of course, the impact of
sanctions poses even more problems when they are
unilateral, especially as pertains to their conformity
with the Charter and international humanitarian law.
That is what led the African Union, at its thirty-third
ordinary session, to urge all States to refrain from
coercive and unilateral measures, which impede the
full achievement of economic and social development
and affect the full enjoyment of human rights.
Of the 14 current sanctions regimes, eight directly
concern African countries — the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Somalia, the Sudan, South Sudan, Libya, GuineaBissau and Mali.
The case of the arms embargo in the Central
African Republic is particularly striking. Plagued by
persistent instability and continuous attacks by armed
groups, the democratically elected authorities of that
country have been deprived of their full capacity to
acquire equipment that would enable them to deal

222442515/28

S/PV.8962

General issues relating to sanctions

effectively with armed groups that often have more
sophisticated weapons and are scouring the country,
while scuttling the authority of the State over a large
part of the national territory.
The situation is untenable for the people of the Central
African Republic and unsustainable for the country’s
immediate and distant neighbours, such as Gabon,
which together with the Central African Republic, is
part of a community of free movement of goods and
people. I call on the Council to unconditionally lift the
arms embargo on the Central African Republic, which
would help mitigate the humanitarian consequences for
its civilian population.
Regardless of their true purpose — whether it be
to force the targeted country to change its attitude,
prevent it from arming or financing itself by depriving
it of the means to carry out actions the sanctions are
intended for or simply to send the message publicly that
the State or States imposing the sanctions disapprove
of the targeted country’s actions, the result remains the
same: the effectiveness of sanctions is lacking or far
below expectations.
The resilience of entities on which sanctions have
been imposed and the feeling of distrust vis-à-vis
United Nations representation seen in some regions,
combined with the increase in the rally-aroundthe-flag phenomenon, calls on us to understand the
repercussions of international sanctions. The Council
must act with the greatest level of circumspection when
adopting a sanctions regime against a United Nations
Member State and always take into account the risk of
seeing its people suffer from it.
General Assembly resolution 59/45 reveals the
degree of concern of the international community
about the harmful effects of international sanctions.
My country intends to maintain that sense of restraint,
shared by the African Union, with regard to the
imposition of sanctions on States and will advocate
that each situation be carefully assessed, taking into
account existing mechanisms, including the Sanctions
Assessment Handbook and the Field Guidelines for
Assessing the Humanitarian Implications of Sanctions.
Ultimately, international sanctions must remain an
incentive or deterrent tool and not be used for punitive
purposes. Their reversibility must be clearly defined
and accompanied by political dialogue with the
targeted Government.
16/28

07/02/2022

In conclusion, on behalf of my country, I would
like to draw the Council’s attention once again to its
duty to the peoples of the world, explicitly set out in the
Preamble to the Charter. We have received our mandate
on their behalf. We carry out our joint work for the sake
of their security and dignity. We must not lose sight of
this primary goal.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Allow me first to
congratulate you, Sir, and your delegation on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and thank Norway for the manner in which it conducted
the presidency in the month of January.
Brazil expresses its appreciation to Russia for
organizing a debate on sanctions and their humanitarian
or unintended consequences. I would also like to
thank the briefers — Under-Secretaries-General
Rosemary DiCarlo and Martin Griffiths — for their
insightful presentations.
The Charter of the United Nations provides
the Security Council with a set of instruments to
maintain international peace and security, sanctions
being one of them. When the situation on the ground
calls for enforcement action from the Council,
sanctions are alternatives to the use of armed force.
Like any coercive measure, however, they will have
unintended consequences.
With 14 sanctions regimes in force and nearly 1,500
listings to date, one might wonder whether a measure
that should be of last resort has become the preferred
choice to deal with intractable crises. One might also
wonder whether the current criteria for imposing
sanctions are still limited to the maintenance of peace
and security or whether, in some cases, they go beyond
that objective.
Sanctions can be legitimate and effective when
they are multilaterally created, strategically targeted
and designed to have a minimal impact on the civilian
population. As a measure of last resort, they should
follow the exhaustion of diplomatic solutions and be
part of a comprehensive strategy to overcome the crisis.
After all, security measures alone cannot adequately
resolve the overwhelming majority of the situations on
the Council’s agenda.
The Security Council came a long way in improving
its sanctions regimes with the transition to targeted
sanctions, the creation of humanitarian exemptions
and the establishment of monitoring mechanisms
2224425

07/02/2022

General issues relating to sanctions

through panels of experts. Despite the progress to
minimize the negative impact of sanctions, there are
still many reports of their unintended consequences
for humanitarian assistance. For that reason, Brazil
encourages the Council to continue its work to adjust
the sanctions framework so that sanctions effectively
minimize human suffering, rather than accentuate it.
First, sanctions should be limited in their scope
and temporal elements, preferably with the inclusion
of sunset clauses in their mandates, as mentioned by
the representative of China. Sanctions regimes that
last for years are warning signs of either their limited
effectiveness for that particular situation or the lack of
additional tools to address it.
Secondly, when designing or renewing sanctions
regimes, there should be efforts to prepare assessment
reports containing the potential humanitarian impacts
of a given measure. There should be better monitoring
of the socioeconomic and humanitarian consequences
of sanctions.
Thirdly, both the listing criteria and the conditions
for lifting sanctions should be clearly established. Clear
and well-defined benchmarks for easing sanctions are
also ways to measure progress and signal the temporary
nature of the restrictions.
Fourthly, while recognizing the specificity of each
sanctions regime, there needs to be greater consistency
in humanitarian exemptions. The humanitarian
carveouts in Somalia’s and Afghanistan’s sanctions
regimes are good examples that could be replicated
in other situations. Humanitarian actors must be able
to provide assistance to civilians in need. If they are
not able to perform humanitarian and impartial relief
actions due to overcompliance or the criminalization
of their activities, the most vulnerable will be the
first to endure the consequences. That is particularly
relevant now when the coronavirus disease increases
the vulnerability of the population.
Brazil has focused its comments on sanctions
imposed by the United Nations. That choice in no
way means that we are not concerned about the dire
humanitarian impacts of unilateral coercive measures.
Rather, it means that we chose to focus on ways to
improve measures that the United Nations Charter
allows and that international law does not proscribe.
I would like to conclude with a question for further
reflection. In increasingly complex scenarios where

S/PV. 8962

armed conflicts derive from a multitude of structural
drivers, how can we ensure the effectiveness of
sanctions in promoting sustainable peace when their
humanitarian consequences are still an afterthought? For
Brazil, the negative impact of sanctions on the civilian
population should be at the core of any assessment of
the appropriateness of imposing sanctions to a given
situation, as sanctions should not generate more harm
than they were intended to prevent.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me join others in welcoming you,
Mr. President, to the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, and I wish you the best success. I also
want to take this opportunity to again thank Norway
for a successful presidency during the month of
January. I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for their briefings
and remarks.
Sanctions are a potent tool and, as the Council heard
from Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, they can be a
vital tool to deter and address threats to international
peace and security and, ultimately, enhance the security
of vulnerable civilians. They make it harder for terrorists
to raise funds via international financial systems. They
have slowed the development of certain capabilities of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s unlawful
weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missile
programmes. They constrain the resources of those
who would spoil peace processes, threaten United
Nations peacekeepers, commit atrocities and obstruct
humanitarian assistance.
Like any tool, sanctions can be used effectively or
poorly, but that is a reason to deploy them carefully,
not to condemn them entirely. Today I want to outline
three ways in which we can ensure that sanctions are
effective and as targeted as possible: by committing to
minimalizing unintended consequences; by working
together as the Security Council to deploy sanctions
when we know that it will help civilians; and by not
undermining sanctions and exacerbating the situations
that makes such measures necessary in the first place.
First, we must do everything in our power to ensure
that sanctions are effective and targeted and minimize
unintended consequences. The United States is fully
committed to that and to taking steps to protect the
delivery of humanitarian aid. In fact, the United States
led efforts in every instance in which the Security
Council established a humanitarian carveout or a

222442517/28

S/PV.8962

General issues relating to sanctions

process for humanitarian exemptions to sanctions. In
certain cases, humanitarian exemptions can strengthen
sanctions by ensuring that their economic costs are
more effectively targeted.
We have routinely done that in the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006),
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, in
Yemen and in Somalia. Most recently, the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2615 (2021), which
the United States introduced in December to establish
a humanitarian carveout for the Afghanistan sanctions
regime. Such carveouts were important to help to
ensure that life-saving humanitarian aid continued to
flow to people in dire need. It ensures that the pain of
sanctions is felt most acutely by the leaders, entities
and individuals being targeted, not ordinary citizens or
those trying to help them. Those individuals will argue
that the people are being hurt, but the truth is that they
are being hurt, and they are the ones responsible for
hurting ordinary people.
We welcome more Council discussions on this topic.
We encourage the sanctions committees to monitor
impediments to the delivery of humanitarian assistance
and engage with non-governmental organizations
and other aid providers — engagement that some
Council members reject — to prevent and address any
unintended impact of sanctions. In the meantime, the
United States will remain in constant dialogue with its
humanitarian partners, United Nations agencies and
others on how to ensure that sanctions do not impact
their work.
Secondly, the Security Council should continue
to use sanctions, when appropriate, to improve the
lives of people in conflict zones, protect civilians and
promote the peaceful resolution of disputes. We hear
regularly from victims asking us to impose sanctions
on human rights violators in their country. The key
is to work together to ensure that those sanctions are
effective. If done properly, sanctions can minimize
suffering and counter political corruption, violence,
abuse and repression. They can prevent weapons from
falling into the hands of those who would use them
to target civilians, while exemption procedures allow
legitimate actors, such as host Governments, to secure
the resources that they need.
Together, we can use targeted sanctions to
discourage attacks on humanitarian aid workers or
organizations, medical workers and United Nations
18/28

07/02/2022

personnel. That includes using targeted sanctions to
address attacks by paramilitary groups such as the
Wagner Group, the actions of which curb access to the
most vulnerable populations in humanitarian crises,
exacerbate or prolong conflict and increase suffering.
That leads me to my third and final point. Too
often, the Security Council’s routine work on sanctions
is blocked or undermined by our own members. Certain
Council members have blocked critical designations of
peace process spoilers, high-profile terrorists, human
rights abusers and sanctions evaders. They have blocked
the routine appointment of members of panels of experts
on sanctions, including experts in humanitarian affairs.
They make it harder for the two to work as intended.
We need to work together to fix that.
When Member States wilfully ignore sanctions,
ignore sanctions evasion activity or fail themselves to
live up to the commitments we have all made to enforce
those measures, they undermine the utility of those
tools and the work of the Council itself. Meanwhile,
it is the legal and moral right of individual Member
States or other multilateral groups to impose sanctions
on their own, where appropriate, to achieve those
important ends.
The United States, to be clear, far prefers to
impose sanctions by multilateral means, such as
the Security Council. But as we all know, often the
Council can become deadlocked, undermining its
ability to maintain international peace and security.
Member States, including even those on the Security
Council, sometimes prove unwilling to uphold the
Charter of the United Nations by implementing their
binding obligations.
In such situations, the United States and many other
countries in the world are prepared to use the legitimate
regulations of our sovereign currencies and domestic
financial systems as economic leverage to address
urgent global challenges such as nuclear proliferation,
human rights abuses and violations and corruption.
We are concerned that some Council members
and other Member States have used this discussion to
criticize and delegitimize the sanctions imposed by
individual Member States, with some even arguing
that such sanctions are unlawful. The United States
categorically rejects that position. It is well-established
that sanctions imposed by individual Member States
or groups of Member States are consistent with
international law.
2224425

07/02/2022

General issues relating to sanctions

Widespread and long-standing State practice,
whether by the United States, the European Union and
its member States or numerous other Member States,
demonstrates that the sanctions imposed by individual
States are a lawful and effective tool to respond to a
range of actions. Therefore, we fully support partners
and regional organizations, such as the European Union,
the African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States, that impose their own sanctions
in response to threats. We often coordinate with those
partners and regional organizations when deadlock
prevents Security Council action.
I recognize that Council members may have
ideological differences over when and how to use
sanctions, but at the same time all Council members
have voted in favour of sanctions that we know will
address global threats such as the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham. We also all share the same commitment
to ensure that those measures do not harm innocent
civilians. Building on those areas of agreement, I
hope that the Council can find a way to work together
to advance those objectives and minimize efforts to
undermine critically important tools.
Specifically on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, the Council heard from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in its December
briefing to the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) that the principal
barrier to sending humanitarian assistance into
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s self-imposed
border closures — not international sanctions, as our
colleagues have alleged today.
The United States remains committed to addressing
the humanitarian situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, which is why we have continued to
support the 1718 (2006) Committee’s swift processing
of sanctions exemptions for aid organizations. It is also
why we are now working closely with the Secretariat to
establish a reliable banking channel.

S/PV. 8962

Security Council’s sanctions committees and expert
panels, which monitor implementation and provide
critical reporting on conflict situations; and better
integrate sanctions measures into broader preventative
diplomacy, peacebuilding and conflict resolution
strategies. We look forward to engaging in good faith
with our partners on the Council to advance a more
productive and positive discourse on those issues.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me congratulate Norway
for an excellent presidency in January and wish Russia
the best in presiding over the Security Council during
this month. I also wish to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral
DiCarlo
and
Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths for their briefings.
Sanctions are an important tool as part of common
efforts to maintain international peace and security
without recourse to the use of force. The Charter of the
United Nations is very clear on the necessity of using
sanctions to prevent further violence and address threats
to peace, breaches of peace or any act of aggression.
As such, targeted sanctions represent a tool that needs
to be used with the utmost care and precision as a
deterrent and a means of accountability when human
rights violations and gross atrocities are committed.
Let us be clear: no one wants to impose sanctions
merely for their own sake. They are used to prevent
greater harm. Their strength rests in their compatibility
with international law, international humanitarian
law and international human rights law as part of a
comprehensive strategy and actions to preserve peace
and security. When the Council puts it full weight
behind sanctions and Member States respect them,
sanctions contribute to the intended results, as we also
heard from the briefers.

We call on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to demonstrate a commitment to the well-being
of its own people by respecting human rights, defunding
its unlawful weapons of mass destruction and ballistic
missiles programme and prioritizing the needs of its
own people, the vulnerable North Koreans.

Albania fully supports targeted sanctions that
respond to specific situations. They need to be measured
and proportional in order to be effective and should
avoid any eventual collateral damage or unintended
consequences. Targeted sanctions do not harm the
economy. They do not hurt populations or affect
essential needs such as food and medicine. Horrible
acts such as genocide, crimes against humanity, torture,
slavery, extrajudicial killings, sexual and genderbased violence, and acts that violate the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States require a swift and
targeted response.

We must do more to help countries implement
sanctions effectively; reinvigorate the work of the

We cannot accept that fortunes that are often
amassed by stealing from countries’ natural resources

222442519/28

S/PV.8962

General issues relating to sanctions

should be hoarded in obscure accounts abroad. We cannot
contemplate that individuals who openly violate peace
processes should travel around the world at leisure and
amass even more wealth. We cannot accept strongmen
who starve civilians by hindering humanitarian efforts,
or those who openly breach national and international
law to just illegally grab or stay in power. That is why
sanctions serve as a means of accountability.
We very much agree with the view that targeted
sanctions need to be regularly and properly monitored.
Monitoring should be an integral part of sanctions
regimes throughout their existence, including at the
stages of formulation, implementation and evaluation.
It should strengthen the effectiveness of sanctions but
should also establish binding exemptions, when needed
and relevant, or carveouts for specific sanctions regimes
to minimize unintended consequences.
To that end, the Security Council should be more
attentive and supportive of the sanctions committees
and panels of experts in order to mitigate the adverse
consequences of sanctions, while monitoring their full
implementation as mandated. Resolution 2615 (2021),
on Afghanistan, did precisely that: it provided a timely
response while making way for the much-needed
humanitarian assistance to the country.
Regrettably, there are times when the Council fails
to address and hold accountable those responsible for
serious human rights violations and abuses — and
even acts of genocide and crimes against humanity. In
such situations, regional organizations or individual
countries step in.
In that respect, and as a matter of principled
position, Albania supports the European Union’s
sanctions, which are carefully calibrated, aimed at those
responsible for policies or actions in clear violation of
human rights law, and are also preventative, reversible
and gradual, as well as proportionate to the objectives
they seek to achieve. We have also expressed support for
the measures and sanctions imposed by the Economic
Community of West African States, convinced that
they are measures meant to address and help redress
important pressing issues.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize once
again the importance that Albania attaches to a robust
implementation of sanctions regimes as part of overall
efforts, while remaining fully committed to ensuring
that sanctions are effective and in full compliance
20/28

07/02/2022

with our commitments under the Charter of the United
Nations and international humanitarian law.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I congratulate the Russian
Federation on its assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of February, and
I commend Norway on its successful presidency for
the month of January. I also thank Under-SecretariesGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo and Martin Griffiths for
their reflections.
In favour of sanctions, former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan regarded them as a “necessary middle
ground between war and words” (A/59/565, para. 178).
That may be so, but we also know that sanctions can
be devastating to civilians, without achieving their
intended aims. In those cases, they can be difficult
to distinguish from acts of collective punishment that
are an offense to our sense of moral right. It is not
uncommon for targeted Governments to strengthen
their domestic and international support owing to
perceptions of collective coercion.
Mr. Annan may have located sanctions between
war and words, but he clearly understood international
conflicts well enough to know that they can be forms
of warfare. Applied with insufficient care for civilian
suffering and lacking a sense of proportion, they can
have the same debilitating impact on a country as
kinetic warfare. While blockades and sanctions differ
fundamentally in their application, their effects can
be similar.
In September 2018, the Special Rapporteur on the
negative impact of the unilateral coercive measures
on the enjoyment of human rights, Mr. Idriss Jazairy,
argued before the Human Rights Council that economic
sanctions can degenerate into blockades that “expose
people to the ravages of economic war in peacetime”.
The question we are left to determine is when sanctions,
with their dangers, are called for and how they can best
be employed by the Security Council.
We have heard many recommendations today, and
Kenya has a few more to offer.
First, we need to regard the ethics and legality of
sanctions beyond their humanitarian impact. When they
are applied unilaterally, their legitimacy is undermined.
The frequency and reach of unilateral sanctions has led
to the growing view that they are the weapons of the
strong against the vulnerable weak. As such, they have
2224425

07/02/2022

General issues relating to sanctions

S/PV. 8962

undermined faith in multilateralism. We urge extreme
reticence in their use.

Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Martin
Griffiths, for their insightful briefings.

Secondly, terrorist groups need to be sanctioned
in equal measure. We all know that it is key that their
finances, recruitment and movement be disrupted
worldwide. Yet today an Al-Qaida affiliate in Somalia
that has killed thousands in multiple countries is
regarded by some members of the Security Council
merely as a domestic political spoiler. Attempts to
address the humanitarian difficulties in practical terms
have not so far received sufficient support. We cannot
have a two-track counter-terrorism and then argue that
the Council does not have double standards for lives
lost to terrorism. We urge delegations to reconsider
their positions for our collective sake.

The question of sanctions is one that is rooted in
the principles of international law and provided for in
Chapter VII, Article 41, of the Charter of the United
Nations. As envisaged by the Charter, sanctions are not
intended for extraneous objectives but are required as a
tool to modify the behaviour of any State whose actions
are in breach of its Charter obligations, where those
actions constitute a threat to international peace and
security, without resorting to the use of force.

Thirdly, terrorist and criminal groups take comfort
in knowing that they will face weaker sanctions if
humanitarian advocates argue on the basis of their
impact on the innocent. They even take fees for
humanitarian access to the vulnerable and use those
finances to perpetrate attacks against civilians. We
must be serious about providing proper carveouts, while
raising the standards of humanitarian aid logistics and
making sure they are combined with strong measures to
limit terrorism financing.
Fourthly, and connected to the previous
recommendation, the Security Council can do more to
provide clarity on exemptions to States, humanitarian
organizations and the private sector.
Fifthly, and finally, we propose building into
sanctions regimes the automatic requirement for
periodic reviews to ascertain that, at all stages, they
still meet their purpose. Most of us see the value of
such periodic reviews within our national laws; we urge
members to share such good practices with the Council.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): It is a delight to see
you, Madam President, presiding over the Security
Council for the month of February. Ghana assures your
delegation of its cooperation and remains confident of
your able leadership. I would also like to congratulate
Ambassador Mona Juul and the delegation of Norway
for the excellent leadership they provided to the Council
during the month of January.
We welcome the focus of today’s debate and express
appreciation to the Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Rosemary DiCarlo,
and the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian

Since the late 1960s, when the Security Council
activated its first sanctions regime, in response to
the illegitimate seizure of power in the then Southern
Rhodesia, 30 sanctions regimes have been established
in all, with varying degrees of success and uneven
consequences in their implementation.
While the imposition of broad sanctions has had
disproportionate adverse effects on populations, some
successes can also be seen in the areas of the reversal
of illegitimate regimes; the disruption of planning,
funding and organization of terrorist networks; the
dismantling of illicit networks and financial flows of
armed groups, particularly non-State actors; the curbing
of the illegal flow of small arms and light weapons; and
the increased focus on massive human rights violations,
among others.
Regardless of the outcomes achieved, sanctions
continue to be an important tool for maintaining
international peace and security. In particular, if
all Member States would fulfil their obligations by
implementing, in good faith, the decisions of the
Council, as envisaged in Articles 25 and 48 of the
Charter of the United Nations and in a manner that
prevents their circumvention by the States placed under
sanctions, we believe that sanctions could be short,
effective and less damaging to civilian populations.
Unfortunately, some of the sanctions regimes
have been long-lasting and their humanitarian impact
and unintended consequences on civilian populations
and third States quite damaging. We therefore have a
responsibility — not only within the Council but also
among the wider membership of the Organization — to
fine-tune the implementation of sanctions in a manner
that is more targeted and effective in modifying the
erring behaviour of sanctioned States.

222442521/28

S/PV.8962

General issues relating to sanctions

With an eye on how we could better implement
United Nations sanctions regimes with a view to
mitigating the humanitarian and other unintended
consequences on populations, Ghana would like to
focus on four points.
First, sanctions must be imposed only as a last resort
when a threat to international peace and security exists.
Before sanctions are imposed, serious efforts must be
made to exhaust all measures of pacific settlement
contained in Chapter VI of the Charter.
Secondly, the processes followed by the Council’s
sanctions committees could benefit from greater
transparency and accountability. The application of
guidelines requires careful consideration, particularly
regarding requests for exemptions to assets-freeze
provisions that have a direct link to humanitarian
issues. In that regard, the panels of experts appointed
to assist the work of sanctions committees should
increase their engagement and collaboration with the
national, regional and international humanitarian
organizations working within their areas of operation
in order to collect information and data on the impact
of sanctions on the work of humanitarian organizations
so as to contribute as much as possible to monitoring,
reporting and policymaking. The Council should
also regularly assess how Member States ensure that
their implementation of sanctions does not violate
international humanitarian law. The impact on the
vulnerable should be assessed, along with the effect of
sanctions on third States.
Thirdly, Ghana underscores the need for enhancing
humanitarian exemption mechanisms to safeguard the
livelihoods of populations, as envisaged by Article 50.
Present exemptions, however, do not appear to fully
tackle the humanitarian problem, especially when
comprehensive sanctions have been imposed.
Fourthly, Ghana wishes to indicate that, while the
responsibility rests on the Security Council to mitigate
the humanitarian crises associated with sanctions,
national Governments and entities also have a part
to play in ensuring full and unhindered access to
humanitarian goods and the utmost cooperation with
humanitarian aid workers. In addition, guided by the
knowledge of the socioeconomic plight of their people
due to sanctions, national Governments should desist
from actions that are inimical to international peace
and security and could potentially attract sanctions.
22/28

07/02/2022

In my statement, Ghana has not focused on the
imposition of unilateral sanctions in violation of
international law because that has not been indicated
as the primary object of this debate. We nonetheless
reaffirm our position that unilateral sanctions that
are in violation of international law, which often have
far-reaching consequences for affected populations,
are unacceptable.
I have also not dwelt on sanctions by other
international and regional organizations against their
erring members. Although that issue is not within the
scope of this debate, it is in line with the accepted
principles of international law. Suffice it to say that, as
a member country of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union,
which have active sanctions regimes in place, I must
note that the sanction regimes of those regional bodies
have often been effective and usually of a shorter
duration. For instance, the sanctions imposed on Mali
in August 2020 by the Authority of Heads of State
and Government of ECOWAS were lifted by October
2020 when Mali showed its commitment at that time
to undertake actions to restore constitutional order
following its breach of the ECOWAS Supplementary
Protocol on Democracy and Good Governance
and the African Charter on Democracy, Elections
and Governance.
We are also aware that the humanitarian
consequences of sanctions have been exacerbated by
the coronavirus disease pandemic. In such exceptional
circumstances, we expect and support clear measures of
exemptions for humanitarian-related goods, especially
those that do not have dual-use purposes. In the case of
ECOWAS, our exemption regime has been specific and
has included virus-related treatment products among
the exempted items.
Finally, let me reiterate that the credibility and
legitimacy of sanctions are manifested not only in their
ability to achieve desired goals and policy objectives,
but also in their capacity to avert humanitarian
catastrophes and other unintended consequences.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I join others in congratulating you, Madam
President, on your presidency of the Security Council
for the month of February, and I wish you great success.
We also thank Norway for its very successful presidency
in January. Finally, I thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and
Mr. Martin Griffiths for their briefings.
2224425

07/02/2022

General issues relating to sanctions

I would like to begin by noting that Security
Council sanctions regimes are an essential instrument
to help maintain international peace and security.
Sanctions are obviously not an end in themselves; they
are part of a political strategy aimed at preventing and
resolving conflicts, combating the proliferation of
nuclear weapons, countering terrorism and combating
violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights.
Sanctions have undergone significant changes
in recent years, particularly to take into account
their potential negative effects on the delivery of
humanitarian and medical assistance. We must ensure
that they are targeted and proportionate. They must
also be flexible and reversible and must be lifted when
their objectives are met.

S/PV. 8962

in order to avoid or mitigate their potential negative
effects. The European Union has put in place special
dispensations and exemptions to safeguard the delivery
of humanitarian and medical aid.
At the national level, France has set up a
direct communication channel between banks and
non-governmental organizations. That makes it possible
to fight against the phenomenon of overcompliance by
banks and to simultaneously counter the financing of
terrorism while preserving the humanitarian space.
We must collectively continue to intensify efforts
to ensure the delivery of humanitarian and medical aid
within the framework of sanctions. But we must act
responsibly and avoid instrumentalizing or politicizing
the issue of sanctions.

The implementation of Council sanctions is
carefully monitored. In that connection, I want to
commend the work of the sanctions committees and
panels of experts, which play an essential role in
that regard.

France is taking concrete action to protect the
humanitarian space and respond to the needs of
populations. The European Humanitarian Forum to be
held from 21 to 23 March, which France is organizing
with the European Union, is part of this effort.

When a sanctions regime is put in place, the Council
has one responsibility — to ensure that humanitarian
assistance is delivered to all those in need. Needless to
say, the development and implementation of sanctions
must be done in full compliance with international
humanitarian law.

Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I begin by reiterating my delegation’s
support to the Russian Federation for its presidency
of the Security Council this month and congratulate
Norway on its successful presidency last month. I thank
Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo and Griffiths for
their briefings.

That is why the Council has introduced humanitarian
exemptions to ensure that United Nations sanctions in
furtherance of resolution 1988 (2011), concerning the
Taliban regime, and those imposed on Somalia, North
Korea and Yemen do not impede the humanitarian
response. We must continue to take a case-by-case
approach and consider the specifics of each context.
The Council has also introduced, at France’s
initiative, provisions to better preserve the humanitarian
space in the sanctions regimes for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic
and Mali. In all cases, we will continue to ensure
that robust monitoring mechanisms are implemented
in order to avoid any diversion of aid by sanctioned
individuals or entities.
Finally, I would like to recall that the European
Union (EU) has always acted responsibly by ensuring
that the sanctions it adopts do not impede humanitarian
action. The European Union’s restrictive measures,
in accordance with international law, are targeted

The issue we are discussing today is at the heart
of Mexico’s priorities in the Council. Some time ago,
through a joint initiative with Germany and Switzerland,
we put the need to safeguard the humanitarian space on
the table, and more recently, together with the European
Union, we co-sponsored a series of discussions on the
protection and safety of humanitarian personnel in
conflicts where we also addressed the negative, even if
unintended, impact of sanctions.
These initiatives have borne some fruit. We have
moved from the debate on whether or not sanctions
produce undesirable humanitarian consequences to
a stage of action where we are trying to prevent or
mitigate their impact. The case of Somalia, the recent
strengthening of humanitarian language in the sanctions
regime for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as
well as the adoption of resolution 2615 (2021), creating
a humanitarian exception in Afghanistan, are concrete
examples of this.

222442523/28

S/PV.8962

General issues relating to sanctions

However, there is still a long way to go. Despite
our request to include agreed language on humanitarian
impact in the renewal of the mandates of resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001) in the area of combating
terrorism, a minority of Council members voiced
its opposition, and resolutions 2611 (2021) and 2617
(2021) were adopted last December, unfortunately with
such language omitted. These double standards are
unacceptable, as they hinder humanitarian action and
violate international humanitarian law.
The reality is that, on many occasions, sanctions
impose severe restrictions on donors to provide funds
and equipment to humanitarian actors. They sometimes
also result in criminal proceedings against humanitarian
personnel, generate a shock wave of disincentives to
participate or cooperate in humanitarian programmes,
and end up affecting the very populations we want
to help.
That is why Mexico opposes the imposition of
unilateral sanctions outside the United Nations system,
as in the case of the embargo against Cuba. We reiterate
the need to bring this practice to an end, in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 75/289.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohammed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to warmly congratulate you,
Madam President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February. We also
thank Norway for its successful presidency last month.
In addition, we thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and
Mr. Martin Griffiths for their briefings.
We thank the delegation of the Russian Federation
for organizing this important debate on “General issues
relating to sanctions: preventing their humanitarian and
unintended consequences”.
The imposition of sanctions on certain countries
by the Security Council has resulted in an ongoing
debate on the adverse consequences of these sanctions
for the attainment of the goals set out in the Charter of
the United Nations. These sanctions also give rise to
a multitude of questions related to their effectiveness
in the maintenance of international peace and security,
as well as their potential impact on the achievement of
socioeconomic development in the countries subject to
these punitive measures. This debate also goes hand
in hand with the overall discussion of and efforts to
24/28

07/02/2022

reform United Nations sanctions regimes, which is why
today’s debate is so important.
The Sudan is deeply concerned by the fact that the
Security Council imposes targeted and non-targeted
sanctions, which gives rise to ethical issues related
to their unintended consequences for vulnerable
populations in targeted countries. There are also
suspicions of politicization vis-à-vis imposing or lifting
these sanctions, which prompts us to question their
legitimacy as a tool to exert political pressure.
At present, the Sudan is targeted by sanctions
imposed on it under resolution 1591 (2005) and
subsequent resolutions. Although these measures are
part of targeted sanctions in response to the situation
that prevailed in Darfur more than 16 years ago, they
nonetheless have had a negative impact on the country
as a whole. This is an issue that has been flagged
by a number of Chairs of the Sanctions Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005). Flows
of foreign direct investment have been affected, which
has generated a climate of mistrust and uncertainty,
with negative consequences for the socioeconomic life
of the people.
In order to prevent the unintended consequences of
sanctions, they should be imposed on a limited basis,
with peaceful avenues set out in the Charter being a
preferred option. There is also a need to clearly define
the objectives of sanctions regimes, based on realistic
and relevant foundations that are applicable and
avoiding politicization. Furthermore, the imposition
of sanctions should be carried out within a determined
time frame and lifted once the circumstances justifying
their imposition change.
The conditions demanded of targeted countries or
parties should be realistic and clearly defined. Sanctions
should also be reviewed and reconsidered periodically
so as to ensure that they reflect developments that
change the triggering conditions. They should never be
imposed indefinitely.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Madam President,
allow me to congratulate you and your delegation on the
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, and to tell you that have you have the
support of my delegation. In the same vein, allow me
to welcome to the Council those whose two-year terms
2224425

07/02/2022

General issues relating to sanctions

commenced as of 1 January. We wish them well. We
would also like to thank Under-Secretaries-General
DiCarlo and Griffith for their briefings.
My delegation is grateful to the Russian delegation
for convening this debate on “General issues relating
to sanctions: preventing their humanitarian and
unintended consequences”. Although no sanctions
have been imposed on my country directly either by
the United Nations or bilaterally by Member States,
nevertheless the targeted sanctions imposed unfairly
on officials and entities and the arms embargo have
impacted the people of South Sudan negatively. The
perception that has created is reflected in how the
business community has been faced with difficulties
in transacting business, especially with the banks or
the corresponding banks to the local banks, which, in
the time of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), make
trade expensive and take longer. Consumers are feeling
the impact in the market, which makes their lives and
livelihoods more difficult.
As a country that became independent after a long
civil war that spanned more than 50 years and reeled
from an internal conflict, South Sudan believes that
the Security Council ought to have had alternative
mechanisms among its tools for conflict resolution other
than sanctions as a means to resolve political problems.
But using sanctions as a preferred method to achieve
its desired goal without necessarily exhausting better
options aggravated the situation, as sanctions or fear
thereof polarized the parties and widened the gap in
the quest for lasting peace and security, which further
aggravated the humanitarian situation, especially
during the COVID-19 pandemic.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate that South
Sudan does not support sanctions in any shape or form,
especially when they do not achieve their desired and
intended goal. The Security Council and the United
Nations system in general ought to seek a peaceful
world through means other than sanctions. One cannot
seek or maintain world peace using harsh means.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mali.
Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): I should
like to begin by congratulating the Russian presidency
of the Security Council for having organized this
debate, on preventing the humanitarian and unintended
consequences of sanctions.

S/PV. 8962

More than half a century after the establishment
of the first sanctions regime, Mali is convinced that
today’s discussion will enable a greater understanding
of all general sanctions-related issues, particularly
the prevention of their unintended humanitarian
consequences for innocent people.
I know that the Security Council has made progress
since 1968, as underlined this morning, by moving from
global to more targeted sanctions so that they are in line
with clearly defined objectives from the start, while
also implementing carveouts for humanitarian reasons
or to promote dialogue in a peace process. Nonetheless,
Security Council sanctions could be further improved in
the spirit of the 2005 World Summit Outcome document
(resolution 60/1), which provides, in its paragraph 106,
that sanctions should be
“implemented in ways that balance effectiveness
to achieve the desired results against the possible
adverse consequences, including socioeconomic
and humanitarian consequences, for populations”.
The Security Council will recall that in 2017
it decided on an asset freeze and travel ban against
those responsible for blocking the implementation
of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali resulting from the Algiers process. Today, four
years after its establishment. it has become relevant
to undertake a careful process of reflection on the
effectiveness of that individual sanctions regime.
The goal of finding a happy medium between
the effectiveness and the harmful consequences of
sanctions should also inspire regional and subregional
organizations when they decide to resort to sanctions
against a member State for various reasons. The
political, economic and financial sanctions imposed
by the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the West African Economic and
Monetary Union (WAEMU) against Mali on 9 January
will have disastrous humanitarian consequences for
the Malian population, which has already been sorely
tested by a decade of particularly deadly warfare, with
the disastrous effects that, alas, we all are aware of.
Most of the sanctions have no legal basis. They
are blatant violations of the foundational texts of those
organizations and a breach of the principles of solidarity
and the pan-African ideal. I would recall, with regard
to WAEMU, that an embargo decided by Heads of State
and Government enforced against a sovereign State
represents a manifest violation of the WAEMU Treaty

222442525/28

S/PV.8962

General issues relating to sanctions

and the statute of the Central Bank of Western African
States (BCEAO). In addition, an asset freeze against a
State or public or quasi-public companies in that State
may not be enforced by the Central Bank, which remains
a totally independent body to which each member State
has conceded its sovereign right of issuance.
Turning to ECOWAS, the Malian Government has
denounced and rejected the closure of the land and air
borders between ECOWAS member States and Mali.
We have further condemned the suspension of trade
transactions between ECOWAS countries and Mali
as well as the freezing of the assets of the Republic
of Mali in ECOWAS central banks. Mali, finally,
opposed the freezing of the assets of the Malian State
and of public and quasi-public companies in ECOWAS
commercial banks.
ECOWAS is trying to explain, unconvincingly, that
those sanctions are not targeting the Malian people and
that essential products have been spared by the scope
of the border closure between ECOWAS member States
and Mali, which is a landlocked country. However,
the reality is quite different. ECOWAS and WAEMU
sanctions essentially target the population of Mali,
which instead would require regional solidarity. Indeed,
it is with the Government’s frozen resources, at the level
of the BCEAO, that Mali is running its hospitals, its
health-care centres and its schools for the benefit of the
Malian people. It is also with those frozen assets that
Mali is paying its civil servants and providing water,
electricity and other basic social services to its citizens.
Mali was not able to pay back its investors last
month owing to the asset freeze on the books of the
Central Bank of West African States. That is also
preventing Mali from seeking to assist its refugees and
displaced persons.
It is therefore clear that the sanctions imposed by
ECOWAS are essentially targeting the Malian people.
Nonetheless, despite the illegal, illegitimate and
inhuman nature of those sanctions, Mali remains open to
dialogue with ECOWAS to reach a consensus that takes
account of both the best interests of the Malian people
and respect for our common organization’s principles.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Iraq.
Mr. Fatah (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My country’s
delegation commends the efforts of the Russian
delegation, which is presiding over the Security Council
26/28

07/02/2022

this month, and thanks it for having organized this
debate on the humanitarian consequences of sanctions.
Iraq shares the views of many Member States on
the need to reduce the negative consequences of the
sanctions regimes imposed on countries. Iraq’s position
is aligned with the clear and transparent position of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries on sanctions. It is
important to be careful when implementing sanctions
so as to prevent undue impacts on society and the
delivery of humanitarian assistance.
Iraq stresses the importance of being cautious
when implementing sanctions regimes, while taking
into account the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). Efforts must be made to
prevent any consequences on vulnerable groups, as well
as on the health, education and other service sectors
of the societies affected. Such consequences would
undoubtedly prevent the achievement of the SDGs and
impede collective efforts to leave no one behind. We
therefore stress the need to protect the interests of all
Member States equally.
Despite the socioeconomic and humanitarian
consequences of any sanctions regime and the high
costs incurred by the society affected, they cannot be
compared to the scourge of wars and armed conflicts.
For that reason, sanctions regimes must be a means
to maintain peace and security and not an end in
themselves. They must be targeted, smart and able to
achieve their goals without exposing an entire society
to shortages and need, because that could lead to violent
extremism, the militarization of society or an increase
in organized crime.
My country’s delegation also stresses the
importance of following up the implementation of the
sanctions imposed on Da’esh and Al-Qaida and their
affiliated individuals and entities, especially in terms
of impeding their funding and preventing the crossborder movement of foreign terrorist fighters.
My country’s delegation believes that the
international community must work together to
promote partnership. That principle applies to sanctions
regimes as well. We also stress the importance of
evaluating the lessons learned from cases in which
sanctions were imposed. It is important to establish
benchmarks and develop concepts to better protect
people from the negative humanitarian consequences
of sanctions regimes.
2224425

07/02/2022

General issues relating to sanctions

We also stress the importance of establishing
benchmarks and practical principles to ensure
optimal humanitarian exemptions for the specialized
organizations that provide assistance in sanctioned
countries. In implementing sanctions and adopting
humanitarian exemptions to facilitate and provide
adequate assistance, services and supplies to protect
societies from the consequences of sanctions, it is
also important to take such exemptions into account
during natural, environmental and health disasters and
challenges such as the coronavirus pandemic.
My country’s delegation greatly appreciates the
significant support provided by the Security Council to
protect the Iraqi funds frozen in Member States pursuant
to resolution 1518 (2003). We call upon the Council
to urge all States Members of the United Nations to
transfer such Iraqi funds to the Government of Iraq as
soon as possible in order that they may be invested in
the national sustainable development process.
In conclusion, we reaffirm the importance of taking
collective action to protect and maintain international
peace and security. All Member States have the
collective responsibility to spare no effort in promoting
and realizing that goal for the benefit of all humankind.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): I will deliver an abridged version
of my statement on behalf of the Group of Friends in
Defence of the Charter of the United Nations. I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the delegations of Algeria,
Angola, Belarus, Bolivia, Cambodia, China, Cuba, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Iran, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Nicaragua, the State of Palestine, Russia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Syria, Zimbabwe and
my own country, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
all of which are members of the Group of Friends.
The Group of Friends recognizes the authority,
functions and powers of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
believe, however, that the measures provided for in
Chapter VII must be taken only as a last resort and in
accordance with the purposes and principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations.

S/PV. 8962

Full consideration must be given to the short- and
long-term effects of measures taken or to be taken by
the Security Council, precisely in order to ensure that
unintended consequences, in particular the negative
impact on civilians and the provision of humanitarian
assistance, are avoided and prevented at all times. We
emphasize the need to ensure that the populations
of States subject to such measures not be directly or
indirectly victimized or deprived of their own means of
subsistence and development.
Similarly, efforts must also be made to address
concerns about issues of due process and transparency
in inclusion, exclusion and exemption procedures,
including those of a humanitarian nature and in relation
to the possibility that the populations of countries
subject to such measures be allowed access to adequate
resources for the financing of humanitarian imports,
especially as a concrete way to prevent any possible
negative humanitarian and socioeconomic impacts of
measures adopted by the Security Council on the basic
living conditions of the civilian population.
We also reject the manipulation of humanitarian
assistance for political purposes. Humanitarian
assistance constitutes a fundamental component of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and must be
provided in accordance with the guiding principles set
out in General Assembly resolution 46/182.
We must raise awareness of the growing and
worrisome trend that, when it comes to sanctions, the
authority and powers of the Security Council have been
usurped by a number of States that consider unilateral
coercive measures — whether political or economic
in nature — as their preferred instrument for exerting
pressure, particularly on developing countries, in order
to bend the sovereign will of another State to win any
kind of advantage. That practice is not only a flagrant
violation of the Charter but also a sign of contempt for
the authority and powers of this organ, which in turn
undermines its integrity and effectiveness.
Today we are seeing not only an unprecedented
resort to unilateral sanctions but also a new generation
of illegal measures, which are currently much crueller
and more destructive. Such illegal measures are used
as weapons in the pursuit of geopolitical and economic
objectives, but now their implementation is being
expanded by and coordinated among a larger group
of Governments.

222442527/28

S/PV.8962

General issues relating to sanctions

It is what might be called the new group unilateralism.
Its goal, however, remains the same — to bend the
political will of sovereign and independent nations and
restrict their industrial development and technological
progress, while inflicting the greatest possible pain
and suffering on their populations — all within the
framework of a policy of maximum calculated cruelty.
The implementation of unilateral coercive
measures — the goal of which is to attack the civilian
population as part of a generalized and systematic
policy that ultimately generates unnecessary suffering
amounting to crimes against humanity — impedes the
full achievement of economic and social development,
particularly in developing countries, and consequently
has a negative impact on the realization and full
enjoyment of human rights. In other words, they create
and exacerbate poverty and inequality and represent
a deliberate attack on the right to development.
Likewise, interference in the internal and sovereign
affairs of States, coupled with the imposition of
economic, financial or commercial unilateral coercive
measures, in addition to representing widespread
violation of human rights and causing great suffering
and pain for entire populations, deliberately fuels
conflicts and crises, including through the creation of
intentional human-made humanitarian crises by the
very sponsors of those illegal measures, which have
now even become structural factors and key drivers of
contemporary crises.

28/28

07/02/2022

We therefore call on the Security Council to condemn
once and for all the imposition and strengthening of
unilateral coercive measures, particularly amid the
worst pandemic facing humankind in the past 100 years.
We further call on the Council not to ignore the many
calls for their elimination, particularly in the current
international situation. Their negative and often tragic
impact, as documented by independent United Nations
experts, added to the impact of secondary sanctions
and the phenomenon of so-called overcompliance,
continues to prevent States under unilateral coercive
measures from effectively and promptly obtaining
food, medicines, supplies, equipment, vaccines and
other essential goods for the civilian population. That
clearly demonstrates the ineffectiveness, or rather the
non-existence, of the supposed humanitarian exemptions
in force. That is acknowledged in the conclusions of the
Special Rapporteur on the negative impact of unilateral
coercive measures on the enjoyment of human rights.
In conclusion, the Group of Friends undertakes to
spare no effort in preserving, promoting and defending
the validity and primacy of the United Nations Charter.
To that end, we must, on the one hand, ensure that
unilateral sanctions are fully and immediately lifted
and, on the other hand, move forward in conducting
a comprehensive and exhaustive review of measures
imposed by the Security Council so as to ensure that
they are in accordance with the letter and spirit of the
principles enshrined in our founding Charter.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

2224425
