S/PV.8176

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8176th meeting

Wednesday, 7 February 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Hickey
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2018/76)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-03500 (E)
*1803500*

S/PV.8176

Kosovo

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2018/76)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Serbia to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Tanin joins today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Pristina.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Vlora
Çitaku to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/76, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tanin.
Mr. Tanin: At the outset, I would like to
congratulate all the new Member States that have joined
the Security Council in 2018. In particular, I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and Kuwait on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. Today I will update the Council on new
developments, some of which are well documented in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/76) before the
Council, while focusing on key facts that have dominated
the reporting period and the days that followed.
2/22

07/02/2018

The new enlargement strategy of the European
Union (EU) for the Western Balkans was launched
yesterday. It is the most ambitious and far-reaching
framework for engagement since the Thessaloniki
Summit of 2003. The new strategy paves the way for
enlargement linked to political and socioeconomic
reform, as well as reconciliation and a lasting resolution
of the disputes. There was mixed reaction in Kosovo
but most Pristina leaders emphasized the importance
of the new strategy for the realization of Kosovo’s EU
perspective. Within the new framework, it is clear that
dialogue and the normalization of relations between
Belgrade and Pristina is a prerequisite for Kosovo’s
EU aspirations.
While there have been a number of formal and
informal high-level contacts of leaders from Pristina
and Belgrade, for more than a year, the dialogue has
produced little substantive progress at the technical
level. A number of standing agreements are yet to be fully
implemented. Among those, the establishment of the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
is essential. The year 2018 can provide new momentum
for that dialogue. As the EU High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy herself highlighted
yesterday, the dialogue could be positively concluded
with the sufficient will of the leaders and the adequate
encouragement of the international community.
The recent attempt to abrogate the law on the
Specialist Chambers by a number of members of the
ruling coalition in the Kosovo Assembly drew attention
and raised grave concerns among all stakeholders about
Kosovo’s commitment to justice and the impartial
application of the rule of law. The establishment of
the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and the Specialist
Prosecutor’s Office, endorsed by the Assembly in
2015, was a major achievement for Kosovo. Yet, in
contradiction to that advancement, on the evening
of 22 December 2017, some Kosovo members of
Parliament launched an effort to revoke a key law
supporting the work of the Specialist Chambers. Nearly
all regional and international partners of Kosovo made
it clear that such a move, if successful, would be deeply
damaging to Kosovo’s aspirations and reputation.
Some political leaders withdrew their support for that
proposal. However, for now, the motion to repeal the law
remains on the Assembly’s agenda. The President of the
Assembly of Kosovo assured me that leaders in Pristina
would stand by their international commitments. I
take this opportunity to reiterate that the court does
18-03500

07/02/2018

Kosovo

not target any particular community or group but only
the criminal responsibility of individuals. That is well
known by many people in Kosovo who understand that
repealing the Specialist Chambers is simply not an
option. The only way forward is by accepting justice.
The murder, on 16 January, of Oliver Ivanović, the
prominent Kosovo Serb politician, in broad daylight
sent shockwaves throughout Kosovo and across the
region, raising concerns about the prospect of another
wave of political instability. Hours after it took place,
I condemned the murder, calling for calm and for swift
and decisive work by the investigating authorities. All
representatives of the international community were
united in that view. Moreover, I have urged all parties
to work together to ensure that the perpetrators of that
brutal act are brought to justice.
It is important to note that the leaders in Belgrade
and Pristina have reacted to the event in a prompt
and responsible manner. Since the Kosovo Police are
leading the investigation, Pristina and Belgrade have
come to an understanding on sharing information and
supporting the process. Serbian President Aleksandar
Vučić visited Kosovo shortly after the crime and told
the Kosovo Serb communities in the north and the south
of Kosovo that peace was of paramount importance. I
would also like to underline the constructive role of the
Pristina officials in facilitating that visit.
In my meetings with leaders in Pristina, they
made it clear to me that they are doing whatever is
necessary to find the perpetrators of that crime and
the motives for the killing. Belgrade is cooperating
with the investigation but concerns remain, including
about the efficiency of information exchange. Failure
to identify the perpetrators would not only be a terrible
miscarriage of justice but also undermine confidence
on all sides.
In 2017, Kosovo underwent parliamentary and
municipal elections and the formation of a new
Government. The people of Kosovo have high
expectations of their Government and the Assembly given
their needs and the promises made to them. The harsh
realities of everyday life in Kosovo — unemployment,
challenges to good governance and economic and social
development, as well as corruption and organized
crime — all require political actors to come together,
transcend their differences and achieve unity of purpose
for the good of the people. They will be assisted in
that by ensuring a positive and productive relationship

S/PV. 8176

with the international community and all institutional
presences on the ground.
A welcome example has been the unified efforts
of political parties to adopt the goals of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. I commend the
Government’s commitment to strive to end poverty,
improve education, prioritize gender equality, protect
the environment, promote a just and peaceful society
and ensure prosperity for all. Those commitments
are fundamental to overcoming the challenges
facing Kosovo.
The international community continues to assist the
Kosovo institutions in promoting justice, the rule of law
and human rights. The Government of Kosovo adopted
four draft laws on the functioning of the judicial system
aimed at increasing its efficiency and transparency.
I would like to mention that judicial integration is
moving forward, with officials at the Basic Court and
Basic Prosecution Office of Mitrovica working as part
of a unitary Kosovo justice system. The United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
is working hand in hand with the other international
presences in order to enable the full functioning of that
integrated system, following up on issues such as full
compliance with language rights.
At the same time, we take note of the decision of
the Government of Kosovo to recognize and verify the
status of victims of conflict-related sexual violence,
including the allocation of monthly pensions for
survivors. Additionally, I acknowledge the appointment
by the Prime Minister of Kosovo, Ramush Haradinaj,
of the Deputy Chair of the Kosovo Government
Commission on Missing Persons.
Despite those important steps, many challenges
remain on furthering the rule of law and strengthening
human rights in Kosovo. Efforts in those areas must be
guided by international best practices. Among a number
of setbacks to the rule of law, the use of presidential
pardons for three individuals convicted of murder
in the so-called Hajra family case was particularly
concerning. Human rights protections should not
be diminished by political considerations or ethnic
dimensions; such attempts would cast a dark shadow
over the promises of a rules-based society.
UNMIK and its partners have assisted in
strengthening the role of women and youth, as well as
in helping consolidate their essential contribution to
peace, security and trust-building across communities.

18-035003/22

S/PV.8176

Kosovo

The annual international campaign 16 Days of Activism
against Gender-based Violence took place throughout
Kosovo during the reporting period. The campaign
highlighted actions on international, governmental and
civil society levels that contributed to public awareness
of the drivers and consequences of violence against
women and girls. Women still face an uphill challenge in
electoral politics. Of 204 mayoral candidates across all
of Kosovo’s municipalities, only eight were women. A
concerted effort is required to achieve a more balanced
representation and provide women with a more levelplaying field.
Similarly, the youth and peace and security
agenda remains important in Kosovo. The youth of
Kosovo, despite their understandable frustrations with
the status quo, provide hope for a better present and
future. UNMIK continues to engage young people from
across Kosovo through initiatives such as the United
Nations Youth Assembly in Kosovo. I am inspired by
the strength of character of the young leaders I have
met — leaders who have the courage to join hands
across societal divides and develop a common strategy
and vision for a successful, multi-ethnic society.
Building trust between communities remains
essential for the Mission. Sustainable peace cannot be
achieved without the engagement of all institutions and
the assistance of the international community to build
bridges for long-term trust. Our Mission has undertaken
a number of initiatives focused on supporting grassroots
trust-building and using the know-how of the United
Nations to help achieve that end. There are many
Kosovo leaders, at all levels across society, who are
committed to that agenda and actively supporting it.
This moment represents an opportunity for both
progress and moving the political dialogue forward.
I completed a series of consultations just before
this Council meeting with leaders and officials in
Pristina, Belgrade and Tirana. Despite the significant
differences voiced, I am convinced that those leaders
also have a broader understanding of the nature of the
challenges that need to be overcome and equally, not to
continuously postpone action to another day. I would
like to underline that despite all the disagreements,
the potential for trust and more forward-looking
decision-making should not be underestimated.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Tanin
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Dačić.
4/22

07/02/2018

Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation
provided by the delegation): I would like to thank
Secretary-General
Guterres
and
his
Special
Representative, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for their submission
of the report before us (S/2018/76) and their overall
dedication and engagement in the realization of the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) under resolution 1244
(1999). I would also like to recognize and express
my gratitude to the President and the members of
the Security Council for the extensive attention they
accord to the continued consideration, review and
understanding of the issue, which is of paramount
importance to the Republic of Serbia.
Some members of the Security Council suggested
before this meeting that, in the delivery of our
statements, we stick to the topic of the meeting,
demonstrate constructiveness, maintain calm and avoid
all provocations and confrontation. Just as I did in my
previous statement (see S/PV.8100), I shall focus on
the current situation in Kosovo and Metohija and the
developments that took place in the preceding quarter,
as well as on the report of the Secretary-General. I hope
that the representative of Pristina will also honour those
recommendations and that she will not, as she did in the
past, hold a history lesson full of falsehoods, unfounded
accusations and unwarranted embellishments of the
situation in Kosovo and Metohija, disregarding, all
along, the report of the Secretary-General and the
realities on the ground.
The reality on the ground is that the First Agreement
of Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations
was signed as early as August 2013, and that Agreement
provides for the establishment of a community of
Serb-majority municipalities. I would like to remind
those present that I signed that Brussels Agreement
together with Hashim Thaçi and Catherine Ashton, the
latter on behalf of the European Union. As members
of the Council know very well, the establishment of
the community is a question of crucial and enormous
importance for Serbia as it aims to ensure and protect
the vital interests of the Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija
and improve their everyday lives.
For four and a half years now, Serbia has
been waiting patiently for Pristina to fulfil its
fundamentally important obligation. In the meantime,
30 non-permanent Member States have been in and out
of this esteemed organ, and each and every one of them
called on Pristina to fulfil its obligations. Unfortunately,
18-03500

07/02/2018

Kosovo

rather than forward, the movement thus far has only
been backward. In his report, the Secretary-General
notes that
“There was no progress towards the establishment
of the community/association of Serb majority
municipalities in Kosovo ... No indications were
provided about when and how steps towards the
establishment of the community/association might
be taken.” (S/2018/76, para. 21)
That is the reality on the ground.
I would also like to remind members on this
occasion that Serbia’s participation in the dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina was both dedicated and
responsible, and that, irrespective of the hurdles and
challenges, my country approached it with the strong
conviction that there is no alternative to such an approach
and that only within a status-neutral framework is it
possible to contribute to regional peace, security and
stability, as well as the realization of conditions for
the Western Balkans unimpeded progress towards
European Union membership.
Convinced that this approach has no alternative
and that all issues must be resolved peacefully through
dialogue, for its part Serbia has fulfilled its obligations
consistently and in good faith. I emphasize, once again,
that Serbia is ready to continue engaging in dialogue;
however, it is questionable if a new agreement would
have any meaning at all, given that four and a half years
after the signing of the Brussels Agreement we continue
to be saddled with a lack of indications as to when and
how it will be implemented for the establishment of
the community.
The reality on the ground is that Oliver Ivanović,
the leader of the Civic Initiative “Freedom, Democracy,
Justice”, was shot dead in Kosovska Mitrovica on
16 January and his murder has dramatically jeopardized
security in Kosovo and Metohija. We welcome
the reaction of Special Representative Tanin, who
condemned that gruesome act and called for a speedy
and resolute investigation, providing assurances that all
international agencies will support the authorities and
help them arrest those responsible for the crime.
The murder of Oliver Ivanović is a senseless
terrorist act that threatens the stability not only
of northern Kosovo and Metohija, but also the
entire region. Serbia’s political leaders and State
authorities called for a calm and stable situation in the

S/PV. 8176

province. My country’s responsible approach to the
situation was confirmed on 21 and 22 January when
the President of Serbia, Aleksandar Vučić, visited the
Serbs in northern and central Kosovo and Metohija, and
called on them to maintain stability, peace, calm and
dignity, while emphasizing that all problems must be
solved peacefully through dialogue.
Aware of the seriousness of the situation, Serbia sent
correspondence to UNMMIK and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), requesting
that its State organs take part in the investigation of the
murder, convinced that their participation would help to
quickly and efficiently establish the truth. The request
was reiterated by President Vučić in his telephone
conversation with Hashim Thaçi. It was rejected by the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo
and Metohija, which insisted that the investigation be
conducted exclusively by the investigation authorities
of Kosovo. However, three weeks after the murder, we
have no information whatsoever except for statements
by Pristina representatives that the settling of scores
with local mafias was involved and that the murder
was not ethnically motivated. Such statements have
served only to obfuscate Pristina’s inability or its
lack of readiness to conduct an investigation into the
gruesome crime.
I emphasize once again that bringing those who
ordered the crime to be committed and its perpetrators
to justice, as well as establishing the motives of the
crime, are of vital importance to maintaining peace and
trust among the people of Kosovo and Metohija. The
tragic event proves that the overall security situation
in the entire province is very serious, volatile and
sensitive, and that the presence of the international
community is required.
The reality on the ground is also that, at the end
of last year and at the start of this year, the power
structure and the political parties and leaders of
Kosovo and Metohija tried to revoke the Specialist
Chambers law intended to conduct trials for crimes
allegedly committed by the Kosovo Liberation Army
(KLA). There is no need to assure the Council of
Serbia’s concern about the situation because Council
members were themselves surprised and concerned
about the developments. In his report the SecretaryGeneral expresses deep disappointment. He states that
it is a step backwards in one of the most important
areas, and strongly calls on Pristina to demonstrate its
commitment to justice and the rule of law.

18-035005/22

S/PV.8176

Kosovo

United States Ambassador Greg Delawie stated
that any initiative to change the law governing the
Specialist Chambers will have a profound negative
impact on Kosovo’ future in Europe and its relations
with the United States. The head of the European Union
Office in Pristina, Nataliya Apostolova, stated that she
was shocked by the Kosovo Assembly initiative to
revoke or abrogate in any way the law governing the
Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor’s
Office. German Ambassador Christian Heldt warned
that the decision on the decision to establish Specialist
Chambers could affect relations between Kosovo and
its friends abroad. Those statements are clear evidence
that the international community does not share the
views of those who are behind the initiative, and that it
believes that the heinous crimes committed against the
Serbs and other non-Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija
reported by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council
of Europe Special Rapporteur Dick Marty must not go
unpunished and cannot be relativized or justified.
Mindful of the moral responsibility towards
the victims and their families, we believe that the
establishment of criminal responsibility in an impartial
and credible way and the punishment of criminals will
have a measurable impact on the fight against impunity
and demonstrate that justice is achievable for all victims.
I would like to assure the Council that Serbia is ready to
provide the evidence it possesses on the commission of
brutal crimes, which have no statute of limitations and
must not be forgotten. In accordance with its laws and
with international law, Serbia will continue to prosecute
those for whom there is convincing evidence that they
have committed criminal offences of war crimes against
the civilian population in Kosovo and Metohija.
The positions held by some individuals in the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government cannot and
must not deter us from achieving justice. They do not
release those individuals from criminal responsibility
for perpetrating the offences. In that regard, we were
concerned about and disappointed in INTERPOL’s
recent decisions to remove international arrest warrants
for a certain number of persons from Kosovo and
Metohija from its list, including Hashim Thaçi and
Ramush Haradinaj. Let me state unequivocally that
such decisions set a precedent that is at variance with
the rules of the organization.
Regrettably, the so-called President of Kosovo,
Hashim Thaçi, pardoned three KLA members sentenced
to 30 years in prison for killing all five members of the
6/22

07/02/2018

Albanian Hajra family near Glogovac in August 2001.
The victims included 3-year-old Adelina and 9-yearold Mimoza. According to the EULEX report, their
father, Hamsa Hajra, was a member of the Ministry
of the Interior of the Republic of Serbia and the entire
family was killed as an act of KLA retaliation. In a joint
communiqué, the Embassies of France, Germany, Italy,
the United Kingdom and the United States in Pristina
expressed deep concern about the decision taken by
Hashim Thaçi to pardon the criminals. There is no need
for me to assure the Council that the decision sparked
concern among the Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija.
I recall that, in addition to approximately 16,500
internally displaced persons in the province, more
than 200,000 continue to reside outside Kosovo and
Metohija in central Serbia more than 18 years after
the arrival of the international presence. Only 1.9 per
cent of them have achieved sustainable returns, to
which UNMIK should pay additional and maximum
attention. It is noted in the report that the lowest
number of returns since 2000 was recorded in 2017.
Regrettably, only 498 people returned to the province.
On one hand, that statistic is shocking; on the other
hand, it is understandable and raises the question of
who wants to return to a place to suffer discrimination
every day; where nationalistic and religious hatred is
not punished; property is not protected; jobs are few;
people are exposed to intimidation, arbitrary arrests
and ethnically motivated violence; the grave sites of
their forefathers cannot be visited; and where the rule
of law is implemented by institutions that have not
brought a single legally valid decision for the killing of
a large number of Serbs since the end of the conflict?
I pose the question again: Who would want to return
to that situation? Before those problems are resolved
structurally and institutionally, regrettably, the number
of returnees will regrettably only be lower. In his
report the Secretary-General mentions the continued
lack of progress in implementing the ruling of the
Constitutional Court of Kosovo in favour of the Visoki
Dečani Monastery in a case of disputed land ownership,
I would also like to underscore that the protection of
the historical, cultural and religious heritage of the
Serbian people in Kosovo and Metohija, which is
at the same time an important part of European and
world heritage, is a priority for the Republic of Serbia.
There are harmful institutional attempts to conceal
the true identity of Serbian heritage in the province,
which is frequently designated as medieval Balkan or
18-03500

07/02/2018

Kosovo

Byzantine. However, such designations continue to be
omitted from crucial Serbian heritage.
A responsible, realistic and rational approach is
needed in the relations with Pristina. Serbia continues
its internal dialogue to which President Vučić called
its citizens. A working group has been established to
support the dialogue. It is conducted at a number of
levels and with the participation of all the relevant social
groups. I assure the Council that Serbia wants to make
a serious and responsible contribution to the stability
of the region, political cooperation, understanding and
economic progress. We want to offer a solution that
would provide an opportunity for a historic agreement
with the Albanian community in Kosovo and Metohija
and will not cause new divisions, misunderstandings,
instability and conflict. The solution must honour
the interests of Serbia and the needs of the Serbian
community in Kosovo and Metohija. To achieve that
goal, genuine commitment and determination on both
sides are needed in order to build very necessary trust
and respect.
To that end, I would like to point out that the
inappropriate and disconcerting statements made
by some leaders of Albanian political parties do not
contribute to the creation of a constructive atmosphere
for the achievement of a historic agreement. Let me
emphasize in particular that Pristina’s one-sided acts,
as well as each and every attempt to solve problems
unilaterally, are entirely unacceptable to Serbia. I
underscore that Serbia is firmly opposed to Pristina’s
intention to form a Kosovo army. Those and other
similar attempts are very dangerous and could threaten
not only the security of the province and the dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina, but also the stability of
the entire region.
In addition, we have witnessed for some time
attempts by Pristina to become a full-fledged member
of international organizations despite the opposition of a
considerable number of countries, including even some
of those that have recognized the unilateral declaration
of independence of Kosovo. The most recent instances
of such efforts were Kosovo’s attempts to become
a member of UNESCO, INTERPOL and the World
Customs Organization. All those attempts, let me point
out, run contrary to the basic principles of international
law and are detrimental to — while needlessly
politicizing — the work of international organizations.
I take this opportunity to express special gratitude to
all the countries that, with regard to that issue, support

S/PV. 8176

Serbia and, at the same time, insist, together with
Serbia, on principled respect for universally accepted
norms of the contemporary international order as it
relates to upholding consistently the principles of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States.
I would also like to remind Council members
that for a decade — that is, since Kosovo declared
independence by a unilateral act — Serbia has patiently,
dedicatedly and responsibly apprised the international
community of the apparent danger resulting from
unilateral acts and admonished that the unilateral
declaration of independence of Kosovo is a very
dangerous and unacceptable precedent that, as we have
witnessed, has already emboldened other separatist
and secessionist movements all over the world. As in
the past, Serbia continues to take measures to protect
its national and State interests, with full respect for
the basic principles of international law — primarily
the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity
as universal values reasserting freedom and equality
among States and peoples. In that regard, I would like to
thank once again those States that have not recognized
the unilateral declaration of independence of Kosovo
for their consistent support and principled respect of
the Charter of the United Nations and resolution 1244
(1999). At the same time, I call on those States that have
done so to reconsider their decision and accordingly
encourage both sides to find a mutually acceptable
solution through dialogue.
Lastly, I would like to call on all members of
the Security Council to focus together on finding a
compromise and sustainable solution to this decadeslong question and fully support UNMIK in the
meantime, as its unimpeded presence in Kosovo and
Metohija is key to building lasting peace, stability and
security, as well as confidence among communities,
and solving the problems facing the members of the
Serbian and other non-Albanian communities in
the province. In that context, I would point out the
importance of maintaining UNMIK’s financial and
personnel capacities, which will allow the Mission to
meet the complex demands of the implementation of
its mandate.
What I have spoken about today is a testament
to the reality that there are many problems, that the
security situation is volatile and that commitment,
patience and hard work will be required for us to be able
to communicate a different reality to the international
community from this same Chamber in three months

18-035007/22

S/PV.8176

Kosovo

from now. For its part, Serbia is looking forward to the
future and ready to invest all its resources to make a
contribution towards achieving those goals.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Ms. Çitaku.
Ms. Çitaku: It is an honour to be here today. This
month is very special for me and my fellow citizens.
On 17 February, just 10 days from today, Kosovo
will celebrate its first double-digit birthday. As I sit
at this table and in this revered Chamber, together
with representatives of States with their admirable
centuries-old traditions of statehood — representatives
of nations that have given so much to humankind, from
science and technology, to arts and sports — I cannot
help but reflect on our journey as an independent
republic and wonder what Kosovo will look like in 10,
20 and 100 years from today. I wonder: How well have
we done as a young democracy in meeting the rightful
expectations of the Kosovar people? How well have
our institutions performed? How much has our society
evolved, and, most important, what is the legacy that
we will leave behind?
Ten years later, Kosovo has been recognized by
the overwhelming majority of the free nations of the
world. Today Kosovo is a member of dozens of regional
and international organizations. We are also very much
aware that we would never have made it this far without
States Members’ unwavering support. The United
Nations was there for us in our darkest hour of need, and
for that we will be forever grateful. Today I must pay
tribute to one great man in particular — Sergio Vieira
de Mello — who was the first Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Kosovo. When Mr. De Mello
arrived in Kosovo he found a country in ruins, a nation
torn apart and devastated by the pains and horrors of
war. Yet he somehow managed to bring our people
together and establish a United Nations administration
in Kosovo. Sergio may no longer be with us, but he will
always be remembered.
Ten years of statehood have taught us that survival
and independence cannot alone sustain us alone. They
are not our sole concerns. Freedom and food on the table
are not the only things that people require. They require
education, health care, respect and dignity. In Kosovo
we have come to learn that statehood is not only about
building Government and institutions. Civil society, the
free press and the non-governmental sector are equally
as important, and often a driving force for growth.
8/22

07/02/2018

According to international organizations, Kosovo
enjoys greater freedom of speech today than any other
country in the region. That remarkable achievement is
entirely attributable to those Kosovar journalists, who
never bow to power, surrender to threats or compromise
the truth. In Kosovo we have a vibrant civil society
that, independent of the Government, rallies around
issues ranging from war crimes committed during the
war in Kosovo and special courts, to air pollution and
energy costs.
Although our institutions may have their flaws,
the irrefutable truth is that our society has matured.
All one has to do is observe the manner in which
Kosovar society and media reacted to the unfortunate
assassination of Oliver Ivanović. Unlike what would
have probably occurred in the past, Mr. Ivanović’s
assassination was a murder that did not incite ethnic
hatred in Kosovo. In fact, local citizens and politicians
and the media — both Albanian and Serbian — agreed
that organized crime in northern Kosovo was to blame
for the murder. Of course, Mr. Ivanović himself was
a controversial figure. Nonetheless, we will leave no
stone unturned until the perpetrators of that crime
against him are brought to justice.
Allow me to also briefly address the debate
surrounding the Specialist Chambers. First, Kosovo
has an exemplary record with regard to cooperating
with international and local war crimes tribunals. Not
a single Kosovar Albanian indicted for war crimes has
ever attempted to escape justice. However, that is not
the case with any of the former Yugoslav republics.
In fact, if one looks at the numbers, they show that
more Albanians have been prosecuted and convicted
for war crimes in Kosovo than Serbs. Something is
tremendously wrong with that fact.
Secondly, no court can rewrite history or artificially
impose moral parity. The oppressor and the oppressed
are clearly defined in our recent tragic history.
Thirdly, people in Kosovo want justice. They want
justice for all of the victims, regardless of their ethnicity.
The sentiment has been displayed most powerfully in
various forms over the past few weeks. As a point of
reference, 80 members of Parliament voted to establish
the special court. Forty-three signatures to have a
debate about that court in the Parliament cannot, and
will not, undo that.
However, while we are on the topic of war crimes,
let me talk about crimes that the special court will not
18-03500

07/02/2018

Kosovo

be dealing with nor, for that matter, will any other court.
Take the Qyshk massacre, the trial which completely
fell apart in Serbia, despite the public testimony
of Serbian paramilitary Zoran Rašković about the
killing of Albanians by paramilitary units, which was
abundantly reported by the media. Or, consider the
execution of the Bytyqi brothers, for which another
witness came forward to testify just last week. Once
again, no measures were taken by the Serbian justice
system. Until convicted war criminals cease to be
praised and promoted, the feeling of impunity is here
to stay.
We are pleased that INTERPOL has decided to
remove Mr. Ramush Haradinaj and Hashim Thaçi from
its warrant list. That is a clear signal that INTERPOL
will no longer allow Serbia to misuse its red notices for
political gains. For the Council’s information, I note that
the Serbian justice system has accused and convicted
world leaders such as Bill Clinton, Tony Blair, Jacques
Chirac and most of the European Union Heads of State.
There is no doubt that Kosovo has made progress
and taken major steps forward. We just concluded
a nearly flawless electoral process. Every day, the
Kosovar people are demanding more accountability
from their elected representatives. According to the
World Bank, Kosovo’s gross domestic product growth
rate in 2017 was 4.4 per cent — the highest figure
reported in the region.
Needless to say, Kosovo is not a paradise, and many
challenges still linger. Yet for every challenge, for every
single institutional shortcoming, there is a success
story — a role model citizen that defies the odds and
pushes the boundaries. In a country where there is a lot
left to be done to improve the quality of education, where
we still have overcrowded classrooms and overworked
teachers, we also have young girls like Doruntina
Sylejmani, who won medals at the International Math
Olympiad. Today Doruntina is studying at Princeton,
with a full scholarship, and dreams of coming back to
help her country.
At a time of disbelief and doubt over whether the
justice system is worth fighting for, Shyhrete Berisha,
who witnessed the brutal execution of her husband and
her four children during the war in 1999, was exposed
to yet another form of injustice. She had to battle for
18 long years just to get back the keys to her own
house — the house in which she lived with her husband
and children. Throughout those 18 years, Shyhrete did

S/PV. 8176

not lose faith. She never gave up, and neither must we.
We owe it to Shyhrete and to the many others who share
similar experiences to work as hard as we possibly
can to improve our justice system and make sure that
everyone is equal in the eyes of the law.
Today survivors of sexual violence during the war
in Kosovo have a legally regulated status and can benefit
from pensions because of women like Kadire Tahiraj.
For years, this group of survivors of painful wartime
violence was completely neglected by institutions and
stigmatized by society. While the rest of us were either
hiding away from the truth or being both blind and deaf
to it, Kadire was diligently working with the survivors,
offering them all she could — care, medicine, shelter,
at times perhaps even just a shoulder to cry on. Kadire
fought tirelessly and kept her resolve even when all the
odds were stacked against her. Finally, 18 years after
the war, the Government has allocated the necessary
funds to implement programmes for these survivors.
It is because of women like Fahrije Hoti, that Krusha,
a village in south-western Kosovo, is no longer known
only for its tragic past. A young widow herself, living
in a village where most of the adult male population
was eradicated during the war, Fahrije resolved that the
best way to honour the fallen was by building a better
life for the ones that remain. She started by working her
patch of land and, with little to no institutional support,
managed to not only sustain herself, but also to help
organize other women to cultivate their fields and open
small farms and businesses. Today their products are
customer favourites in stores across our country.
Although Kosovo remains the only country in
Europe without visa liberalization, our talented youth
transcend borders and inspire their peers throughout
the European continent and beyond. Just last month,
Forbes published its famous 30 Under 30 List. Three
amazing Kosovar women — Blerta, Dafina and
Bilna — made us all proud by appearing on them.
These young ladies are working hard to increase the
transparency and accountability of the Government by
utilizing digital platforms and novel technology. They
understand, better than most, that European integration
is an internal dynamic, that it is, first and foremost,
about building and applying standards of transparency
at home. We are all proud of these young women, and I
am sure that we will be hearing more from them.
Let us not forget the one and only Majlinda
Kelmendi — our golden pride, our golden champion.

18-035009/22

S/PV.8176

Kosovo

While Kosovo was struggling to become a member of
the Olympic Committee, Majlinda often had to practice
in halls without electricity or heat. Nevertheless, she
turned down the millions that were offered to her to
compete under a different flag. She patiently waited for
her chance to represent Kosovo. And when she finally
got the opportunity to compete in Rio de Janeiro,
Majlinda made us all proud by winning a gold medal.
In doing so, she also taught us a lesson, a lesson of
integrity, perseverance and love for one’s country.
Although Kosovo has many obstacles to overcome,
it is these women who make me hopeful. Whenever we
come up short, whenever we fail to deliver, courageous
women like them are there to lift us up. Time and again
they empower us by inspiring us. They challenge power
and authority; they fight for justice and social norms.
They encourage us to dream and to dare.
We are meeting today one day after the European
Union published its strategy for the Western Balkans.
While we in Kosovo believe that the language used to
describe Kosovo’s path forward should have been more
specific, perhaps more concrete, there is absolutely
no doubt as to where the future lies. Moreover, what
is made very clear by this strategy is that Kosovo
and Serbia must normalize relations and enter into a
legally binding agreement. Now more than ever, it is
crystal-clear that the new status quo and another frozen
conflict do not represent normalization. Normalization
can be achieved only through the recognition of Kosovo,
and the sooner Serbia recognizes Kosovo, the better it
will be for the entire region.

07/02/2018

future for their families, their country and the global
community. They do not have time to listen to us argue
over whether the sky is blue. They know that my speech
here today will not change anything, but their actions
will. They are aware that Kosovo’s independence
is an irreversible fact, as confirmed by the ruling of
the International Court of Justice. But they also know
that it is in our power to create a more prosperous
Kosovo to leave behind for the next generations, so that
when we celebrate the next decades and centuries of
independence, there will be a lot more to be proud of.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now give
the floor to the members of the Security Council.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin
for his update on recent developments. I also thank
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs, and Mrs. Vlora Çitaku for
their briefings.
An issue of great concern for all of us is the recent
murder of the prominent politician Oliver Ivanović,
from North Mitrovica municipality, which took place
on 16 January. We urge close cooperation with all
interested parties so as to carry out a fair and objective
investigation and bring those responsible for this
heinous crime to justice as soon as possible.

As I have stated numerous times, we in Kosovo
believe that the appropriate platform and venue
for dialogue is in Brussels. I want to reaffirm our
commitment to the dialogue and to the implementation
of every single agreement reached in Brussels.
However, the United Nations has no role in this
process. The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo is neither a peacekeeping mission
nor an administrative mission. The United Nations may
choose to maintain an expensive mission in Kosovo, but
we believe that its taxpayers’ money could be put to
much better use.

Kazakhstan fully supports the statement of the
political leaders, the European Union (EU) and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
condemning the murder and considers this barbaric act
to be an attempt by some forces to disrupt the peace
dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo. In this regard,
we call on the leaders of the two parties and local
communities to avoid any further provocative rhetoric
or actions that could lead to additional tensions and
instability. Democracy, security, stability and economic
development cannot be achieved without the rule of
law, criminal justice and institutional and humanrights-related reforms, including the fight against
corruption and organized crime, and addressing any
outstanding shortcomings of the judiciary and the need
for its depoliticization, impartiality and independence,
including in the prosecution of war crimes.

Women such as Fahrije, Kadire, Doruntina,
Majlinda and many more do not have time for debates
such as this one. While we meet here every three
months to repeat the same old stories, they are out
there changing the world, fighting for a better, brighter

We commend the steps taken by the Governments
of Serbia and Kosovo under the auspices of EU High
Representative Mogherini to continue the dialogue by
holding a series of technical-level meetings in Brussels.
My delegation also encourages all interested parties to

10/22

18-03500

07/02/2018

Kosovo

continue interacting to strengthen confidence-building
measures, trust, dialogue and cooperation, with the
engagement of representatives of the Government, the
opposition, civil society, women and youth, the media
and religious organizations.
The role of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in this process is very
important. During the reporting period, UNMIK
launched 12 confidence-building measures to promote
an interest in dialogue as well as intercommunal
reconciliation in different parts of Kosovo. The question
of returning refugees and displaced persons, together
with their resettlement, cultural heritage and human
rights, still have to be addressed.
Finally, we believe that peace and stability in this
part of the world will be achieved only if the parties
continue to fulfil their commitments in a positive spirit
of mutual respect, understanding and compromise.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and the
Ambassador of Kosovo for their statements.
In the light of the situation described by the Special
Representative, I should like to underscore three points.
First, as this year marks the tenth anniversary of
Kosovo’s independence, I should like to recall that
France steadfastly stands beside Kosovo in supporting
it in the building of its institutions and in its efforts to
achieve economic and social development and establish
itself on the international stage. Numerous efforts
have been undertaken in terms of building institutions
and achieving economic development. Kosovo is a
peacekeeping success — a success story. However,
a great deal remains to be achieved, and Kosovo can
count on our support in moving along that path. All are
aware of our commitment to strengthening the rule of
law and combating organized crime and corruption.
We welcome the smooth conduct of the municipal
elections of 22 October and 19 November last, which,
following the legislative elections of June 2017, marked
a milestone in Kosovo political affairs, even though,
as was underscored by the European Union election
observation mission, the climate of intimidation against
some candidates and their voters in Serb municipalities
of Kosovo is to be deplored.

S/PV. 8176

France also condemned the murder on 16 January
of the Serb leader of Kosovo Oliver Ivanović and called
for the circumstances to be brought to light. France,
like its American and European partners, voiced
its concerns at the attempt to call into question the
Specialist Chambers for Kosovo, and a Franco-German
mission visited Pristina to express that concern. We
have duly taken note of the political commitment of the
Kosovar authorities not to abrogate the law, as was just
mentioned by Ms. Çitaku, and we trust that this plan
will be definitively abandoned very shortly.
Secondly, in the light of the information provided
by the Special Representative every three months, the
Security Council must focus on the issue of refocusing
UNMIK efforts and coordinating them with other
international actors with a presence in Kosovo. At a
time when the discussion is focusing on the future of
peacekeeping operations, the responsibility that we
shoulder as members of the Security Council is indeed
to ensure that the means deployed by the United Nations
are tailored fully to the situation on the ground.
To that end, UNMIK and the United Nations
must continue to support the efforts of the EU and its
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo for
peace, progress and stability in Kosovo.
I shall end on a third point: the future of Kosovo.
France believes that this is a priority in the political
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina conducted
under the auspices of the European Union. The
European Union is very clear in that regard: for both
Serbia and Kosovo, rapprochement with the European
Union is conditioned upon the complete normalization
of their relations. France fully supports the mediation
efforts led by the European Union and its High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy,
Ms. Federica Mogherini.
The launch in Serbia of an internal dialogue
on Kosovo is a positive sign, and the Serbian and
Kosovar authorities have voiced their hope for giving
new impetus to dialogue with a view to achieving full
normalization of their relations. France fully supports
this approach, which is critical for lasting peace and
stability in the Western Balkans. Each side must do its
part by adopting a constructive attitude and refraining
from any unnecessary, or even dangerous, provocation.
We also underline the importance of efforts to
promote reconciliation and bringing communities
closer together.

18-0350011/22

S/PV.8176

Kosovo

In conclusion, I would like to stress that the lasting
solution to the conflict lies in making common cause
with the European Union. The future of the Western
Balkans is in joining the European Union, as High
Representative Mogherini stressed yesterday while
pointing out that 2025 was the horizon to which we
must aspire and that the prospects for reaching it
are realistic.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Mr. Tanin. Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Kosovo, for his briefing and
welcomes the presence and statement of His Excellency
Mr. Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia. I have also listened
carefully to the statement made by Ms. Çitaku.
Currently, the situation in the Kosovo region
involves numerous complex factors. Resolution 1244
(1999) provides an important legal basis for resolving
the question of Kosovo. All parties should act in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and within the framework
of the relevant Security Council resolutions and seek
through dialogue and negotiations a solution that is
acceptable to all.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia. We understand Serbia’s legitimate
concern on the question of Kosovo and commend its
efforts to strive for a political settlement.
China welcomes the continuation of the high-level
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. We hope that
the two sides will reaffirm their strong commitment
to a political settlement, continue their dialogue in a
pragmatic and constructive manner, implement existing
agreements and gradually increase mutual trust so as
to build up favourable conditions for finding a lasting
solution that is acceptable to all parties concerned.

07/02/2018

proper settlement. China supports the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
under the leadership of Special Representative Tanin
in implementing its mandate and in cooperating
constructively with all parties. We hope that UNMIK,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
and the Kosovo Force will work in close collaboration
and play a constructive role in improving the situation
on the ground and achieving a proper settlement of the
Kosovo issue.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Zahir Tanin, for
his comprehensive briefing on the latest developments
in Kosovo.
We welcome His Excellency Mr. Dačić, First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs, to today’s meeting and thank him for his
presence and statement. I also thank Ambassador Vlora
Çitaku for her statement.
Over the past year, Ethiopia has been consistent
and clear in this position on the issue of Kosovo. We
reaffirm our support for the peaceful and amicable
solution of all outstanding issues between Belgrade and
Pristina in accordance with the Brussels Agreement.
We also welcome the ongoing efforts made by the
European Union in facilitating the dialogue between
Serbia and Kosovo.

Tolerance, reconciliation and peaceful coexistence
serve the fundamental interests of all ethnic
communities in Kosovo and are necessary for achieving
development. China hopes that the relevant parties will
always put the well-being of their people first, protect
the legitimate rights and interests of all communities
in Kosovo, refrain from action and rhetoric that might
escalate the situation, and safeguard the peace, stability
and development of the Balkans.

As indicated in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/76), the holding of municipal elections in a
peaceful manner is indeed encouraging. However, we
also note from the report that the security situation in
northern Kosovo is still fragile, and the murder of the
Kosovo Serb politician Oliver Ivanović is indicative
of not only the prevailing tense security situation but
also of how the situation is potentially dangerous. It is
good that authorities in both Belgrade and Pristina are
ready to cooperate in addressing this issue in spite of
their emotionally-charged reaction initially. Identifying
those responsible for the crime and bringing them to
justice is no doubt important to reduce tension and
restore calm. Special Representative Tanin could not
have been more emphatic on the need to bring the killers
to justice. We also appreciate his quick condemnation
of the barbaric act.

The sustained attention of the Security Council
on the question of Kosovo is crucial for promoting its

We note that there was little substantive interaction
between Belgrade and Pristina during the reporting

12/22

18-03500

07/02/2018

Kosovo

period, and we understand the murder of Mr. Ivanović
has had its own impact. Some of the steps taken
to implement the agreements reached within the
framework of the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina facilitated by the European Union (EU) are
encouraging, while the lack of progress on some of
the key provisions of the EU-facilitated agreements,
including, inter alia, on the establishment of the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
in Kosovo, remains a source of concern.
It is our hope that the new leadership in both
Belgrade and Pristina will continue to engage in
dialogue and maintain the momentum in a positive
and constructive spirit with a view to addressing
outstanding issues and disagreements through peaceful
means. That demands that both sides refrain from
actions and statements that could cause ethnic discord
and undercut efforts to create an atmosphere of trust
and confidence conducive for dialogue. We will also
support the call by the Secretary-General to the leaders
in both Belgrade and Pristina to intensify their efforts
aimed at implementing the agreements reached within
the framework of the EU-facilitated dialogue.
Ethiopia fully supports the work that the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo has
been undertaking in discharging its mandates in line with
resolution 1244 (1999). Its engagement with municipal
authorities and community representatives in support
of the efforts to protect the rights of communities and
to promote intercommunity reconciliation and trustbuilding is commendable, as is the effort being made
by Kosovo authorities to implement measures aimed
at preventing violent extremism and radicalization by
constructively engaging with young people and women.
It is our hope that UNMIK will continue to promote
political dialogue, strengthen community reconciliation
and ensure security and stability in Kosovo and the
region. We also recognize the significant role played
by the European Union on matters concerning Kosovo,
and we commend the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force for their
valuable contributions in Kosovo in the area of the rule
of law and security.
In conclusion, I would like to say that security and
stability in Kosovo and the region will ultimately be
ensured when there is political will and resolve on the
part of both. In that respect, we once again encourage
both parties to remain committed to dialogue

S/PV. 8176

and negotiation with a view to finding a mutually
acceptable solution.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Zahir
Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his excellent and
comprehensive briefing, which provides greater clarity
and a better understanding of the question of Kosovo.
Indeed, his briefing demonstrated the need to tackle the
political challenges in order to sustain and strengthen
the progress made to date in Kosovo and for the benefit
of the population. We also thank Mr. Ivica Dačić,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Çitaku, Ambassador
of Kosovo to the United States, for her intervention.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea conveys its
condolences for the recent murder in broad daylight
of Mr. Oliver Ivanović, leader of the Civic Initiative
“Serbia, Democracy and Justice” party, and strongly
condemns that horrendous crime. We join our voice to
that of the political leaders of Belgrade and Pristina, the
Secretary-General and members of the international
community calling for the investigation of that crime
and for that sad event not to derail the peace process
in Kosovo. We commend the recommendation of
Ambassador Çitaku, who said in her intervention that
no effort would be spared to identify the perpetrators
and to bring them to justice.
Equatorial Guinea is very clear about its position on
the Kosovo issue and understands that the legal basis for
a just resolution of the question of Kosovo is resolution
1244 (1999). Equatorial Guinea always advocates for
direct, fair, frank and inclusive negotiations to resolve
any dispute, and the position of Equatorial Guinea on
the Kosovo issue remains the same. We support the
efforts by the interested parties to find an appropriate
solution that is acceptable for all through dialogue
and negotiations, in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and in
the context of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
The question of Kosovo is complex because of
sensitive issues such as national reconciliation, which
involves the welfare of the people and the protection of
the rights of all populations and communities in Kosovo.
The opposing parties must refrain from any action
that could exacerbate tensions and, instead, prioritize
actions that promote peace and trust. That would

18-0350013/22

S/PV.8176

Kosovo

undoubtedly result in the pursuit of a final resolution
that is satisfactory to all. The Security Council should
remain seized of the Kosovo issue and, in that process,
should encourage the parties to prioritize a direct and
constructive dialogue, while respecting the agreements
already reached.
Equatorial Guinea commends and appreciates
the tremendous work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo since its
establishment and the support that it provides to the
communities of Kosovo, the regional and international
actors and the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe with a view to implementing
the mandate of resolution 1244 (1999).
Respect for diversity and the participation of
all communities, women and young people in the
institutions and peace processes are critical elements to
ensure a sustainable peace process. In that regard, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea would like to encourage
the efforts in Kosovo in those areas and the role of
UNMIK and the United Nations family in Kosovo
in supporting such elements. We also encourage the
deployment of all necessary efforts to resolve the
problem of the internally displaced persons in Kosovo.
Guaranteeing security and stability in the area
requires ongoing efforts to ensure the protection of
human rights and to strengthen the rule of law. For
that reason, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea shares
the concern of Mr. Tanin over the recent crimes and
violence in various parts of Kosovo. Such events make
it necessary to step up efforts to improve the rule of
law, strengthen the judicial institutions and promote
development, peace and security in Kosovo.
Although the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina facilitated by the European Union had to be
suspended, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea hopes
that it will resume as soon as possible and that both
sides work in a spirit of mutual understanding and trust
to protect the rights and interests of all communities.
Regional cooperation and good-neighbourly
relations are crucial for the region. That is why the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea hopes that UNMIK and
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
will ensure the rule of law in Kosovo and, as we have
already noted, play a very positive role in order to
achieve a final resolution that is satisfactory to all.
14/22

07/02/2018

I conclude my statement by congratulating and
paying well-deserved tribute to Special Representative
Zahir Tanin for his noble work in Kosovo.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for his very useful briefing. I also appreciate the
statements of Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and of Ambassador Vlora Çitaku.
Poland shares our European partners’ assessment
with regard to the overall stability of the situation in
Kosovo, which does not warrant the current frequency
of reporting. We also believe that the time has come for
the strategic review of UNMIK, which should lead to
the re-evaluation of the level of international presence in
Kosovo. Having recognized Kosovo’s independence, in
2008, we remain confident that its political institutions
are capable of realizing the potential of the country’s
future, which lies in its integration into the European
Union. It will require the full engagement and consensus
of the Kosovo political forces and society in order
to implement the necessary reforms and meet, to the
fullest extent, the obligations under international law.
That brings me to the issue of the attempts to repeal
the law on the Specialist Chambers and Specialist
Prosecutor’s Office, established to investigate the war
crimes committed between 1998 and 2000. In that
context, we would like to take positive note of the
recent statement by President Thaçi that the special
court cannot, and will not, be revoked. We see that as a
reassuring sign of the acknowledgement at the highest
level of the importance of the unassigned work of those
institutions for the country’s international and EuroAtlantic integration.
Nevertheless, we also see room for improvement
with respect to good governance and enhancement of
the role of women in public life. No efforts should be
spared in eradicating corruption and in achieving an
efficient and accountable Government, as well as in
ensuring the equitable representation of all citizens in
the Government. We see that as the best guarantee for
prosperity for all.
Lastly, we join others in strongly condemning the
recent murder of the Kosovo Serb politician Oliver
Ivanović. We would also like to express our faith in
the ability of the relevant institutions in Kosovo to
18-03500

07/02/2018

Kosovo

investigate the crime in a professional manner and bring
the perpetrators to justice. I would like to conclude by
reiterating that Poland views Kosovo as fully capable of
managing its own future.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and we share the grave concerns he expressed about
the state of affairs in Kosovo. We would like to
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Zahir Tanin, and his team for their work
and objective briefing on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), which shows that the persistent serious
problems in the province continue and are in urgent
need of solutions and of oversight by the international
community. We also listened attentively to Ms. Vlora
Çitaku’s statement.
Ten years ago, at the initiative of Russia, the
Security Council convened in this Chamber to respond
to Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of independence
(see S/PV.5821). We gave a warning at the time about
the pernicious consequences of that step both for the
situation in the province and for regional security,
and today it is perfectly clear that the sponsors and
executors of the questionable Kosovo project should
reflect on the results of that misadventure. The illegal
secession, whose forerunner was the NATO aggression
of 1999, made a resolution of the Kosovo issue
significantly more difficult. The result is that to this
day there are still no clear prospects for a settlement
and Kosovo continues to be one of the main problems
on the regional, European and international agendas.
Above all, the flouting of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of a Member State continues, in violation of
fundamental principles of international law.
The expectations of Pristina’s supporters that
the number of States recognizing Kosovo’s so-called
independence would keep going up have proved
unfounded. On the contrary, there have recently
been calls for retracting that recognition. Kosovo’s
applications for membership in a number of international
organizations have been rejected. On the security
front, the potential for serious conflict continues, and
any incident is liable to spark an outbreak of violence.
On top of that, the province continues to be a comfort
zone for recruiting radicals. Attempts to sweep this
issue under the rug could have costly consequences for

S/PV. 8176

both the Balkans and for Europe as a whole, especially
since returning terrorists are fleeing there from Syria
and Iraq.
The attempts to cultivate a self-sufficient political
system with pretensions to being a legal democratic
State have been fruitless. Behind the facade of
public institutions we glimpse clannish interests and
unresolved contradictions and conflict, and corruption
and organized crime are rampant. The moderate
political forces have been pushed into the background,
and the current authorities, where former Kosovo
Liberation Army fighters are running things, are being
challenged by even more radical nationalists and those
supporting the creation of a greater Albania. In spite
of the promises, there has been no economic boom or
influx of investments in the province, and as a result the
socioeconomic situation is still disastrous. From that
point of view, Kosovo remains the most unsuccessful
area in the region.
We have always believed that the only solution to
the Kosovo problem is a political one, which should
be based on dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999). Yet for the
second year in a row the Brussels dialogue between the
parties, in which the European Union took on the role
of mediator, is stalled. The main reason for that is the
Kosovo Albanians’ refusal to fulfil their obligations,
and in particular to implement the key First Agreement
of Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations
between Belgrade and Pristina of April 2013 on
establishing an association/community of Serbmajority municipalities in Kosovo. It is astonishing that
the European mediators’ attitude to this stagnation is
strangely complacent.
In contrast, we note Belgrade’s constructive attitude,
demonstrating a willingness to continue the dialogue
and seek ways to arrive at a long-term settlement of
the relations between Serbs and Albanians on a basis
of compromise. Unfortunately there has so far been no
serious response to those calls from either Pristina or
Brussels. At the same time, the signs are increasing
that preparations are being made to ramp up pressure
on Serbia’s leaders in order to compel it to recognize
a de facto Kosovo independence. In our view, if the
negotiations on Serbia’s admission to the European
Union are used as a way of cranking up the pressure,
that would call into question Brussels’ objectivity and
impartiality as an intermediary.

18-0350015/22

S/PV.8176

Kosovo

The recent murder of Oliver Ivanović, a prominent
Kosovo Serb politician, is alarming and has further
highlighted the fragility of the situation in the
province. Whoever was responsible for the crime, it is
a clear reflection of the catastrophically low level of
security and law and order in Kosovo, the particular
vulnerability of the Serb community and the lack of
effective mechanisms for responding to such challenges.
Only the courageous decision by Serbia’s President
Vučić to take the risk of visiting Kosovo, with the aim
of giving support to his compatriots, has brought some
calm to the situation.
However, it would be premature to suggest that
this crisis has been completely dealt with. In particular,
we want to emphasize that it is unacceptable to
use the current situation as an excuse for enforcing
Kosovo Albanian control of the province’s Serbianmajority areas. We support Belgrade’s calls for a fullfledged investigation into the murder of Ivanović by
the international entities in Kosovo and for giving
the competent Serbian authorities the opportunity to
participate as well, especially given that the possibility
of a Serbian police presence in the province is explicitly
provided for in resolution 1244 (1999). In our view,
special responsibility lies with the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), which has
claimed a key role in recent years in the maintenance of
law and order but is now passing the baton to the Kosovo
police, within whose purview it says the issue falls.
One wonders who, if not EULEX, is deciding to
transfer such functions to the Kosovo police? On what
grounds and according to what law has it been done,
considering that at issue are powers delegated to EULEX
by UNMIK, pursuant to a resolution of the Security
Council? Who verified the ability of Kosovo Albanian
security forces to objectively investigate crimes against
Serbs? Is Pristina actually interested in doing that in
any way? Its refusal to provide any of the evidence
requested by Belgrade suggests the opposite, including
the possibility of an attempt to conceal something.
Immediate efforts must be undertaken to rectify
these mistakes so as to ensure the most effective,
comprehensive and impartial investigation possible
and to identify those who planned and carried out
the murder.
The passivity of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) is
startling, constituting as it does the international
security presence in the country, in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999). Frankly, the meagre reports
16/22

07/02/2018

submitted to the Secretariat do not give us a clear
picture of KFOR activities.
We cannot ignore the issue of the investigation into
the crimes of the Kosovo Liberation Army. It remains
unclear when the work of the Specialist Chambers
established under the leadership of the European Union
in The Hague will begin or if any specific indictments
will be made. The fact that the Court’s activities depend
on the whims of the members of the Assembly of
Kosovo, among whom are a number of former fighters,
does not inspire great optimism. There is considerable
additional evidence of the lamentable state of affairs
in the province, some of which is described in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/76). It includes a
drop in refugee returns, persistent attacks on the homes
and property of Kosovo Serbs, arson, acts of material
damage and vandalism and attacks on Serbian Orthodox
church property. These are the sad legacies of 10 years
of Kosovo’s independence.
Under the leadership of the United Nations as
represented by the Security Council and UNMIK,
the international community should continue to
closely follow the situation and actively fostering the
maintenance of stability and security in the province.
In view of all of this, and given the current situation, we
believe it would be absolutely inappropriate to raise the
question of changing the format and periodicity of the
Secretariat’s briefings to the Council on Kosovo.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I too would
like to begin by thanking Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing today. I would also
like to thank Foreign Minister Dačić and Ambassador
Çitaku for their statements.
As Ambassador Çitaku pointed out, this month
marks 10 years since Kosovo’s declaration of
independence. Over that decade significant progress
has been made in the consolidation of peace and
democracy in Kosovo. However, further efforts on the
path of progress are needed. We are concerned about
recent attempts to undermine the Specialist Chambers
and the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office. It will be crucial
to ensure that Kosovo’s political leadership respects its
previous commitments in that regard.
Like others, we strongly condemn the murder of
Oliver Ivanović. It is vital that the investigation under
way be able to run its course. But while Kosovo is
18-03500

07/02/2018

Kosovo

addressing its recent challenges, its European Union
(EU) perspective is clear. Irreversible steps are needed,
and the Government must resume the dedicated reform
agenda that the people of Kosovo so desire. To that end,
the Government needs partners across the political
spectrum, and we encourage all political actors to
engage in a constructive dialogue that will enable the
necessary reforms to be speedily implemented.
The future of Kosovo will be saved by courage
and committed leadership from Pristina and Belgrade.
We welcome the steps being taken to breathe new life
into the European Union-facilitated Belgrade-Pristina
dialogue, and we encourage both sides to fully engage
and deliver on their respective parts of all agreements
reached. Good-neighbourly relations are vital for
a stable and prosperous Western Balkans, and the
success of the dialogue will also have positive effects
on the wider region. In the meantime, it is essential
to ensure that the status issue does not hamper
Kosovo’s European perspective or its membership in
international organizations.
As the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and my European Union colleagues highlighted
earlier today, yesterday the European Commission
adopted its strategy for a credible enlargement
perspective for an enhanced EU engagement with the
Western Balkans. The strategy reaffirms Kosovo’s
place in Europe and its European Union perspective. It
recognizes that the challenges Kosovo faces with regard
to the rule of law, relations with its neighbours, and the
reform agenda can and must be addressed within the
framework of the European Union integration process.
Lastly, almost two decades after its establishment,
it is clear that UNMIK has made an invaluable
contribution in Kosovo but, looking forward, we hope
that the Council will be able to consider the possible
prospect of further downsizing the Mission’s structure,
size and tasks, as well as of adjusting the reporting and
briefing period from three to six months.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative Tanin for his briefing and for the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/76).
As Ambassador Çitaku recalled, this month marks
10 years since Kosovo became a sovereign State. Let
us reflect on the progress that has been achieved in
this time. The people of Kosovo have participated
in three parliamentary elections since declaring
independence in 2008, as well as two countrywide

S/PV. 8176

mayoral and municipal elections. Kosovo has also
shown solid economic growth and is now among the
top 10 countries for starting a business, according to
the World Bank’s Doing Business 2018 report, jumping
from sixtieth to fortieth place in the report’s ranking
for ease of doing business. Recent action towards
the full integration of Kosovo’s judiciary within the
European Union-facilitated dialogue underscores a real
commitment to progress and stability.
This is not the same country it was 10 years ago when
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) was first established. That is not to
say that Kosovo is without its challenges. Building a
democracy takes time. The genuinely competitive local
elections in the majority of municipalities in Kosovo
were a welcome sign of healthy democratic competition,
although we continue to be concerned about allegations
of intimidation in Kosovo Serb municipalities. We also
welcome President Hashim Thaçi’s public statement on
1 February that Kosovo’s Specialist Chambers cannot
and will not be abrogated. We hope to see the initiative
in the Assembly of Kosovo formally removed in the
coming days, ensuring that the important work of the
Chambers to maintain justice and the rule of law will
continue. We continue to urge the Kosovo authorities
to take all possible steps to swiftly resolve the murder
of Oliver Ivanović, which has increased local tensions
in northern Mitrovica. However, those concerns should
not diminish the progress that Kosovo has made.
Kosovo can continue to build on its progress
by transitioning UNMIK institutions to Kosovo
institutions or other international organizations. While
we appreciate UNMIK’s years of work in Kosovo, it
is time for a leaner, more efficient mission to focus on
more tightly defined priorities that take into account all
of the progress Kosovo has made in the past 10 years.
Kosovo’s challenges are far less severe than those that
the fledgling nation was facing when UNMIK first
arrived, and it therefore does not require a United
Nations mission of this size. Moreover, Mr. President,
in the Council’s open debate yesterday (see S/PV.8175),
that you presided over, the United Kingdom called for
a Security Council that focuses on present and future
challenges. With all of the world’s pressing challenges,
checking in on Kosovo’s good progress in these
meetings every three months is simply not a good use
of the Council’s time.

18-0350017/22

S/PV.8176

Kosovo

In conclusion, let me reiterate the long-standing
position of the United Kingdom that it is past time for
the Council to meet less frequently on this issue.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): Let me first
thank Special Representative Tanin for his briefing. I
also thank the representatives from Serbia and Kosovo.
There is always more progress to make, but the
conditions in Kosovo have changed markedly since
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo was established, in 1999. And it has changed
for the better. That is work which we should be proud
of, and it is work that the leaders of Kosovo and Serbia
must now seek to build upon. As my colleagues know,
peacekeeping reform has been a focus of my work on
the Security Council. Central to that reform agenda
is the support for political solutions on the ground,
which include the parties themselves. Without the
political buy-in of the various parties, no real progress
can be achieved. What we end up with is an artificial,
subsidized peace that is imposed from the outside.
But what we want is real peace, which is created by
the people who must nurture and sustain it. As Kosovo
approaches the tenth anniversary of its independence,
we believe that the opportunity is at hand for such a
genuine peace. The people of Kosovo are establishing
the institutions of self-government.
Last year, a new Administration was formed
following free, fair and peaceful democratic elections.
A functioning multi-ethnic democracy continues to be
strengthened in Kosovo — one that respects the rule
of law and the human rights of all. The United Nations
Mission in Kosovo has been an important part of that
achievement, but now it is time for leaders in Kosovo
and Serbia to take their future into their own hands.
Both nations’ leaders must come together to reach
an agreement on the normalization of Kosovo-Serbia
relations as soon as possible. Much work has been done,
but more progress is needed on crucial issues, such as
ending corruption, strengthening the rule of law and
laying the foundation for economic growth. For Kosovo
and Serbia, normalization is a win-win proposition.
Both nations will benefit from expanded ties with one
another and with the wider European community.
To facilitate that, the United States reiterates its
support for the Brussels dialogue. We appreciate and
thank the European Union for its leadership in that
effort. Its support and guidance has helped create the
opportunity for both sides to make progress towards
18/22

07/02/2018

normalization and lasting peace. In the strongest terms,
we urge the leaders of Kosovo and Serbia to take this
opportunity. The coming months will be crucial. The
stage is set. The benefits are clear. All that is needed is
the political will to come together to create a just and
lasting peace between Kosovo and Serbia.
A good indication of whether or not Kosovo and
Serbia can come together to normalize relations will
be how both nations respond to last month’s murder of
Kosovo-Serb politician Oliver Ivanović. The United
States has condemned that killing in the strongest
terms. We have offered our support for a full and
impartial investigation by Kosovo’s police and judicial
institutions. The world will be watching to see if
that investigation results in accountability for those
responsible. We trust that Kosovo’s institutions are
capable of handling that professionally and impartially
to hold those responsible to account without external
interference. We call on all parties to avoid dangerous
rhetoric at this sensitive time.
Another pillar of our peacekeeping reform
agenda is to know what success looks like and, once
it is achieved, to set the countries on a path to operate
independently of the peacekeeping mission. We believe
that we have achieved that measure of success with the
United Nations Mission in Kosovo. It is long past time
to wind down the Mission to preserve scarce United
Nations resources. Significant changes are needed in
the role of the United Nations in Kosovo. I urge the
Council to waste no time in making those changes.
Lastly, we continue to strongly support Kosovo’s
membership in all relevant international organizations,
including the United Nations and INTERPOL. Much
has changed during the 19 years since the Council
authorized the establishment of the United Nations
Mission in Kosovo. The time has come for the leaders
of Kosovo and Serbia to do what the Mission cannot
and what it was never intended to do: to independently
and cooperatively build a future of mutual security,
prosperity and peace for all the peoples in the region.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First, let me
thank Ambassador Tanin, as well as his staff, for their
work, the detailed report (S/2018/76) and the briefing. I
should like to add that it is also a great personal pleasure
to see Ambassador Tanin in person today.
We welcome the close cooperation of Ambassador
Tanin with High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Mogherini,
18-03500

07/02/2018

Kosovo

given the important role of the European Union in
Kosovo. I will focus on three points today: first, Kosovo
in the Security Council; secondly, the rule of law; and,
thirdly, accountability.
With regard to my first point, concerning Kosovo
in the Security Council, in our view, the situation in
Kosovo today allows for a reduction of the frequency
of our discussions in the Council from every three to
six months. We also favour changing the format of our
discussion to consultations. Furthermore, we call on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo to focus on its core tasks, and we look forward
to future options concerning its downsizing.
That brings me to my second point, namely, the rule
of law. We condemn in the strongest terms, as others
have done today, the recent murder of Mr. Ivanović. It
is crucial that the perpetrators of that crime be found
and justice be done. The rule of law is important for
individuals to achieve a sense of closure, but it also has
a broader importance for society as a whole.
That brings me to my third point, on accountability.
Accountability is an important step on the road to
reconciliation in Kosovo’s society. For Kosovo’s
progress to be maintained, its judicial capacities must
be accompanied by sincere political will to protect
and promote the rule of law. In that light, recent steps
undertaken to undermine the authority and legal basis
of the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and the Special
Prosecution Office are reason for concern. We encourage
Kosovo’s political leaders to fully act in line with the
obligations to which they have committed themselves.
In conclusion, Kosovo is on a positive path, but much
remains to be done to ensure accountability for past
crimes. In that regard, let me also refer to my European
colleagues’ statements concerning the statement
made on behalf of the European Union yesterday. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands has confidence in Kosovo’s
future, and we call on all the relevant parties to build
trust, continue peaceful dialogue and fully implement
reached agreements.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): Allow me to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his excellent briefing on the
situation in Kosovo, and convey to him my country’s
support for the work that he is doing to reconcile the
various Kosovo Serb communities.

S/PV. 8176

As the tenth anniversary of Kosovo’s independence
nears, we are pleased to note that much progress
has been made in various areas in the country.
Côte d’Ivoire, which has recognized Kosovo as an
independent and sovereign State since 21 September
2011, enthusiastically welcomes the significant
progress made in the country. Since 1999, thanks to the
support of the international community, in particular
by UNMIK, Kosovo has made enormous strides in
security, economic and political areas. I would like
to take this opportunity to commend the work carried
out by the staff of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and by NATO troops in Kosovo.
My country also welcomes the unremitting commitment
of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
to the maintenance of multi-ethnic, transparent and
democratic institutions in that country — an effort that
dates back to 2008.
I would now like to focus on progress on the
political front and to highlight the successful holding
of municipal elections of October and November 2017,
which demonstrated the country’s democratic backbone
and the maturity of its institutions. What is more, the
broad participation of Kosovo Serb communities in
the elections is cause for great optimism. Besides that,
the comprehensive implementation of the agreement
on the courts for northern Kosovo, concluded by the
parties on 10 February 2015, is proof of the Kosovo
authorities’ recognition of their country’s multi-ethnic
nature and their desire to consolidate the rule of law.
On the institutional front, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes
the implementation of the agreements on freedom
of movement. My country earnestly hopes that the
Assembly of Kosovo will definitively enact its draft
law on freedom of religion, with a view to guaranteeing
that freedom for the Kosovo Serbian community.
Despite my delegation’s optimism on the political
situation in Kosovo, we continue to be alarmed by the
murder on 16 January of Mr. Oliver Ivanović, leader of
the civic initiative Serbia, Democracy, Justice. It goes
without saying that if such political crimes continue,
they will seriously threaten the country’s stability and
intercommunal unity. The Council must take every
appropriate measure to ensure that the perpetrators
of the crime are apprehended, tried and, if found
guilty, convicted.
We also call for the rapid operationalization of the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities,
which will undoubtedly contribute significantly to

18-0350019/22

S/PV.8176

Kosovo

calming the sociopolitical atmosphere and easing
tensions. We urge the Government and the Assembly
of Kosovo to honour their commitments with regard
to the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and the Specialist
Prosecutor’s Office. We call on both to respect the
agreement signed in 2015 with Montenegro on the
demarcation of the two countries’ shared border. My
delegation is of the view that these commitments are
inseparable from those undertaken by the Kosovo
Government on 10 November 2017 with regard to the
implementation of its European reform agenda.
In conclusion, we hope that the high-level meetings
held last year between Pristina and Belgrade political
authorities, under the auspices of the European
Union High Representative, Ms. Federica Mogherini,
will continue this year once again in the interests of
reconciliation and a final settlement of the Kosovo
question. These meetings, along with the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, have contributed
to the significant progress made in the areas of
human rights and national reconciliation between
Kosovo’s communities.
Finally, as I should have said at the outset, my
delegation also wishes to thank Mr. Dačić, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia and Ms. Çitaku, Ambassador of Kosovo to the
United States, for their briefings, which have enabled
us to understand the reality of the situation in Kosovo.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his informative briefing.
We also thank Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and Ms. Vlora Çitaku for their statements.
The latest report (S/2018/76) on the activities of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) reveals problems that arise from the
historical baggage of a still-latent conflict. Resolution
1244 (1999) therefore continues to be fully applicable
and the supervision of the international community to
be necessary. In that understanding, Bolivia once again
calls for compliance with the resolution, including full
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of the Republic of Serbia. Any attempt
to turn the Kosovo security forces into an armed force
would therefore run counter to resolution 1244 (1999),
which provides for the establishment of a force based on
a Council mandate. Bolivia is also concerned about the
20/22

07/02/2018

attempt to pass a law revoking the Kosovo Specialist
Chambers. We believe that the rule of law and its
impartial application is vital to combating impunity.
Those responsible for the commission of war crimes
must answer for their actions, regardless of who they
are or where they come from. We stress that the victims
deserve justice.
We also condemn the assassination of the political
leader Oliver Ivanović. We want to highlight the words
of Mr. Tanin when he said that this act raises concerns
about the possibility of a new wave of political instability.
We trust that the authorities and international agencies
on the ground will work quickly to apprehend those
responsible. We call on political leaders to cooperate
and avoid escalating tensions.
Bolivia believes it important to ensure that
the parties honour the commitments made in the
negotiations sponsored by the European Union. In
that connection, we urge them to work for a peaceful
solution through dialogue and in line with the
obligation to negotiate in accordance with international
law. In that regard, Bolivia has called on the parties
on several occasions to comply with the provisions of
the Brussels Agreement, reached more than four years
ago. Unfortunately, the establishment of an association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities has yet to
take place. Its implementation is key to ensuring the
security and human rights of Serbs in Kosovo and
Metohija and essential to achieving a peaceful longterm settlement. We hope that the next report will note
progress in this area.
We appreciate the efforts of the European Union
and the mediation of the High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy with a view to advancing the implementation
of the existing agreements. In that regard, we call on
the parties to set start dates for a round of technical
dialogue. We believe that these rounds of negotiations
are ideal for building mutual trust between the parties.
We also note the efforts of the parties to finalize the
implementation of the agreement on the judiciary in
northern Kosovo.
Bolivia appreciates the work that UNMIK has done
in accordance with its mandate. We encourage it to
continue working to build trust between the parties, use
its good offices to mitigate tensions, employ peaceful
means to seek consensus solutions and promote political
dialogue and respect for human rights, with a view
18-03500

07/02/2018

Kosovo

to safeguarding peace as enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. We commend its continuing work
through its joint efforts with the municipal authorities
and representatives of the province of Kosovo to protect
the rights of communities, promote intercommunal
reconciliation and inter-ethnic cooperation, facilitate
the return of internally displaced persons, highlight
the importance of gender equality and provide
certification services.
We echo the concerns expressed by the
international community about the mandate of the
truth and reconciliation commission to be established
by the Kosovo authorities. We believe that it should be
inclusive and meet the minimum standards that it needs
to function.
Finally, we call on the international community to
contribute to the trust fund created by the SecretaryGeneral to carry out community assistance projects to
benefit the communities of the Roma, Egyptian and
Ashkali minorities.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of this informative quarterly
briefing and are grateful for the comprehensive
presentation provided by Mr. Zahir Tanin on the
situation in Kosovo and the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). We took note of the statements made and
information provided by the Deputy Prime Minister of
Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, and Ms. Vlora Çitaku.
Peru acknowledges the progress made in building
stability and economic development in Kosovo, which
reflects the commitment of the parties to a process
that is supported by the international community,
particularly by the Security Council. In this vein, we
support the renewed dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, facilitated by the European Union, as well
as the implementation of the Brussels agreements.
We believe that the parties should continue making
progress in this respect in the interests of the peoples
concerned and the Balkans region.
We also encourage greater participation of women
and young people in political life, especially given the
final results of the recent municipal elections. Like
others, we deplore and condemn the recent assassination
of Serbian leader Oliver Ivanović. We deem it urgent
to identify those responsible and bring them to justice,
and to ensure the security of vulnerable groups in the
northern part of the Kosovo territory.

S/PV. 8176

We are concerned at reports of abuse and arbitrary
detentions by Kosovo police. Measures to safeguard the
rights of minorities and internally displaced persons
must continue to be implemented, and we hope that the
community/association of Serb-majority municipalities
will soon be established, in accordance with what was
agreed in 2013. We deem it vital that there be full
cooperation between the Kosovo authorities and the
Specialist Chambers in The Hague responsible for
atrocities committed by former members of the Kosovo
Liberation Army. Impurity for these crimes cannot
be tolerated.
We believe it is important to establish a truth
and reconciliation commission. Intercommunal
reconciliation that is based on full respect for different
identities and customs is a key element for internal
cohesion, diversity and cultural wealth. We also
commend the initiatives that are being developed with
the support of UN-Women to incorporate a gender
perspective into various aspects of the Kosovo process.
My delegation wishes to highlight the role being
played by UNMIK in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999). We believe that efforts to respond to the
persistent challenges to the implementation of key
aspects of the Brussels agreement must continue to be
supported. Nonetheless, so long as the situation remains
stable and progress continues to be made in terms of
sustainable peacebuilding in Kosovo, the Council must
ensure that at the right time, when conditions so allow,
an orderly transition takes place from UNMIK to other
United Nations entities present in the country.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of Kuwait.
I would like to begin by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Zahir
Tanin, for his comprehensive briefing to the Security
Council on the report (S/2018/76) pertaining to the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). The State of Kuwait
reiterates its full support for the Special Representative
in the discharge of his duties, and appreciates the
vital role of the United Nations during the past
period in assisting Kosovo in building its institutions,
in accordance with security Council resolutions,
especially resolution 1244 (1999). I also welcome His
Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić, Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,

18-0350021/22

S/PV.8176

Kosovo

as well as Ambassador Vlora Çitaku, and thank both of
them for their statements.
The security and political developments in Kosovo
without a doubt directly affect regional security and
stability. The State of Kuwait applauds the measures
taken by Kosovo to achieve more coherent and faster
progress in implementing the European reform agenda
and its full commitment to the implementation of all
the consequent obligations within the framework of
the agreed agenda. Kuwait welcomes the free and fair
municipal elections held on 22 October 2017, which
were the second local elections to be held in Kosovo
since the signing of the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations between
Belgrade and Pristina, on 19 April 2013.
We appreciate the role played by political leaders and
their self-restraint in the aftermath of the assassination
of Mr. Oliver Ivanović, as well as the commitment of
both Pristina and Belgrade to cooperation in order to
prevent political tensions from escalating.
On the other hand, we express our concern at the
continued challenges facing the dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade, as indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General before us. Kuwait stresses that the
high-level dialogue between the two sides, which is being

22/22

07/02/2018

facilitated by the European Union, remains the most
appropriate framework to resolve all pending issues in
order to achieve consensual, equitable and sustainable
solutions. We also express concern regarding attempts
by members of Parliament in Kosovo to repeal the law
on supporting the work of the Specialist Chambers
and the Prosecutor’s Office, which would undermine
the credibility of the Parliament. We also call upon all
parties in Kosovo to remain fully committed to justice
and the rule of law.
In conclusion, we stress the importance of the
continued efforts of the international community to urge
Pristina and Belgrade to overcome their differences
and to achieve consensual, equitable and sustainable
solutions that are acceptable to both parties and lay
the foundation for peace and stability in the region.
UNMIK should continue to cooperate constructively
with Pristina and Belgrade and all communities in
Kosovo in order to enhance security, stability and
respect for human rights.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

18-03500
