S/2014/461

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 July 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation
in Cyprus

I. Introduction
1.
The present report on the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP) covers developments from 16 December 2013 to 20 June 2014 and
brings up to date, since the issuance of my report dated 30 December 2013
(S/2013/781), the record of activities carried out by UNFICYP pursuant to Security
Council resolution 186 (1964) and subsequent Council resolutions, most recently
resolution 2135 (2014).
2.
As at 20 June 2014, the strength of the military component stood at 858 for all
ranks and the strength of the police component stood at 62 (see annex).

II. Good offices mission and other developments
3.
On 11 February, after five months of intense discussions, the Greek Cypriot
leader, Nicos Anastasiades, and the Turkish Cypriot leader, Derviş Eroğlu,
concluded a joint declaration marking the official relaunch of high -level
negotiations on a comprehensive settlement to the Cyprus problem. On that
occasion, I wrote to both leaders acknowledging the agreement on the joint
declaration and the resumption of full-fledged negotiations. In April, I held bilateral
meetings with both leaders and expressed encouragement over their continued
commitment to the process.
4.
Following the resumption of high-level negotiations, the sides regularly
engaged in discussions, both at the leaders’ and at the negotiators’ level. The leaders
held two meetings (on 31 March and 2 June), during which they took stock of the
work conducted by their respective negotiators and reiterated their commitment to
continuing to move the process forward. On 22 May, the leaders agreed to speed up
the process of negotiations towards a comprehensive settlement and, to that end, to
meet at least twice a month. During the meeting on 2 June, the leaders also
discussed the revitalization of the technical committees, possible confidencebuilding measures and other substantive issues relating to different negotiating
chapters.
5.
On 27 February, the Greek Cypriot negotiator, Andreas Mavroyiannis, visited
Ankara and the Turkish Cypriot negotiator, Kudret Ozersay, visited Athens, in the
first exchange of its type in the Cyprus peace talks. The negotiators considered the
14-56360 (E)

140714

*1456360*

S/2014/461

visits an important step forward and the beginning of a useful dialogue. The
negotiators also travelled to South Africa from 25 to 29 April, in a visit facilitated
by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), to gather lessons learned
and experiences from the South African mediation pro cess.

III. Activities of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus
6.
UNFICYP is intended first and foremost to prevent a recurrence of fighting
and to contribute to the maintenance of law and order and a return to normal
conditions. Its mandate requires reconciling, as far as possible, security
considerations and the maintenance of the military status quo with allowing
Cypriots who live and work in the buffer zone to pursue civilian activities and enjoy
full and productive lives. Such an approach, when successful, builds confidence
between communities and contributes to the overall United Nations effort in support
of the peace process.

A.

Prevention of a recurrence of fighting and the maintenance of the
military status quo
7.
During the reporting period, UNFICYP continued to maintain the integrity and
stability of the buffer zone. Notwithstanding the minor military violations
committed by the opposing forces, which resulted in occasional altercations with
UNFICYP, relations between the latter and the opposing forces remained good.
Thanks to regular patrolling and the mission’s observation, reporting and liaison
infrastructure, UNFICYP managed to avert attempts by both opposing forces to
effect low-level changes to the military status quo across the buffer zone. The
non-recognition by the opposing forces of the aide-memoire of 1989 and incidents
that challenge the authority of UNFICYP in the buffer zone continue to be
problematic, however. On a number of occasions, the opposing forces continu ed to
question the United Nations delineation of the ceasefire lines and, consequently, the
extent of the buffer zone in certain areas.
8.
In a new development, during the reporting period, the Turkish forces
deployed 28 closed-circuit television cameras along the ceasefire line in central
Nicosia, including some on previously unmanned observation posts. The assessment
of UNFICYP is that this confers a clear military advantage to the Turkish forces in
the areas concerned. UNFICYP protested against this military violation on several
occasions, at both the military and political levels, but the cameras remain in place.
9.
While no progress was made in the implementation of military-related
confidence-building measures, neither of the opposing forces conducted any major
military exercises during the reporting period. In old town Nicosia, where the
ceasefire lines are in close proximity to each other, instances of ill -discipline at the
lowest tactical level continued to provoke reactions from the other side.
Furthermore, previously reported military positions established by both forces inside
the buffer zone that violate the status quo remain in place. The Turkish forces
frequently overmanned the liaison post at Strovilia in violation of the military status
quo. The United Nations continues to hold the Government of Turkey responsible
for the status quo in Varosha.

2/11

14-56360

S/2014/461

B.

Demining activity
10. The two sides continued to withhold access for demining to the four known
mined areas in the buffer zone, of which three ar e under the control of the National
Guard and one is under that of the Turkish forces. On 3 April, the eve of the
International Day of Mine Awareness and Assistance in Mine Action, my Special
Representative and Head of UNFICYP, Lisa M. Buttenheim, wrote se parately to the
Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot leaders to inform them that, following an
inter-mission agreement between UNFICYP and the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL), a Cambodian mine clearance team from UNIFIL would deploy
to help UNFICYP to clear two areas where mines might have been displaced into
the buffer zone by flooding (see S/2013/781, para. 7). On 22 April, the team found
an anti-tank mine on the Turkish forces’ ceasefire line near Mammari, in sector 1 of
the buffer zone, and safely detonated it the following day, in close cooperation with
the opposing forces. The team completed its mine clearance tasks on 5 June, having
cleared a total area of 7,032 m 2 within the buffer zone.
11. In her letter, she further noted that the Security Council had repeatedly called
upon both sides to allow access to deminers and to facilitate the removal of the
remaining mines in the buffer zone, and had urged them to extend demining
operations outside the buffer zone, as most recently reflected in its resolution
2135 (2014). In his reply dated 8 April, the Greek Cypriot leader recalled that, on
1 July 2013, Cyprus had concluded its national plan for the destruction of all
anti-personnel mines and minefields under its control, pursuant to its obligations
under the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and
Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction. In his reply dated
14 April, the Turkish Cypriot leader indicated that he had already proposed to the
Greek Cypriot side that, as a “confidence-building measure”, the United Nations
should clear the remaining mines within the buffer zone, followed by demining
operations to be conducted simultaneously in the north by the Turkish Cypriot side
and in the south by the Greek Cypriot side.

C.

Restoration of normal conditions and humanitarian functions
12. In line with its mandate to contribute to a return to normal condi tions,
UNFICYP continued to urge the authorities, local community leaders and civilians
to provide relevant information on civilian projects in the buffer zone in a timely
manner and in accordance with the established procedures. UNFICYP issued more
than 900 permits for farming and other civilian activities in the buffer zone, and
approved 28 of 37 civilian construction projects in the buffer zone. In support of
such civilian activities, UNFICYP continued to facilitate the maintenance of public
utility infrastructure and the provision, at times contested by the sides, of basic
services such as water, sewage and electricity to both communities.
13. UNFICYP police continued to assist and facilitate investigations conducted by
the respective police services into criminal matters occurring within the buffer zone.
This was particularly the case in the mixed village of Pyla, where UNFICYP is
responsible for the conduct of law enforcement by the two sides and where an
increase in criminal activity over the reporting period in the village was noted. The
university that opened in Pyla in October 2012 remained unauthorized during the
reporting period. The Greek Cypriot leader attended the university’s inauguration

14-56360

3/11

S/2014/461

ceremony on 16 June and delivered an address. Improved r elations between
UNFICYP and local representatives in the village and the slow growth in student
numbers have to date mitigated the university’s impact on community relations and
law and order in the village.
14. At times, UNFICYP personnel faced challenges to their authority in the buffer
zone from individuals carrying out unauthorized activities, such as armed hunters,
and on some occasions they encountered aggressive behaviour, including both
verbal and physical aggression. UNFICYP urged the relevant aut horities on both
sides to take prompt action in such instances, including through judicial process
when necessary. Restrictions on local United Nations staff members seeking to
undertake their duties in the north remained in place.
15. Beyond the buffer zone, UNFICYP continued to address the concerns of
343 Greek Cypriots and 118 Maronites residing in the north, including through the
weekly delivery of humanitarian assistance and support to the Greek Cypriot
schools in the Karpas peninsula. UNFICYP also facilitated the post-mortem
transfers of three Greek Cypriots for burial in the north. The two requests of Greek
Cypriot individuals to return to the Karpas region (see S/2013/781, para. 12)
continue to await a reply from the Turkish Cypriot authorities, and requests for
Greek-speaking doctors to treat elderly Greek Cypriots and Maronites in the north
are yet to be addressed. For Turkish Cypriots residing in the south who had
requested assistance, UNFICYP conducted home visits and liaised with the local
authorities to ensure access to health and welfare support. As noted in previous
reports, there were again no new developments regarding the establishment of a
Turkish language school in Limassol. UNFICYP also assisted in addressing the legal
and humanitarian issues surrounding the imprisonment and temporary detention of
10 Turkish Cypriots in the south by means of regular visits to the detention facilities
where they were held. To enhance confidence in judicial proc eedings, UNFICYP
attended seven court hearings involving Turkish Cypriots in the south and one court
hearing involving a Greek Cypriot in the north.
16. During the reporting period, UNFICYP and UNDP continued to engage with
various stakeholders to promote enhanced cooperation in old town Nicosia, where
the buffer zone is at its most narrow. With support from UNFICYP, experts from the
Nicosia Master Plan — a bicommunal mechanism to address urban issues in the old
town — were instrumental in facilitating the stabilization of 14 buildings that had
been identified as posing a risk to UNFICYP patrols along the Green Line. Under a
UNDP-implemented project, on 8 April, the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot
mayors of Nicosia inaugurated the bicommunal Nicosia waste water treatment plant,
which services 270,000 people from both communities. On six occasions during the
reporting period, UNFICYP brought together environmental, social and health
experts from the two municipalities to discuss issues of common concern.
17. With a view to fostering bicommunal cooperation and reconciliation,
UNFICYP supported 98 civil society events in cooperation with international and
local partners, in which more than 9,500 individuals from both communities
engaged in sporting, cultural, educational and other activities. One such event was
the joint celebration of International Labour Day by Turkish Cypriot and Greek
Cypriot trade union representatives, which culminated in a concert in the downtown
Nicosia buffer zone that was attended by 5,000 people. UNFICYP also supported
regular meetings of Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot political party

4/11

14-56360

S/2014/461

representatives under the auspices of the Embassy of Slovakia. Separately, in the
first half of 2014, UNDP facilitated an interdisciplinary bicommunal dialogue on the
peace process that brought together senior representatives of political parties, trade
unions, professional associations and non-governmental organizations.
18. With UNFICYP support, interreligious dialogue continued to make good
progress during the reporting period. On 26 February, the five religious leaders of
Cyprus (the Archbishop of the Church of Cyprus, the Grand Mufti of Cyprus, the
Maronite Archbishop, the Armenian Archbishop and the Patriarchal Latin Vicar)
issued their first joint statement, in which they welcomed the resumption of the
Cyprus talks. The reporting period also saw several instances of worship on both
sides of the island in locations that were opened for the first time in many decades,
including a Good Friday service held at St. George’s Church in Famagusta, a name
day celebration at the Armenian Church of Virgin Mary in north Nicosia on 11 May
and an inauguration ceremony at Tahtakale Mosque in south Nicosia on 3 June.
Against this trend, a religious ceremony on 31 Ma y at the Maronite St. Antonis
Chapel was interrupted by the Turkish Cypriot authorities.
19. For its part, UNFICYP facilitated 48 religious services and commemorative
events, involving more than 10,000 individuals, conducted in the north or held
under escort in the buffer zone. A total of 22 religious events were held in the north,
a sharp rise compared with the same period in 2013, when only 11 such events were
held. Underpinning those developments, UNDP worked closely with the Technical
Committee on Cultural Heritage on the protection of cultural sites on both sides of
the island, with significant progress made in the restoration of Othello Tower in
Famagusta and the Apostolos Andreas Monastery. The renovation of 12 other
cultural heritage sites on both sides of the island is either near completion, under
design or about to begin.
20. On 2 June, the Cyprus Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the Turkish
Cypriot Chamber of Commerce, the Union of Chambers and Commodity Exchanges
of Turkey and the Union of Hellenic Chambers of Commerce and Industry of
Greece came together in Nicosia and established the Nicosia Economic Forum. On
that occasion, the Chambers issued a joint statement in support of the continuing
negotiations and committed themselves to promoting the development of joint
private sector initiatives.
21. The Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters, facilitated by
UNFICYP police, continued to meet, and the Joint Communications Room
continued to provide a forum for enhanced cooperation between the respective
police forces. Over and above the exchange of information on criminal matters that
have intercommunal elements, the Joint Communications Room focused on
humanitarian cases of recently missing persons and family disputes involving
children.
22. UNFICYP police continued to provide escorts for convoys with Turkish
Cypriot civilians and humanitarian supplies in accordance with the leaders’
agreement of October 2010 that was reached upon the opening of the
Limnitis/Yeşilırmak crossing. From December 2013 to May 2014, more than
500,000 official crossings through the buffer zone were recorded, down from some
700,000 during the previous reporting period. No agreement was reached on the
opening of further crossing points.

14-56360

5/11

S/2014/461

IV. Committee on Missing Persons
23. During the reporting period, the Committee on Missing Persons continued with
the exhumation, identification and return of the remains of missing persons. As at
15 June, the Committee’s bicommunal teams of archaeologists had exhumed the
remains of 1,090 individuals on both sides of the island. To date, the remains of
520 individuals have been returned to their families, including 46 during the
reporting period. The total number of missing persons identified in 2014 currently
stands at 43. Following the excavation of a military site in north Nicosia in February
and March, on 9 May the Committee conveyed a request to the Turkish forces to
excavate an additional site in a fenced military area in the north.

V. Financial and administrative aspects
24. As indicated in my previous report, the General Assembly, by its resolution
67/272, appropriated the amount of $55.4 million gross for the maintenance of
UNFICYP for the period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014, inclusive of the
voluntary contribution of one third of the net cost of the Force, equivalent to
$18.7 million, from the Government of Cyprus, and the voluntary contribution of
$6.5 million from the Government of Greece. I invite other countries and
organizations to make voluntary contributions, with a view to reducing the portion
of the cost of UNFICYP covered by assessed contributions.
25. My proposed budget for the maintenance of UNFICYP for the period from
1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015 is currently under consideration by the General
Assembly. Should the Security Council decide to extend the mandate of UNFICYP
for a further six months, as recommended in paragraph 38 below, the cost of
maintaining the Force would be limited to the amount approved by the Assembly.
26. As at 17 June 2014, the total outstanding assessed contributions to the special
account for UNFICYP for the period from 16 June 1993 to 17 June 2014 amounted
to $17.2 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions for all peacek eeping
operations as at the same date amounted to $1,222.3 million.
27. Reimbursement of troop and contingent-owned equipment costs has been made
only for the period up to December 2013, owing to the delay in the receipt of
assessed contributions.

VI. Observations
28. As UNFICYP marked the fiftieth year of its continued presence in Cyprus
since its establishment on 4 March 1964, the situation along the ceasefire lines
remained calm and stable. At the same time, minor incidents and challenges, which
passed largely unnoticed by the wider public, remained a regular occurrence.
Frequent unauthorized civilian activity in the buffer zone, in part resulting from a
perception of greater security, further complicated the overall security situation in
the buffer zone. In that context, the Force’s regular patrolling and liaison with the
opposing forces and the respective authorities continued to play a critical role in
preventing the escalation of tensions.

6/11

14-56360

S/2014/461

29. Given the resumption of negotiations towards reunifying the island, I call upon
all parties to take specific steps on a range of measures as a sign of their
commitment to the peace process. One such step could be for both opposing forces
to engage actively with UNFICYP on military confidence-building measures. This
could include formal acceptance by both sides of the aide-memoire of 1989,
bringing an end to the contestation of the United Nations delineation of the ceasefire
lines. Within such a framework, both sides could also deal with the recent change to
the status quo arising from the placement of closed -circuit television cameras in
Nicosia, which has increased tensions unnecessarily and is regrettable.
30. Another step could be for both sides to facilitate, without delay, access to all
remaining mined areas in and outside the buffer zone, in line with Security Council
resolution 2135 (2014). I thank Cambodia for agreeing to the temporary
redeployment of its mine clearance team from UNIFIL to UNFICYP, wh ich allowed
for the clearance of two suspected mined areas in the buffer zone, making Cyprus a
safer place. I also welcome the Turkish Cypriot proposal to resume demining
operations across the island, and call upon the sides to reach an agreement on the
modalities as soon as possible. The United Nations stands ready to further assist the
parties in their aspiration to achieve a mine-free Cyprus.
31. UNFICYP continued to promote civilian use of the buffer zone provided that it
did not negatively affect security and stability. Such activities, however, will
promote trust between the communities only if they are undertaken in accordance
with UNFICYP procedures. I thus once again call upon the respective authorities to
act decisively towards all who engage in unauthorized activities, thus showing
respect for the Force’s authority in the buffer zone and support for its ability to
implement its mandate.
32. The security challenges in old town Nicosia, a highly militarized area within
the Venetian walls where the buffer zone is at its most narrow, need to be tackled. I
reiterate my call upon both sides, including the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot
mayors and municipalities of Nicosia, in addition to the Nicosia Master Plan, in
cooperation with UNFICYP and UNDP, to adopt a holistic approach to the urban
infrastructure of the old town through joint projects that could attract investment
and thereby transform the wider area. Such an approach would also contribute to a
return to normal conditions in a manner that enhances security along the Green Line
and promotes public confidence in the negotiations.
33. Civil society has a critical role to play in contributing to peace in Cyprus. I
commend the religious leaders for their continuing dialogue, which has delivered
tangible results for Cypriots, including the opening of some locations of worship for
the first time in decades. I also commend business leaders from Cyprus, Greece and
Turkey, who have joined together for the first time under the Nicosia Economic
Forum. I encourage their efforts to promote private sector initiatives that could have
a positive effect on the continued regrettable low number of people crossing the
buffer zone. I encourage the respective football federations to put into practice their
earlier agreement on greater cooperation.
34. The successes of civil society and the continued development of economic,
social, cultural, sporting or similar ties and contacts can provide critical support to
political leaders and help them to make the necessary compr omises at the
negotiating table. Such contacts promote trust between the communities and help to
address the concerns of isolation of the Turkish Cypriots. I once again call upon

14-56360

7/11

S/2014/461

both community leaders to exert efforts to create a climate conducive to the
widening and deepening of such contacts, and to remove obstacles to those contacts.
Greater economic and social parity between the sides will make an eventual
reunification easier and more likely. In the context of an internationally sanctioned
peace process, efforts in the opposite direction can only be counterproductive.
35. With regard to natural resources around Cyprus, it is important to ensure that
any new-found wealth will benefit both communities. I remain of the view that such
developments constitute a strong incentive for all parties to find a durable solution
to the Cyprus problem and should engender deeper cooperation for the benefit of all
stakeholders in the region.
36. The United Nations remains committed to supporting the critical humanitaria n
work being done on behalf of the families of victims through the Committee on
Missing Persons. While I welcome the results achieved by the Committee during the
reporting period, I also note that, up to 50 years after their disappearance, half of all
missing persons have yet to be located and 75 per cent have yet to be identified. It is
critical that the work of the Committee suffer no further delays. The aforementioned
statistics and the advancing age of the relatives of missing persons highlight the
need to expedite the process, including through accelerated granting of access to
military areas. I therefore reiterate the need for increased cooperation with the
Committee.
37. Regrettably, restrictions continue on the movement of locally employed United
Nations personnel. Freedom of movement for all United Nations personnel is a
matter of principle for the Organization and an operational requirement for
UNFICYP. I call upon the Turkish Cypriot authorities to respect that principle.
38. UNFICYP continues to play a crucial role on the island by exercising authority
in the buffer zone and contributing to keeping the calm and resolving various issues
that affect the everyday lives of individuals in both communities. However, its
ability to play this role depends by and large on the commitment of the sides to
refrain from challenging the authority and legitimacy of UNFICYP in the buffer
zone. In calling upon both sides to continue to cooperate with UNFICYP in good
faith, I recommend that the mandate of the mission be extended for a period of six
months, until 31 January 2015.
39. UNFICYP continues to maintain close collaboration with my mission of good
offices and other United Nations actors on the island. In line with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, most recently resolution 2135 (2014), the mission
remains engaged in contingency planning in relation to the settlement. The planning
will continue to be guided by developments in the negotiations and views of the
parties on the possible role of the United Nations in this respect.
40. At the same time, I will continually keep the operations of UNFICYP under
close review, taking into account developments on the ground and the views of the
parties, and report to the Security Council with recommendations, as appro priate,
for further adjustments to the UNFICYP mandate, force levels and concept of
operations as soon as warranted.
41. With regard to the peace process, the joint declaration of 11 February
constitutes an important achievement. I welcome the joint declar ation as a clear
statement by both leaders of their shared principles and as an invaluable basis for
renewed talks, and I am heartened by their stated determination to resume structured

8/11

14-56360

S/2014/461

negotiations in a results-oriented manner, under the auspices of the United Nations.
As they take this renewed process forward, I strongly encourage both leaders to
sustain the current momentum, to build on existing agreements and the gains
achieved to date and to intensify efforts to reach a comprehensive settlement based
on the joint declaration.
42. As I have reiterated on various occasions, the sides should refrain from
negative rhetoric about the process and each other, preserve the confidentiality of
the process and work to build support for a settlement deal. I welcome the
innovative step taken by the sides to engage in cross-visits of the negotiators to
Turkey and Greece. I hope that those efforts will be sustained in the months to
come. I encourage the sides to explore further mutually acceptable confidencebuilding measures that could contribute to an environment conducive to a
settlement.
43. In view of the fiftieth anniversary of UNFICYP, I once again express my
gratitude to the 32 countries that have contributed since 1964 either troops or police
or both to the mission, and I pay tribute to the 184 peacekeepers who lost their lives
over that period in support of peace in Cyprus. The year 2014 also marks half a
century of the efforts of my good offices and those of my predecessors. I trust that
this anniversary will further the impetus towards the reunification of the island. It is
incumbent upon all parties to work in a determined manner towards a
comprehensive settlement, to which all Cypriots aspire and which would obviate the
continuing need for a peacekeeping presence.
44. In conclusion, I should like to express my gratitude to my Special
Representative, Head of UNIFCYP and, since April 2014, Acting Special Adviser,
Lisa M. Buttenheim; to the Force Commander, Major General Chao Liu; and to the
men and women serving in UNFICYP for the efficiency and commitment with
which they have discharged the responsibilities entrusted to them by the Security
Council. I should also like to express my deepest thanks to my outgoing Special
Adviser, Alexander Downer, for his efforts over the past six years to reach lasting
peace in Cyprus.

14-56360

9/11

S/2014/461

Annex
Countries providing military and police personnel to the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (as at
20 June 2014)
Country

Military personnel

Argentina a

294

Austria

4

Canada

1

China

2
b

84

Slovakia c

200

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

273

Hungary

Total

Country

858

United Nations police

Australia

15

Bosnia and Herzegovina

8

Croatia

1

India

7

Ireland

12

Italy

2

Lithuania

2

Montenegro

4

Serbia

2

Slovakia

1

Ukraine

8

Total

62

a

The Argentinian contingent includes soldiers from Brazil (1), Chile (14) and Paraguay (14).
The Hungarian contingent includes soldiers from Serbia (7).
c
The Slovakian contingent includes soldiers from Croatia (2), Serbia (39) and Ukraine (2).

b

10/11

14-56360

S/2014/461

14-56360

11/11
