S/PRST/2006/17

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 April 2006
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5422nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 April 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to the sovereignty, unity,
independence and territorial integrity of Sudan.
“The Security Council strongly commends and supports the efforts of the
African Union to achieve lasting peace in Darfur. It reiterates in the strongest
terms the need for all parties to the conflict in Darfur to put an immediate end
to the violence and atrocities; reaffirms its concern that the persisting violence
in Darfur might further negatively affect the rest of the country as well as the
region including the security of Chad and expresses its utmost concern over
the dire consequences of the prolonged conflict in Darfur for the civilian
population. It further reaffirms the right of the displaced persons to return to
their homes if they wish to do so.
“The Security Council reiterates its full support for the African Unionled Inter-Sudanese Peace Talks in Abuja on the conflict in Darfur in particular
the tireless efforts of the Chief Mediator, Dr. Salim Ahmed Salim and his
team. It welcomes the developments so far in the negotiations and urges the
parties to make speedy progress in concluding a Darfur Peace Accord.
“The Security Council further reiterates its endorsement of the decision
of 10 March 2006 of the African Union Peace and Security Council that an
accord must be reached by 30 April 2006 and strongly urges that all parties
make the necessary efforts to reach an accord by this date.
“The Security Council recognizes that an inclusive political settlement is
key to peace in Sudan, that the talks provide a mechanism to achieve such a
settlement in Darfur. The Council reiterates its call to all parties to the conflict
to fulfil their commitments to conclude a peace accord in the interest of the
people of Darfur and Sudan as a whole.
“The Security Council calls on and expects the parties in Abuja to
consider in good faith proposals to be made by the Mediator with a view to
reaching peace, security and stability in Darfur and Sudan as a whole. It
emphasizes that working towards a positive outcome is a collective
responsibility of all the parties in the conflict.
06-32696 (E) 250406

*0632696*

S/PRST/2006/17

“The Security Council commends the various partners and stakeholders
for their support to the African Union-led Abuja Peace process and encourages
them, in particular the United Nations, to continue supporting the parties in the
implementation of the Peace Accord.”

2
