‘: 17 JUNE

1981

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2286). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda. . . . . . . , . , , , , . . . . . . . . . , , . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , .

1

Complaint by Iraq:
Letter dated 8 June 1981 from the Charge d’affaires of the Permanent Mission
of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/14509) . . +. . , . . +. . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . , , , . . . , . .

1

SlPV.2286

1
0

NOTE

Symbols ,of ,United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined ,with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~~ppple~nenfs of the Qfficial Records of the Security Corrncil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions c~f the Security
Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2286th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 17 June 1981, at 11 a.m.
Mr. Porfirio

President:

MUfiOZ

LED0

(Mexico).

(India),
Mr. Suwondo
(Indonesia),
Mr. La Rocca
(Italy),
Mr.
Nuseibeh
(Jordan),
Mr.
Al-Sabah
(Kuwait),
Mr. Tue’ni (Lebanon),
Mr. Halim
(Malaysia), Mr. Erdenechuluun
(Mongolia},
Mr. Mrani
Zentar (Morocco),
Mr. Chamorro Mora (Nicaragua),
Mr. Ahmad
(Pakistan),
Mr. Freyberg
(Poland),
Mr. Marinescu
(Romania),
Mr.
Koroma
{Sierra
Leone),
Mr. Adan (Somalia),
Mr. Fonseka
(Sri
Lanka),
Mr. Abdalla (Sudan), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian
Arab Republic),
Mr. Kirca (Turkey),
Mrs. Nguyen
Ngoc
Dung
(Viet
Nam),
Mr.
Alaini
(Yemen),
Mr. Komatina
(Yugoslavia),
Mr. Mutukwa
(Zambia)
and Mr. Terzi (Palestine
Liberation
Organization)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the
COUhCil chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines,
Spain,
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United
Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.

Provisional

agenda (SIAgendal2286)

1.

Adoption

2.

Complaint by Iraq:
Letter dated 8 June 1981 from the Charge
d’affaires of the Permanent Mission of Iraq to
the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/14509)
The meeting

of the agenda

2. The PRE’SIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
I should like to inform the members of the Council that
1 have received a letter dated 16 June 1981 from the
Charge d’affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission
of Tunisia to the United Nations [S/14.545], which
reads as follows:

was called to order at 12.05 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda

“I have the honour to request that the Security
Council extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Clovis Maksoud, Permanent Observer for the League of Arab
States to the United Nations, to participate in the
Council’s consideration of the item entitled ‘Complaint by Iraq’.”

was adopted.

Complaint
by Iraq:
Letter dated 8 June 1981 from the Charge d’affaires
of the Permanent Mission of lraq to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/14509)

If I hear no objection, I shaI1 take it that the Council
agrees to that request.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
In accordance
with decisions taken at previous
meetings
[2280th to 2285th meetings], I invite the
representatives
of Iraq and Israel to take placeS at the
Council
table, and I invite the representatives of
Algeria,
Bangladesh, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
Egypt, Guyana, Hungary, India, Tndonesia, Italy, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia,
Mongolia,
Morocco, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland,
Romania,
Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sri Lanka, the
Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Viet Nam,
Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Zambia and of the Palestine
Liberation
Organization to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

It was so decided.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
1 wish to draw the attention of members of the Council
to the following documents:
S/14542, letter dated
15 June 1981, from the representative of Poland to the
Secretary-General;
S/14.543, letter dated 16 June, from
the representative
of Guyana to the Secretary-General; and S/14544, a note, verbale dated 16 June, from
the Mission of Cuba to the President of the Council.
4, Mr.
ARCILLA
(Philippines):
I have been
instructed by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
countries members of the Association of South-East
Asian Nations, who are now having their annual
meeting at Manila, to read before the Council their
statement on the question before us. It is as follows:

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kittani (Iraq)
nrld Mr. Blum (Israel) took places at th.e Council table
and Mr. Bedjaorri (Algeria), Mr. Kaiser (Bangladesh),
Mr.
CorrCa
da Costa (Brazil), Mr. Tsvetkov (Bulgaria),
Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Hulinsk$ (Czechoslovakia),
Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Sinclair
Mr. Rcicz (Hungary),
Mr. Krishnan
(GIhyanU),

“The Foreign Ministers
condemn the recent
unwarranted
Israeli air attack on Iraqi nuclear
1

installations near Baghdad and regard it as a serious
violation of the Charter of the United nations and
international
law. They express grave concern that
this dangerous and irresponsible act would escalate
existing tension in the area and pose a serious threat
to international
peace and security.” [S/24552]

intransigence
by that State-more
recently by its
purported annexation of East Jerusalem, for example,
its frequent forays into Lebanon, in complete disregard of that country’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity, and by its continuing refusal to give any
recognition to the rights of the Palestinians. Israel’s
recent attack against installations inside the Republic
of Iraq only serves to complicate further the Middle
East peace process and to confirm beyond doubt its
blatant contempt for, and defiance of, the Charter of
the United Nations and the principles of peaceful and
friendly relations among States, in the same way as the
aggressive acts and arrogance of the racist Pretoria
regime complicate the process of finding a peaceful
solution to the question of Namibia.

5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretafion
from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative
of Guyana,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
6. Mr. SINCLAIR
(Guyana) (inferpretation
Jiom
Spanish): When I assure you, Sir, of the satisfaction
and pride with which my delegation sees you presiding
over the Council in this month of June, I do much
more than show deference to a tradition.
More
importantly,
I give expression to the bonds of solidarity and friendship which unite the Governments
and peoples of Mexico and Guyana. I also voice the
Guyanese Government’s
recognition and appreciation
of Mexico’s proud history and its historic contribution
to the cause of peace and the strengthening of the
political and economic independence of States. I am
confident that during your presidency, the influence of
your wisdom, your resourcefulness and your forceful
insistence on and defence of what you know to be
correct and what you know to be just, will have a
positive impact on the decisions of this body.
[The speaker continued

10. My delegation vehemently condemns the recent
Israeli act of aggession against the Republic of Iraq,
and insists that the security of the State of Israel
cannot be built on a policy that promotes insecurity
and fear in its neighbours or in other States of the
region. It is only in a climate of trust and confidence
that Israel can enjoy the security it seeks; a necessary
first step in the creation of such a climate would be for
Israel to desist from acts such as the one which made
this meeting necessary- acts which themselves create
and compound the distrust among States of the region.
11. My delegation likewise categorically rejects the
notion that one State in any region can arrogate to
itself the right of a power of veto over the development
plans or projects of any other State of the region on the
grounds that they are not consistent with its own
interests or its own security. Such a notion flies in the
face of the sovereign equality of States and violates the
political
independence
of those States and their
sovereign right to organize their economic affairs in
the manner that they themselves determine, and
without any form of external interference. The right of
States, including the Republic of Iraq, to develop
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, has been sustained by numerous resolutions of the General Assembly and decisions of the non-aligned movement,
including
the sixth Conference of Heads of State
or Government
of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at
Havana in September 1979.

in English.]

7. At the same time as I express to Mr. Nisibori of
Japan my delegation’s great appreciation for his skilful
and efficient conduct of the business of the Council
during the month of May, I also wish to’express my
sincere gratitude to you, Sir, and the other members of
the Council for providing
my delegation with the
opportunity to address this body on the item of which
it is currently seized.
8. It was with a feeling of deepest outrage and
indignation that Guyana learned of the unprovoked
attack by Israeli aircraft against the nuclear reactor
installations of the Republic of Iraq two Sundays ago.
This act, unprecedented in its arrogance, is clearly a
grave violation of the national sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of the State of
Iraq, and one which dangerously heightens the tension
and instability existing in the Middle East area, with
negative consequences for peace and security not only
in the region itself but beyond it,

12. Reliable sources have indicated that the Zionist
State has been in possession of nuclear weapons for
some time now. Members of the Council do not need
to be reminded of some of the clandestine, irregular
means used to obtain the raw materials for the
development
of these weapons. We also know of
earlier Israeli attempts, some executed even inside the
territory of other States, to prevent Iraq from developing nuclear technology. It is clear that Israel wili
shrink from no aggression, from no act of terrorism, in
order to maintain a nuclear-monopoly
in the Middle
East region. The Zionist Prime Minister confirmed this
attitude as recently as last Sunday, when in a televised
interview he declared that if Iraq should rebuild the
reactor, Israel would destroy it again-not
necessarily

9. The Middle East region has experienced
two
costly wars in the past two decades, wars which had
their root causes precisely in the intransigence and
lack and sensitivity of one State in the area: 1 refer to
Israel. Despite the fact that the prescription for a just
and lasting peace in the area has long been identified
and enjoys almost unanimous acceptance, the search
for a comprehensive solution is frustrated and undermined at every turn by the continuing manifestation of
2

through the use of planes, but by any of a number of
means.

17. The desire for a regime of peace and security and
an atmosphere in which economic development can be
pursued is not the monopoly of the Zionists, even ifwe
were to believe their professions of a commitment to
it. There are men and women of peace and good wiI1
everywhere but who, fortunately, seek their promotion in more positive and constructive ways. In fact,
the policy of the pre-emptive strike leaves no room for
peace and good will. What peace can there be, what
good will can a State feel towards others, when at any
moment death and destruction can come roaring out of
the skies or creeping in like a thief in the night, simply
because of a purely subjective assessment made
outside its borders that this or that project is a threat to
someone else’s security?

13. It is a fact that the Republic of Iraq is a signatory
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear
Weapons [General Assembly resolution 2373 (XXII),
annex]. It is also a fact that Israel has refused to sign
that Treaty. The Government
of Iraq itself has
declared that its nuclear reactor was to be used for
peaceful purposes and has accepted international
safeguards on all its nuclear facilities. The Iraqi
nuclear installation at Osirak had been inspected as
recently as January 1981 by the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) and found to be in conformity
with the Agency’s requirements. Israel, on the contrary, has never opened its nuclear installation at
Dimona to such international inspection.

18. It is with a sense of grim despair that my
delegation contemplates the future of humanity if acts
similar to that recently committed by the Israelis were
to become accepted international behaviour. Their
criminal, aggressive nature is the very negation of the
idea of international co-operation for international
peace’. As the President of Guyana, Comrade Forbes
Burnham, has declared in his message addressed to
the President of the Republic of Iraq, Saddam Hussein: “such lawless behaviour cannot be allowed to
become a precedent in the Middle East, Africa or
elsewhere.” [S/145431 This manifestation of the logic
of power, this recklessness, if pursued, can lead only
to a complete erosion of the basis of inter-State
relations that underlies the Charter and to a dangerous
situation of insecurity and chaos in international
relations, This is why my delegation believes that the
Council must respond decisively and unequivocally to
this most recent act of aggression by Israel against the
Republic of Iraq and take measures that would restrain
that outlaw State from committing such acts in future.
The Council can do no less than issue a categorical
condemnation of this Israeli aggression and oblige the
Israeli Government to make reparation to the Government and people of the Republic of Iraq. To do any
less would be to desert the Charter and to render a
disservice to the causes of peace and the strengthening
of international security.

14. We heard the lucid and categorical statement
of the representative
of France two days ago
[2282nd meeting] in which he asserted that the only
purpose of the Tamuz reactor was scientific research.
The relevant agreements concluded between France
and Iraq specifically exclude its application to military
purposes. Yet the Israelis, using their sophisticated
military hardware and setting themselves above and
beyond the very IAEA, took upon themselves to
launch their so-called pre-emptive strike in order to
destroy the Iraq facility in the interest, they say, of
Israeli security,
15. While Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations does confer upon Member States the right of
individual
self-defence if an armed attack occurs
against them, nowhere does it provide for the use of
the pre-emptive strike, which is contrary to the spirit
of the Charter and to the purposes and principles of the
Organization. In addition, it is contrary to the spirit
and the letter of several important declarations and
decisions of the General Assembly, including the
resolution on the non-use of force in international
relations [resolution 2936 (XXVZZ)] and the Declaration on the Inadmissibility
of Intervention
in the
Domestic Affairs of States and the Protection of Their
Independence and Sovereignty [resolution 2131 (XX)].

19. Israel’s record of open contempt for the independence and territorial integrity of States is a long one,
an attitude that has been buttressed and sustained over
the years by the encouragement given it by both the
Governments and the media of some of its influential
friends. My delegation could not but notice with
disgust, indignation and a measure of sadness the
indulgence with which this recent Israeli act Of
aggression is being treated, or the hardly restrained
exultation with which the event is viewed in certain
official circles and is being reported in their media; or
the prcl forma noises being made, which, while seeking
to make a gesture to Arab sentiment, actually insult
Arab pride and nationalism.

16. Israel’s much-vaunted policy of the “pre-emptive strike”, instead of enhancing the security of the
State, is slowly eating away at the very entrails of that
State, producing insecurity from within and making
the Israelis themselves their own worst enemies and
the foremost enemies of peace in the Middle East. The
policy of the pre-emptive strike fosters arrogance and
disrespect; it fears everything and trusts nothing. It
makes good-neighbourliness
and peaceful coexistence
impossible; underlying it is the assumption that the
activities and energies of other States have no significance whatsoever, except in relation to the existence of the State of Israel or the people of Israel. This
series of meetings concerns precisely the most recent
of the sinister consequences that flow from acts based
on that assumption.

20.

tion
3

The solution to the complex Middle East quesdoes not lie in automatic and UncaICulating

!.

support for the exaggerated definition by any one State
in the Middle East region of its security interests; nor
does it lie in the preponderance of sophisticated arms.
Encouraging Israeli intransigence is a decidedly negative policy, which will redound only to the creation of
greater instability and lead to more war in the Middle
East. To be sure no one wants another holocaust. But
the Arab nations will certainly not allow themselves to
be today’s victims of a State which sees itself as the
hegemonic Power and regional gendarme of the
Middle East. The use of force in the Middle East will
only perpetuate the use of force, and its effects will be
felt well beyond the confines of the region concerned.

alarming implications for world peace and security. If
its aggression has taken a new form, Israel’s contempt
for international law is quite familiar, and indeed has
been in evidence ever since Israel gained statehood at
the expense of the Palestinian people. Israel’s membership in the United Nations should indicate, at the
very least, a commitment to the principle of collective
security and to the building of a structure of international law in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter. But Israel, acting with its customary arrogance and illegality, has once again seriously impeded
the task of securing and strengthening international
peace.

21. States Members of the United Nations, be they
big or small, rich or poor, have committed themselves
to abide by the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the Organization;
to refrain, in their international
relations, from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State; to respect the sovereign equality of all States
and the right of each State to chart its own development path, free from outside intervention
or interference, whatever its form or the pretext for it. My
delegation remains firmly committed to those principles. That is why we are prepared to support any
action which this body may take to ensure that they
are respected in the Middle East.

28. My delegation welcomes the fact that condemnation of Israel’s aggression has been widespread and
has come even from its most powerful supporters. It
could hardly have been otherwise in the face of so
flagrant a breach of international peace and so direct a
blow to the objectives of the Non-Proliferation
Treaty.
If signatories to the Treaty such as Iraq, which have
complied with its requirements, are still not protected
by its provisions, then this international instrument
once hailed as an essential measure for nuclear arms
control becomes meaningless. Certainly the world
community
cannot tolerate a situation where the
development of nuclear alternatives to non-renewable
sources of energy in the Middle East is threatened by
Zionist chauvinism and where the 30 or so countries
engaged in developing nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes would be left open to the militarist designs of
unfriendly States. In our view, Israel’s action makes it
imperative that the Council strongly reaffirm the right
of all States to develop nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes, under the appropriate safeguards.

22. Meanwhile, the incident of 7 June must certainfy
serve to underscore the urgency of finding an early and
just solution to the Middle East problem, the core and
centrepiece of which is the recognition of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including their
right to their own independent State.
23. In conclusion, I reiterate the Government
and
people of Guyana’s continuing support for and solidarity with the Government
and people of the Republic of Iraq.

29, The arrogance, the irresponsibility
and the egocentric nature of the Israeli aggression is underscored
by the resolution adopted on 12 June by the Board of
Governors of IAEA-a
resolution which reaffirmed
Iraq’s status as a Treaty member in good standing,
attested to the peaceful nature of Iraq’s nuclear
research and strongly condemned Israel for its premeditated and unjustified attack on the Ltaqi research
centre [S/14532].

24. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfiom
Sputzislz):
The next speaker is the representative
of Somalia.
I. invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
niake his statement.
25. Mr. ADAN (Somalia): First of all, permit me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the
presidency of this most important organ of the United
Nations for this month.

30. My delegation notes also that the French GOVernment,
which supplied nuclear technology and
experts to Iraq, has stated that controls on Iraq’s
research and training plant were so strict that it would
have been impossible for an atomic bomb to be built.

26. I wish also to thank you and the other members
of the Council for permitting my delegation to participate in this debate. We believe it is important that
as many voices as possible should be raised in
condemnation of Israel’s unprovoked
attack on an
Iraqi facility for nuclear energy research-an
attack
described by the Secretary-General
as being in clear
violation of international law.

31. The threat to an important aspect of the nonproliferation
rCgime is of course only one of the
damaging effects of Israel’s aggression. My delegation
is also deeply concerned because the Zionist inclination towards pre-emptive strikes has in the past led to
regional conflicts and seriously endangered world
peace and security, The sa’me results could well follow
Israel’s latest act of international gangsterism. Israel’s
attempt to elevate the pre-emptive strike to a new
principle of international law must not be given the

27. This action not only raised Zionist aggression to a
new level, but has also created a precedent with
4

slightest credence or support. Indeed, this stratagem
could not be supported by anyone who understands
and values the Charter of the United Nations.

has undoubtedly been substantiated by recent events,
and the relevant General Assembly resolutions point
to the courses of action open to the Security Council.

32. If any State can decide that it has a right to
indulge in military aggression simply because it considers that there is a possibility
of some future
hypothetical threat to it, then the United Nations
might as well consider itself irrelevant and its Member
States should resign themselves to international chaos,

38. In that context, my delegation welcomes the
decision of the United States to suspend its planned
delivery of four fighter-bombers
to Israel. We hope
that this is not a temporary measure but the beginning
of a reassessment by the United States of the dangers
of its open-ended supply of arms to Israel-arms
which have been used for military aggression against
Lebanon and now against Iraq, in violation of the
agreement under which they were supplied. The
United States Government has a grave responsibility,
in view of its special relations with Israel, to exert a
restraining influence on Zionist aggression and expansionism.

33. Israel claims to have acted in self-defence in
launching its carefully planned assault on Iraq’s
nuclear energy research centre, supposedly in order to
pre-empt the making of an atomic bomb. Yet Israel
itself has refused to sign the Non-Proliferation
Treaty
and has, as the world knows, developed its own
atomic weapons, using all means, fair or foul, for this
purpose.

39. My delegation
also welcomes the forthright
approach of the Board of Governors of IAEA to the
Israeli action. The recommendations
of the Board with
regard to the suspension of technical assistance to
Israel and of its membership of the Agency, coming as
they do from an expert and objective body, serve to
emphasize the seriousness of Israel’s offence.

34. Israel also continues steadily with its illegal
occupation and annexation of Arab territory; it is
engaged in genocidal attempts to exterminate
the
Palestinian people; it routinely mounts large-scale
military aggressions in Lebanon, and it has exacerbated and prolonged the tragic conflict in that country through mischievous intervention
in its internal
affairs.

40. However, it is the Security Council which has the
primary responsibility for dealing with Israel’s violation of international law. My delegation believes that
Israel’s breach of the peace is of such gravity, and has
such far-reaching implications, that the matter calls for
the Council to use the specific powers granted to it
under the Charter for maintaining international peace
and security .

35. One of the most baleful after-effects of the Nazi
Holocaust was the opportunity it gave the Zionists to
exploit the guilt of the Western world and to portray
themselves as perpetual victims, forever unaccountable for any action, however illegal, however contemptuous of human rights, and however dangerous to
world peace and security it might be.

41. Israel has never been deterred by mere condemnation from its drive to achieve regional hegemony by
all available means. The imposition
of mandatory
sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter is therefore the only practical response and the only measure
consonant with Israel’s act of State terrorism. Unless
significant action of that kind is taken, the Zionist
threat to regional and international
peace will continue. No one can doubt the reality of that threat in
view of the bellicose and typically arrogant promise of
the Israeli Prime Minister to repeat Israel’s’ act of
international terrorism in the future against any State
whose nuclear-energy
facilities and programmes do
not meet with Israel’s approval.

36. The Zionists’ portrayal of themselves as the
heroes of the Middle East drama, and of their Arab
victims as its villains, has served to obscure the issues
and has ensured that conflict would be endemic in the
area. Today we are seeing a repetition of this historic
pattern, but it is long past time for the true nature of
Israel’s role in the Middle East to be clearly understood by all. Israel, a State engaged in blatant
expansionism, showing unrelieved contempt for international law, is once again expecting the world
community
to accept its intolerable aggression as a
natural and justifiable prerogative. It must not succeed
in this attempt. There can be no mitigating circumstances for Israel’s aggression. My delegation hopes that
the Council will be able to identify with objectivity the
real villains and the real victims of the Middle East
conflict,

42. In the circumstances,
my delegation sincerely
hopes that the Council will not fail in its duty to take
the only measures which are likely to avert an
escalation of the Middle East conflict and to remove a
grave threat to international peace and security.

37, Certainly Israel’s unprovoked violation of Iraq’s
sovereignty and its wanton and destructive military
action must not go unpunished. It is pertinent to note
that the General Assembly has repeatedly called on all
States to desist from supplying arms and nuclear,
technology
to Israel in view of its long-standing
violations of international law. The validity of this call

43, The PRESIDENT
(interpretafion porn Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Turkey,
1 invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
44. Mr. KIRCA
(Turkey)
(interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, first of all, I should like to
5

-

51 of the Charter or on any special provision of
international law. In our view it is clear that Israel
used that idea as a pretext in order unilaterally and
arbitrarily to lay claim to an alleged right of intervention, which could well become a constant threat to the
Arab States that have already started developing
nuclear technology for peaceful purposes in their own
countries in accordance with the prevailing rules of
international law, or that may do so in the future. For
those States, and indeed for all other States, that is a
sovereign right, and it is not the business of any other
State to make judgements as to whether or not that
right is to be exercised.

express my gratitude to you and the other members of
the Council for having granted Turkey the opportunity to participate in this highly important meeting.
I should also like to share with you the conviction of
the Turkish delegation that the deliberations
of the
Council on the problem before us will be successfully
conducted thanks to your wise leadership, as has been
the case on other occasions in the course of your
presidency.
45. It was with profound concern and indignation
that my Government learned of the Israeli attack on
7 June against the Iraqi nuclear installations.
46. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey made
the following statement about the act of aggression
committed by Israel:

50. Israel has committed an act of flagrant aggression, and it must therefore make prompt and adequate
reparation, in particular to Iraq, for the damage caused
by the air raid.

“The destruction of the Iraqi nuclear reactor by
Israeli aircraft is an act that seriously imperils peace
in the area. We are faced here with a grave violation
of international
law. We condemn that act, which
was, incidentally,
greeted with indignation by the
international community. We hope that the Security
Council, before which the matter has just been
placed by Iraq, will adopt on the subject a resolution
compatible with the gravity of the situation.”
That was the official
ernment .

reaction

of the Turkish

51. That act of Israeli aggression was committed at a
time when serious efforts were under way in the area
with regard to certain aspects of the Middle East
question in order to halt and prevent hostilities. The
Israeli occupation of Arab territories since 1967 and
the growing threat to the very existence of Lebanon
have once again brought the area to the brink of war.
Israeli aggression against Iraq has, as the SecretaryGeneral has said, added further dimensions to the
conflict already existing in the region and has aggravated an already highly precarious situation.

Gov-

47. I listened with great attention to the statement
made to the Council by Mr, Hammadi, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Iraq [228&h meeting], and also to
that of the representative of Israel [ibici.], as well as
statements made on behalf of other Governments.

52. Israel can hardly ensure its own security by
threatening the security of the Arab States in the area
or persisting in its refusal to concede the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian Arab people. It is the sincere
conviction of the Turkish Government that Israel’s
security can be truly ensured only by means of a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, that peace which the international
community
has desired for so many years. It is the responsibility
of all parties in the area, and indeed of the international community, to spare no effort to achieve that
end. One cannot, on the one hand, be involved in a
peace process while, at the same time, organizing
“preventive”
armed attacks against other States in the
area. So a basic choice has to be made: one must either
tl;y to live in peace and harmony with others in the
same area, or continue indefinitely to involve oneself
in an escalation of conflict and tension which, in the
long term, will undoubtedly be extremely prejudicial
to the national interests of every party in this hot spot
on our planet.

48. The Turkish delegation has taken due note of the
report of the Director General of IAEA and the
resolution adopted by the executive organ of that
institution,
which alone has technical competence on
the subject in the international
arena. From those
documents it emerges very clearly that the nuclear
programme of Iraq is entirely peaceful. My delegation
was also careful to take note that Iraq, a member of
that Agency, and a party to the Non-Proliferation
Treaty, subscribes to and fully accepts all the obligations, including submission to inspection, provided for
in the Statute, whereas Israel, which is relentlessly
developing its own nuclear programme, has not even
signed the Treaty in question and remains outside the
international
system of safeguards.
49. In the light of those undeniable facts, the Turkish
delegation believes that to invoke the idea of selfdefence in order to justify this act of aggression against
Iraq, in particular within the framework of Article 51
of the Charter, as that idea was presented and developed by the representative of Israel, is ‘inadmissible. In the case of the armed action we are discussing,
the exception on the grounds of self-defence cannot be
based either on the general concept set forth in Article

53. It is from this standpoint that the Turkish
Government
wishes to express the hope that the
deliberations of the Council on this important problem
will lead to a resolution commensurate with the gravity
of the situation.
54. The PRESIDENT
(interpr~tatimzfiom
Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Hungary.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table.
6

55. Mr. RACZ (Hungary)
(interpretation
from
FI-ench): I would Iike first of all to thank you,
Mr. President, and the other members of the Council
for having given me this opportunity to express our
views on a question which concerns my country as
well.

one after the other demonstrate
that the Israeli
Government
has elevated terrorism to the status of
official State policy and that it will stop at nothing in
order to carry out this policy.
62. Israel can continue this expansionist policy only
in the knowledge that it can be sure of the support of
the United States as it thus obstructs ajust, global and
lasting settlement by peaceful means of the whole
question of the MiddIe East. Until a solution formulated in such a spirit is brought about, the peoples
of the area will continue to be exposed to such
aggressive attacks on the part of Israel. In these
circumstances, it is ever more urgent and imperative
to convene an international
conference, as the Soviet
Union has proposed, with the participation
of all the
parties concerned-including
the Palestine Liberation Organization-since
notwithstanding
the separate
agreements, such a conference alone can produce a
solution which would ensure the security of all the
States in the region.

56. 1 should at the same time like to convey our
congratulations
to you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. You have taken office at a
time when this body has before it a very grave
question, I am convinced that your competence and
far-sightedness and your personal qualities will play
their part in our success in the performance of the task
of this important body, in keeping with the expectation
of Member States and of the international community.
57. 1 should also like to pay a tribute to the work of
Mr. Nisibori, President of the Council last month.
58. The Council is meeting to discuss once again a
further aggressive action undertaken by Israel. All
people of good sense throughout the world learned
with profound indignation the news of the unjustifiable
and unprecedented attack carried out by the Israeli Air
Force against a nuclear installation near the Iraqi
capital. This terrorist act served only to increase
tension in a part of the world which for so long now
has been one of the most dangerous hotbeds of tension
on the international
scene.

63. The international
community
cannot remain
indifferent to the actions of the Israeli Government
which, in the pursuit of its own selfish interests, is
acting according to the law of the jungle and is
unscrupulously
flouting fundamental
norms of international law stipulated in the Charter of the United
Nations and other international
agreements and continuing to violate the basic principles
governing
relations among States,

59. Beyond the fact of the act of intimidation
itself,
committed
so cold-bloodedly, we also cannot help but
note the cynicism with which Israel is trying to justify
its successive actions, which constitute a flagrant
violation of international law. How can we accept the
reference to national security if we find that, on this
pretext, the fundamental rights of neighbouring countries are being flouted and their sovereignty is being
openly infringed? How can we talk of humanitarian
considerations
when we find that an installation whose
purpose was to promote progress for peaceful purposes, and which had not even been completely
constructed, has been razed to the ground? According
to this upside-down argument, any country would
have the right to eliminate by force, now and in the
future, any progress achieved in the field of nuclear
technology by other States.

64. I should like to recall the statement of the
Government
of the People’s Republic of Hungary,
which condemned this terrorist attack and I would like
to stress that the people of Hungary and its Government energetically repudiate this new action on the
part of Israel. We should like to express our solidarity
with the Iraqi Republic and the people of that country,
and we extend our support to the Arab peoples
struggling against the aggressive policy of Israel.
65. The Hungarian delegation sincerely hopes that as
a result of the debate which is being held here on this
subject, the Council will adopt a resolution which will
not only severely condemn Israel, but if fully put into
effect, effectively prevent Israel from embarking once
again on adventuristic acts which violate international
law, threaten the security of the region and imperil
peace throughout the world.

60. We should note in this context that the terrorist
attack was committed by Israel, a country which, for
reasons and considerations obvious to everyone, has
not hitherto acceded to the international Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and has refused stubbornly to place its nuclear programme under
effective international control within the framework of
IAEA.

66. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Italy. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
67. Mr. LA ROCCA (Italy): Sir, it is with particular
pleasure that my delegation welcomes your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of
June. You represent a country with which mine is
linked by long-standing and very close ties of friendship and co-operation.
We are confident that your

61, The world has had further proof of the fact that it
is the aggressive and expansionist policy of Israel
which is imperilling peace and security in the countries
of the Middle East. The acts of aggression committed
7

well-known diplomatic skill, sagacity and experience
will greatly contribute to bringing the work of the
Council to a positive conclusion. We wish YOUthe best
in your important task.
68. I should’ like also to pay a tribute to your
predecessor, Mr. Nisibori of Japan, for the most
skilful way in which he conducted the Council’s
proceedings during the month of May.
69. As is well known, Italy has been consistently
opposed to the proliferation of nuclear weapons and,
in accordance with this position, it was among the
initiators of the Non-Proliferation
Treaty and made a
significant contribution to the drafting of its text. In
that endeavour, my Government from the start pursued
a double objective: to set up an effective system to
prevent the spread of nuclear armaments through the
establishment of a strict set of international controls
on nuclear installations and at the same time to
enhance the peaceful uses of nuclear energy by
facilitating the transfer of nuclear technologies for
peaceful purposes.
70. Since it came into force in 1970, the NonProliferation Treaty has been signed and ratified by
115 States and has been universally considered as a
fully adequate instrument for the promotion and
achievement of the goals I have just mentioned. The
effectiveness of the system of controls directed at
ensuring the implementation
of the Treaty by the
States parties has never been challenged. On the
contrary, international pressure has been brought to
bear particularly on those States that are not parties to
the Treaty and are assumed to have acquired or to be
on the verge of acquiring a nuclear-weapons capability
to convince them to adhere to the Treaty as the most
effective means of containing the development of that
capability.

nuclear fuel supplied by Italy for use in the labcratories cannot, from the point of view of either
quantity or quality, be used for purposes other than
those for which it was ceded. Iraq’s compliance with
its obligations under the Non-Proliferation
Treaty was
confirmed by the Director General of IAEA in a
statement issued on 9 June.’
72. All this is very well known both in Israel and
elsewhere. If old arguments, which have been proved
unfounded in the past, continue to be raised, as they
have been in these last days, by the Israeli authorities
even at the highest political level, the reason can only
be traced to the need to confer legitimacy, for both
internal and external consumption, on an action which
remains inadmissible.
For our part we reject the
allegations which have been made in Israel and in the
Council in regard to our relationship with Iraq in the
nuclear field. My Government
views the Israeli
military action against the Tamuz nuclear centre with
the utmost concern and firmly condemns it as an
unacceptable breach of international law.

~
I

73. The conclusions of the work of the Council
should convey to Israel a clear signal that such behaviour cannot be condoned by the international
community. Moreover, we believe that the Government of Iraq is entitled to compensation for the damage
inflicted on the nuclear installations. The renunciation
of violence is the prerequisite for the achievement
of a just and lasting settlement of the Middle East
question.
74. Italy, for its part, together with the other members of the European Community,
remains fully
committed to the search for such a settlement along
the lines of the declaration of the European Council,
issued at Venice on 13 June 1980 [S/140091.
75.

Our concerns extend not only to the Israeli action
se and its implications for the situation in the
Middle East as a whole and for the orderly develop
ment of international relations. They relate also more
specifically to the potential harm thus done to the
credibility and effectiveness of the Non-Proliferation
Treaty. I should like in that regard to refer once again
to the statement of the Director General of IAEA that
I mentioned earlier. He stated:

per

71. My Government therefore considers that until
clear evidence is brought forward as to the need for
even stricter safeguards than those provided for in
the Treaty to prevent the proliferation of nuclear
weapons, the Non-Proliferation
Treaty represents the
accepted framework for the transfer of nuclear technology for peaceful uses. The sale to Iraq of research
laboratories for the application of nuclear energy to
fields such as medicine, industry and agriculture was
agreed to in full accordance with the letter and the
purposes of the Non-Proliferation
Treaty and article 4
thereof, which are to promote the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy while preventing the proliferation of
nuclear weapons. Iraq has been a party to the NonProliferation Treaty since it came into force in 1970
and has opened its nuclear installations, including
therefore the laboratories supplied by Italy, to inspection by IAEA. In fact, the Iraqi Government has
vohmtarily accepted the even stricter controls provided for in the guidelines agreed in London between
the members of the nuclear-suppliers group, The

’

“This attack on the Iraqi nuclear centre is a
serious development with far-reaching implications.
The Agency’s safeguards system is a basic element
of the Non-Proliferation
Treaty. During my long
time here, I do not think we have been faced with a
more serious question than the implications of this
development. The Agency has inspected the Iraqi
reactors and has not found evidence of any activity not in accordance with the Non-Proliferation
Treaty. A non-NPT country has evidently not felt
assured by our findings and about our ability to
continue to discharge our safeguarding responsibilities effectively, In the interest of its national

’

security, it has felt motivated to take military action.
From a point of principle, one can only conclude
that it is the Agency’s safeguards regime which has
also been attacked. Where will this lead us in the
future? This is a matter of grave concern which
should be pondered well.“’

bilizing implications of the Israeli armed attack for the
future of the non-proliferation
system.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

NOTE

76. My Government is in full agreement with the
conslderatlons
of the Director General and shares in
his grave concern as to the far-reaching and desta-

’ This statement was made at the 563rd meeting of the Roard of
Governors of IAEA, the official records of which are issued in
summary form.
