A/64/PV.104

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

104th plenary meeting
Friday, 2 July 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Agenda item 114 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/64/L.56)
The President (spoke in Arabic): Members will
recall that the General Assembly held the debate on
agenda item 114, jointly with agenda items 48, 120 and
121, at the 47th plenary meeting on 16 November
2009. Members will also recall that under this item,
jointly with agenda items 48 and 53 (b) and (f), the
Assembly adopted decision 64/555 at its 82nd plenary
meeting, on 15 April 2010, and resolution 64/265, at its
86th plenary meeting on 13 May 2010.
(spoke in English)
I should like to draw the Assembly’s attention to
the following corrections to draft resolution A/64/L.56.
Paragraph 14 should read as follows:
“Emphasizes the principle of national
ownership and leadership, and supports the
initiative of some countries to use, on a voluntary
basis, common country programme documents, as
well as its support for all countries that wish to
continue using the existing frameworks and
processes for country-level programming.”
Paragraph 16 should read as follows:

voluntary basis to prepare it consistent with the
United
Nations
Development
Assistance
Framework, where it exists, and to present in the
common country programme the critical actions
that will be taken to achieve the agreed results
with available or indicative resources, as well as
actions to ensure coherence of the assistance
provided by the United Nations system at the
country level, attaching, as an annex, a brief
description of the agreed results and indicative
resources of each of the relevant United Nations
agencies.”
Paragraph 49 should read as follows:
“Decides to establish, by the present
resolution, as a composite entity, a United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women, to be known as
UN Women, by consolidating and transferring to
the Entity the existing mandates and functions of
the Office of the Special Adviser on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women, and the
Division for the Advancement of Women of the
Secretariat, as well as those of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women and the
International Research and Training Institute for
the Advancement of Women, to function both as a
secretariat and to carry out operational activities
at the country level, to be operational by
1 January 2011.”

“Invites those countries presenting a
common country programme document on a
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-43641 (E)

*1043641*

A/64/PV.104

Paragraph 90 should read as follows:
“Decides to review the work of the Entity
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women at its sixty-eighth session, and requests
the Secretary-General to present a comprehensive
report in that regard to the General Assembly at
its sixty-eighth session.”
(spoke in Arabic)
In connection with draft resolution A/64/L.56, I
now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Shaaban (Department of General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
resolution A/64/L.56, entitled “System-wide coherence”,
on behalf of the Secretary-General and in accordance
with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly, I wish to place on record the following
statement on financial implications.
Under the terms of operative paragraphs 76, 77
and 85 of the draft resolution, the General Assembly
would request the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly for its approval during the main part
of its sixty-fifth session a report containing a revised
proposal for the use of regular budget resources
approved for the biennium 2010-2011 for the
normative support functions of the new entity, in
accordance with all relevant United Nations rules and
procedures, including a detailed organizational chart of
the entity and options for administrative arrangements
for the regular budget of the entity.
The draft resolution would also request the
Secretary-General to appoint the Under-SecretaryGeneral by the beginning of the sixty-fifth session in
order to oversee the transitional arrangements of the
entity before its operationalization, and decide that the
position of the Under-Secretary-General would be
funded from existing temporary assistance funds
pending the submission of the report on the revised
regular budget required to be submitted to the
Assembly at its sixty-fifth session.
The draft resolution would further request the
Under-Secretary-General to submit a report to the
Executive Board, including the organizational chart
referred to in paragraph 76, together with a revised
draft strategic plan and proposal for the use of
voluntary resources for the support budget for the
biennium 2010-2011.

2

As requested in the draft resolution, the
Secretary-General, in consultation with all United
Nations entities concerned, would present, during the
main part of the sixty-fifth session of the General
Assembly, the revised proposals on the use of regular
budget resources approved for the 2010-2011 biennium
for the normative support functions of the new entity,
including a detailed organizational chart of the entity
and options for administrative arrangements for the
regular budget of the entity.
In that connection, it is expected that the
proposals presented by the Secretary-General would
include the necessary programmatic changes and
resource requirements needed for their implementation.
Any programme budget implications would therefore
be considered at the time that proposals are considered
and subsequently endorsed by the General Assembly.
In accordance with the established practice, the
proposals of the Secretary-General would also contain
summary information on the voluntary — that is,
extrabudgetary — resources of the new composite
entity. In order to ensure the compatibility of this
information, including a detailed organizational chart
of the entity, with that requested to be submitted to the
new Executive Board, the Secretary-General would
rely in that regard on the results of transitional
arrangements.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
the draft resolution, details on the programmatic
changes and resource requirements in the biennium
2010-2011 would be provided by the Secretary-General
to the General Assembly during the main part of its
sixty-fifth session in the context of the report on the
revised proposal for the use of regular budget resources
for the 2010-2011 biennium that is requested in the
current draft resolution.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/64/L.56,
entitled “System-wide coherence”, as orally corrected.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/64/L.56, as orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/64/L.56, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 64/289).
The President (spoke in Arabic): We have just
adopted a resolution on system-wide coherence. The
strength of the United Nations is reflected in the
goodwill and commitment of its Members. The

10-43641

A/64/PV.104

resolution we have just adopted illustrates the
dedication and joint efforts of Member States and the
Secretariat to move forward together with a stronger
and more efficient Organization.
The Organization’s shortcomings are well known.
Its operational activities are fragmented, costly and, at
times, duplicative. Improving the coherence and
effectiveness of the United Nations in delivering its
services is vital to ensuring that the Organization
remains at the heart of the global multilateral system.
Today is an important day for all of us. Systemwide coherence has been a central theme of the
General Assembly’s agenda for the reform of the
Organization since the 2005 World Summit. Since the
beginning of my presidency, it has been my priority to
facilitate the finalization of an agreement on the
establishment of the new gender entity, as well as on
other aspects of system-wide coherence, by June of this
year.
I am therefore very pleased that today we have
adopted a resolution that will enhance the performance
of United Nations operational activities by making
their funding system more coherent and by
harmonizing their governance structure. For instance,
the resolution requests that United Nations agencies
that administer multi-donor trust funds report annually
on their administration so as to ensure better
complementarity between funds. Reforms to the
governance structure of the Organization’s operational
activities
also
include
establishing
informal
coordination meetings with their governing bodies to
increase the coordination of their work and the
circulation of information on the agendas, calendars
and programmes of work of the governing bodies of
United Nations operational activities with a view to
enhancing the coherence of both agenda-setting and
programmes of work.
The resolution also seeks to institutionalize our
joint efforts to empower one of the world’s greatest
assets, namely, women. I am delighted that the
resolution establishes UN Women, a United Nations
entity for gender equality and the empowerment of
women. UN Women will consolidate and take up all
the existing mandates and functions of the Office of the
Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women, the Division for the Advancement of Women,
the United Nations Development Fund for Women and

10-43641

the International Research and Training Institute for
the Advancement of Women.
The entity will be both a normative and an
operational body, acting as a secretariat and carrying
out operational activities such as guidance and
technical support at the country level. Importantly, the
resolution also charges UN Women with the additional
mandate of coordinating the United Nations system on
gender issues, including gender mainstreaming. The
United Nations is uniquely placed to take a leading role
in advancing the status of women. I have no doubt of
the significance of this resolution in making progress
in that vital area.
A
strong
organizational
structure
will
undoubtedly better serve us in improving our work,
particularly when it comes to results on the ground.
But our work does not stop there. Excelling in our
efforts to provide aid and development, secure global
peace and protect the rights of the world’s most
vulnerable people requires constant reflection and
continuous institutional improvement. Today, we have
taken a major step to that end.
I would like to thank the co-facilitators, Her
Excellency Mrs. Tiina Intelmann, Permanent
Representative of Estonia, and His Excellency
Mr. Ghazi Jomaa, Permanent Representative of
Tunisia, for their great efforts during this process. Let
me also thank His Excellency Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and Deputy Secretary-General Asha-Rose
Migiro for their important work in supporting these
reform efforts.
I now give the floor to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: Allow me to warmly
congratulate Member States, which today have adopted
a landmark resolution on system-wide coherence and
established UN Women, a new composite United
Nations entity for gender equality and the
empowerment of women. This is truly a watershed day.
By bringing together four parts of the United
Nations system dedicated to women’s issues, Member
States have created a much stronger voice for women
and for gender equality at the global level. It will now
be much more difficult for the world to ignore the
challenges facing women and girls, or to fail to take
the necessary action.

3

A/64/PV.104

Member States have combined global normsetting responsibilities in one United Nations entity
and given it the means to provide operational support
to countries to implement those norms and standards.
The United Nations system will now be able to
significantly step up its support for national efforts to
advance gender equality and women’s empowerment.
I thank you, Mr. President, for your leadership. I
also wish to thank co-facilitators Ambassador Tiina
Intelmann of Estonia and Ambassador Ghazi Jomaa of
Tunisia for the successful outcome of their important
consultations. I am sure that all Member States will
agree that the consultations on system-wide coherence
were conducted in the most inclusive, transparent and
efficient manner. Let us give credit where credit is due.
Ambassador Intelmann and Ambassador Jomaa and
their excellent staff have shown exemplary leadership
and dedication to this demanding task. I would like to
place on record our sincere appreciation.
I am also grateful to Member States and to
Permanent Representatives for having taken this major
step forward for the world’s women and girls. I know
that their negotiations on certain issues have been
difficult. I greatly appreciate their spirit of compromise
and I pay tribute to the great efforts of all Permanent
Representatives and their experts, who have been so
engaged in this process.
I also wish to thank Ambassador Hardeep Singh
Puri of India for his able facilitation of the meetings of
ambassadors at the last stages of the process, where
some critical issues relating to the gender entity were
resolved. And I am sure all members will join me in
expressing our gratitude to the previous co-facilitators
of earlier rounds of General Assembly consultations on
system-wide coherence, who laid the ground for this
landmark resolution.
I would also like to recognize the support and
encouragement that all delegations received from civil
society organizations. Their determination sustained
the necessary momentum to establish this long-overdue
outcome.
Finally, but importantly, I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the wonderful staff of the
Division for the Advancement of Women, the
International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women, the Office of the Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, and the United Nations

4

Development Fund for Women for their great efforts on
women’s issues and their work in preparing for the
establishment of the new gender entity.
The strength of the United Nations lies both in its
intergovernmental agreements and in the wonderful
women and men who work for our goals and values
around the world. We have seen much collaborative
spirit among the staff of the four entities in recent
months. We will depend on that as they now embark on
the task of making UN Women operational. We will
work to ensure that the transition is as smooth as
possible, while the staff of the four existing entities
continue to perform their usual functions.
As the Assembly is aware, the new resolution
establishes the post of an Under-Secretary-General to
head the new entity. I am working to identify the most
suitable candidate. Until the post is filled, I have asked
Deputy Secretary-General Asha-Rose Migiro to guide
the transition process. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank her for her leadership of the
process that has brought us so far.
This resolution will always be strongly associated
with the establishment of the new gender entity, but we
should not forget that Member States have also adopted
today many important decisions in other areas of the
system-wide coherence process. In the area of funding,
Member States have agreed to introduce a new
approach to determining the critical mass of core
funding for funds and programmes. Rather than relying
on ad hoc bilateral negotiations to address resource
requirements, better links will be established between
core contributions and the cost of carrying out key
mandates. I believe that the critical-mass approach to
funding offers a new and powerful vision for
improving the quantity and quality of funding for
operational activities.
Member States have also realized that the voice
of programme countries is not always heard in
governing bodies. The resolution addresses that critical
issue by requesting governing bodies to identify how to
strengthen the participation of national policymakers in
meetings of the executive boards of funds and
programmes and the operational activities segment of
the Economic and Social Council. Such measures will
enable programme countries, particularly the least
developed, to participate in governing bodies on a
more equal basis.

10-43641

A/64/PV.104

The adoption of this resolution on system-wide
coherence sends a strong signal that Member States are
determined to make the work of the United Nations
system for development more coherent, effective and
efficient. The Assembly has taken a bold decision to
make the United Nations much better able to support
progress for women and men. I encourage the
Assembly to ensure that the new gender entity is well
funded so that it can deliver. I am aware that many
Member States face resource constraints due to the
recent economic and financial crisis. But I am
confident that UN Women will receive strong financial
backing from donor countries and other partners.
The newest member of the United Nations family
has been born today. The Assembly’s generous support
is essential for it to grow up to be the champion for
gender equality and the empowerment of women we
need.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Before giving
the floor to speakers in explanation of position
following the adoption of the resolution, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Khattab (Egypt): It is my great honour and
privilege to address the General Assembly on behalf of
the 135 States members of the Joint Coordinating
Committee (JCC) of the Group of 77 and China and the
Non-Aligned Movement on this historic day, when the
international community has declared its resolve to
ensure that women, who represent more than half of
the world’s population, enjoy their full rights.
The adoption of resolution 64/289, entitled
“System-wide coherence”, illustrates the resolve of
Member States to invest in one of its most precious
resources — women. The establishment of UN Women
is the crowning achievement of a five-year process of
negotiation in which we strived to honour our
collective commitments as articulated in the World
Summit Outcome document (resolution 60/1). In that
regard, I would like to underline the following with
respect to the different clusters.
First, on the newly established entity for gender
equality and the empowerment of women, the adoption
of this resolution is a huge step in the long process of
United Nations reform and one of the most exciting
achievements of the past 10 years. Today, following
years of tough and prolonged negotiations, we are
witnessing the establishment of a new entity that

10-43641

belongs to all the women of the world and that will be
headed by a woman, in the best interests of all women.
Mandated by the women of 135 countries, under
the leadership of Egypt and Yemen, the JCC actively
engaged in a series of long and constructive
negotiations with open minds and hearts and a spirit of
flexibility, tolerance and understanding. We were
determined to achieve our goal, and together we did so.
Today is a key milestone in our collective efforts.
Today, we established UN Women for our women
and for all women — a strong, universal entity within
the United Nations system, determined to help women
achieve their dreams and address their challenges and
to commit all stakeholders, Governments, civil society,
private sector and the entire international community to
come together to solidify their efforts towards the
advancement and empowerment of all women so that
they might fully and equally enjoy their rights without
any discrimination. UN Women puts women at the
forefront of the international agenda, pledges its
support to strengthen national capacities towards the
advancement of their status, and is committed to the
fulfilment of their rights to develop, lead and prosper.
Realizing that we needed a more proactive
approach to bring about a significant change as early as
March 2010, the JCC was proud to be the first among
all negotiating partners to submit a detailed, concrete
and comprehensive set of elements dealing with all
aspects of establishing the entity. Our intention was to
institutionalize such concepts as universality, national
ownership and equitable geographical representation,
which are among the cardinal principles of the United
Nations, in the creation of the new entity. The highlight
of all of these proposals was the proposal to establish a
new Executive Board that would be strong,
independent and appropriately and adequately
mandated and funded, and, most importantly, that
would abide by the equitable geographical distribution
of the General Assembly in the distribution of its seats.
In a major step forward, the JCC was not
oblivious to the contemporary realities of today’s world
and recognized also the role of the contributing
countries. The JCC was willing to give contributors
their due role and responsibilities in the new Executive
Board. I am confident that the contributing States will
provide adequate core funding to the entity in order to
empower it beyond being a mere catalyst, so that it
might emerge rather as a key international body for

5

A/64/PV.104

women, a strong voice, an advocate and a programmeimplementing entity of the United Nations in the field.
This has been demanded by civil society in general,
and women’s organizations in particular, and I am
happy that we were able to acknowledge this fact in the
resolution.
The entity will be relevant and truly universal
only if its activities successfully provide support and
assistance to all women of the world, in developing
and developed countries; women from all regions and
corners of the world, including those suffering in
armed conflicts and under foreign occupation. This is a
core concern of the JCC.
We look forward to the establishment of a focal
point within the entity for assisting women living
under foreign occupation. Moreover, we will be
supportive of the new Under-Secretary-General in
establishing appropriate mechanisms to address all 12
critical areas of concern, as identified in the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action 15 years ago.
Critical areas deserve due attention and require that
focus not be diverted to issues that are important to
only a few while ignoring other important issues that
concern all of us.
As we turn an important page in the cause of
women’s rights, we are eager and hopeful that the
Executive Board will be able to devise innovative
mechanisms to implement the mandate in developed
countries and in other areas that do not have a United
Nations field presence. This was one of the JCC’s
reasons for suggesting the entity be called “UN
Women”, that is, a United Nations for women or
nations uniting for women.
In order to ensure continuity of the work of the
new Executive Board and enhance institutional
memory, it is our understanding that the Economic and
Social Council will follow its established practice of
applying a staggered mechanism in electing members
of the Board during the first election, thus guaranteeing
a smooth transition and the institutional stability of its
work.
Accountability and oversight are as important for
the entity as for any other part of the Secretariat. We
request the Secretary-General to put in place a proper
accountability framework based on the guidelines
recently defined in resolution 64/259. It is important
that these concepts be set in stone and duly
institutionalized in the operational philosophy of the

6

new entity from the very beginning of its existence.
Accountability — accountability of the entity to
Member States and accountability of Member States to
their women — is of crucial importance to the JCC.
On behalf of the JCC, I would like to seize this
opportunity to express our deep appreciation for the
excellent work and most fruitful programmes being
carried in the field by the United Nations Development
Fund for Women (UNIFEM) and the International
Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women (INSTRAW). We stress in particular the
importance of ensuring the continuation of all current
operational activities, field offices, staff and facilities,
as well as existing and new country programmes and
contractual obligations until appropriate new
arrangements are put in place. With this in mind, we
request the Secretary-General to ensure that all
personnel matters related to the transition be addressed
in a sensitive manner and dealt with efficiently and
with due respect for the existing staff rules and
regulations of the United Nations in such cases, both at
Headquarters and in the field.
To the JCC, dissolving the two entities and
transferring their mandates and functions to the new
entity does not mean that we will establish the entity
without the expertise of the current organs and staff,
whose efforts are highly appreciated and essential to
the success of the new entity. The JCC looks forward
to a smooth transition without programme interruption
or staff suffering from the change.
We hope that all the existing activities of the
Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women (OSAGI) and the Division for
the Advancement of Women will also be continued till
new arrangements are put in place. After all, UNIFEM,
the Division, INSTRAW and OSAGI are the building
blocks of this new entity, and they will be our assets
during the transition period and when the entity is
operationalized on 1 January 2011.
The JCC looks forward to the new entity
commencing its activities as soon as possible, which
will strengthen the United Nations ability to support
Member States in achieving gender equality and the
empowerment of women. In addition, we look forward
to the early appointment of the new Under-SecretaryGeneral at the head of the entity, who we understand
will be a woman from the South. We hope that her
leadership capabilities and clear vision will provide

10-43641

A/64/PV.104

added value to the full implementation of the mandate
given by the resolution we have just adopted. We also
hope that the staff who are recruited in the entity will
represent all the regions of the world in an equitable
manner in order to empower the entity with a solid
understanding of different cultural sensitivities.
We also recognize that there is still work to be
done by the Fifth Committee regarding funding, budget
and resources, as well as the organizational chart of the
entity, and we look forward to the Committee
convening soon to deal with these issues.
Secondly, on governance, the system-wide
evaluation mechanism, common country programmes,
“delivering as one”, the funding of operational
activities for development and the harmonization of
business practices, the JCC welcomes the progress
made through this resolution in the areas of governance
and funding of operational activities.
In that context, the JCC attaches great importance
to the full implementation of the resolution’s
provisions aimed at enhancing the coherence of the
work of the United Nations development system and
the transparency of the activities of the Chief
Executives Board for Coordination. Furthermore, the
JCC would like to stress what the Assembly has
emphasized with regard to the principles of national
ownership and leadership and United Nations support
to all country programmes.
The impact of the international economic and
financial crisis and other crises, which have hampered
the efforts of developing countries towards achieving
the internationally agreed development goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals, makes
United Nations operational activities more important
than ever. As they also support the efforts of country
programmes to address the devastating repercussions
of those multiple crises, the JCC has stressed from the
outset the importance of improving funding for United
Nations operational activities in order to ensure their
adequacy, predictability and sustainability.
In that context, while acknowledging the increase
in overall funding for United Nations operational
activities, the JCC strongly supports the resolution’s
emphasis on the need for adequate quality and quantity
of funding for operational activities and the clear
mandate stipulated in the resolution for the governing
bodies of funds, programmes and relevant specialized
agencies to explore the definition and arrive at a

10-43641

critical mass of core resources. The JCC looks forward
to their reports on this matter and considers it an
important step towards ensuring the balance between
core and non-core funding.
Finally, the JCC would like to express its sincere
appreciation to you personally, Mr. President, for your
leadership and commitment to the cause of United
Nations reform and the empowerment of women. We
also thank His Excellency Vice-President Ambassador
Hardeep Singh Puri, Permanent Representative of
India, for the great work he has done in steering our
consultations on some of the most difficult issues
during the past few days and for his ability to bring
about different compromises and creative forms of
agreement.
Our appreciation also goes to the co-facilitators
of the process, Her Excellency Mrs. Tiina Intelmann,
Permanent Representative of Estonia, and His
Excellency
Mr.
Ghazi
Jomaa,
Permanent
Representative of Tunisia, for their dedication and
effective management of the consultation process. I
would also like to make special mention of our
appreciation of our partners in development for the
constructive atmosphere that has prevailed throughout
the negotiating process.
Our thanks also go to Deputy Secretary-General
Asha-Rose Migiro, her team and that of the SecretaryGeneral, and everyone in the Secretariat who helped
and supported Member States by facilitating our
agreement today. We thank them very much. Their
services and support are always appreciated.
Last but not least, I would like to thank His
Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
tireless efforts, the least of which was his full support
for the JCC proposal that the new baby must have a
name, a simple yet expressive one that epitomizes what
the new entity is all about. We believe that UN Women
says it all.
(spoke in Arabic)
Having spoken on behalf of the JCC of the Group
of 77 and China and the Non-Aligned Movement, it is
now my pleasure to address the Assembly briefly in my
national capacity and on behalf of all Egyptian and
Arab women, underlining the priority that Egypt and
the Arab world attach to women’s full enjoyment of all
human rights without distinction. That remains one of
the goals of the Arab Women’s Organization, which

7

A/64/PV.104

was established upon the initiative of Mrs. Suzanne
Mubarak, First Lady of Egypt. This initiative was
supported and strengthened by the first ladies of every
Arab States, as was the initiative of convening two
NAM summits for first ladies, a precedent that stressed
the importance that Egypt and NAM member States
attach to gender equality, the empowerment of women,
the full enjoyment by women of all their human rights
without distinction and their advancement in all areas,
whether political, economic or social.
I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the United Nations on the establishment
of this new entity for women, as well as all Member
States, both developing and developed, that
participated in negotiating its establishment. I am
honoured that my country was one of the Member
States that actively and effectively participated in those
successful efforts. The Government of Egypt pledges
to extend its full support to the new entity in order to
help it to achieve its goals.
We welcome the great achievement of
strengthening United Nations work in all issues related
to women, and we all pledge to work together for its
success. The success of the entity in fulfilling its
mandate will require comprehensive coordination by
all United Nations agencies and organs, cooperation
with all treaty bodies, especially the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women and the
Committee on the Rights of the Child, and assistance
to committees aimed at coordinating their efforts and
supporting Member States from both developing and
developed countries, as well as all regional and
subregional organizations and political communities. In
that regard, Egypt pledges to continue its determined
efforts, both nationally and regionally, with the Arab
region and with NAM countries, in coordination with
Yemen as the current Chair of the Group of 77 and
China.
Let us all resolve to eradicate all forms of
discrimination and marginalization against women and
to help make the most of their capabilities and
capacities to the benefit of all humankind. Together,
God willing, we will meet the expectations of women
around the world.
Mrs. Kaur (India): It is my privilege to address
the General Assembly as we adopt today the landmark
resolution 64/289 creating UN Women, a composite
entity for gender equality and the empowerment of

8

women within the United Nations. I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your leadership in this
transformational reform at the United Nations.
I say this with particular pride, as India has the
distinction of giving the General Assembly its first
woman President, Mrs. Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit. I am of
course happy that my delegation, under the leadership
of Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri, played a very active role in
the success of the negotiations. I offer my
congratulations also to the co-facilitators, the
Secretary-General, the Deputy Secretary-General and
all others involved in the process.
India is home to more than half a billion women.
Our Constitution enshrines gender equality and
affirmative action to ensure women’s empowerment.
That has been a key focus of our socio-economic
policies. Prime Minister Manmohan Singh has said,
“no society can claim to be a part of the modern
civilized world unless it treats its women on par with
men”.
India has also taken major strides in the area of
the political empowerment of women. Today, more
than 1 million elected women representatives
participate in political decision-making at the
grassroots level. A move to provide a similar
reservation of seats for women in the Indian Parliament
is at an advanced stage of the legislative process,
already having received the approval of the upper
house of our Parliament.
India welcomes the creation of UN Women as a
significant victory for the cause of women worldwide.
It is a reflection of our collective commitment to the
pursuit of gender equality and empowerment. Our
decision here today also takes a step towards restoring
the faith of those Member States, including mine, that
often regard the United Nations as an anachronistic
body resistant to organizational reform and innovation.
We of course hope that it creates momentum for much
needed reform in other areas as well.
I would like to take this opportunity to pledge
India’s full support to UN Women. We urge the early
operationalization of the entity so that the international
community can work with renewed vigour and
commitment for gender equality and women’s
empowerment.
In conclusion, I would like to recall the words of
Sonia Gandhi, Chairperson of the United Progressive

10-43641

A/64/PV.104

Alliance and the leader of my party: “Complete gender
equality, nothing less, must be our over-riding goal.
There must be neither compromise nor complacency.
The struggle is joined. It must be brought to full
fruition.”
Mr. Grauls (Belgium): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The candidate
countries of Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia, Ukraine, Georgia and Iceland,
align themselves with this statement.
On behalf of the European Union, I want to thank
the two co-facilitators, my colleagues Ambassador
Jomaa of Tunisia and Ambassador Intelmann of
Estonia, for their tireless efforts in bringing Member
States to this consensus decision on the establishment
of a new gender entity and for bringing about progress
in other important areas within the system-wide
coherence process.
I would also like to thank you personally,
Mr. President, and the Secretary-General for the
commitment and leadership you have shown in this
negotiation. I also wish to thank my colleague
Ambassador Puri, Permanent Representative of India,
for the crucial role he played in very ably steering the
consultations of the past few days that led to this result.
Our gratitude also goes to the Deputy SecretaryGeneral and all others involved in this process.
The European Union welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 64/289 on system-wide
coherence, and in particular the establishment of UN
Women, the United Nations entity for gender equality
and the empowerment of women, which is to be
operational by 1 January 2011. After four years of
negotiations, the merger of several bodies into one,
new strengthened gender entity is a new milestone in
the reform of the United Nations. It demonstrates the
willingness of the membership for reform. The
European Union encourages the United Nations system
to carry on in that direction.
From an early stage in this process, the European
Union strongly supported the creation of a composite
entity in order to strengthen the capacity,
accountability and effectiveness of the United Nations
system in the area of gender equality. The entity will be

10-43641

in a position to close the current gap between the
normative and operative work of the United Nations in
this
area,
promote
effective
system-wide
mainstreaming in the United Nations system and
strengthen accountability. Through this new body, the
United Nations will be in a stronger position to meet
the urgent and ever-increasing requests by
Governments in support for gender equality and the
empowerment of women.
With regard to the governing body of the
operational activities of the new entity, the European
Union still believes that an independent segment of the
United Nations Development Programme or the United
Nations Population Fund would have been most
appropriate for ensuring efficiency and coherence.
However, in the spirit of compromise and flexibility,
we have accepted the establishment of a new executive
board. Smooth efficient functioning by the board and
strong performance by the entity will ensure the level
of funding required for its operational activities, to
which the European Union and its member States
remain fully committed.
Strong leadership will be essential in order to
implement the provisions of the resolution
unanimously adopted today. Therefore, the European
Union calls on the Secretary-General to urgently
advance the appointment of the new Under-SecretaryGeneral of UN Women so that she or he will be in a
position to lead the development of the new entity from
the early stages.
In the next few months, the four entities will
come together under the leadership of the future
Under-Secretary-General. During the transition period,
it will be particularly important to ensure that all
activities currently carried out by the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) can
continue and that the dissolution of UNIFEM as a
separate entity does not translate into any disruption in
the field or at Headquarters.
The European Union wants to recognize the
essential contribution of civil society throughout the
negotiations for the new gender entity. The resolution
before us underlines the vital role of civil society
organizations in all its future work. The new UnderSecretary-General will have the important task of
ensuring that effective means are established for
ensuring meaningful consultations with civil society
organizations at all levels.

9

A/64/PV.104

With regard to other areas of the system-wide
coherence process, the European Union welcomes the
progress made so far in the areas of the funding and
governance of operational activities for development.
The final purpose of the reform in all these areas
should be to strengthen the capacity of the United
Nations to deliver better assistance for poor and
vulnerable people according to their needs and
priorities.
In particular, the European Union warmly
welcomes the support that the General Assembly gives
to the initiative of some countries to use common
country programmes on a voluntary basis, thus
responding to the needs and demands emerging at the
country level. In addition, the General Assembly
welcomes the ongoing process in the Delivering as One
pilot initiative, as recently recognized in the Hanoi
intergovernmental meeting and in Kigali. The European
Union is encouraged by that positive trend and looks
forward to a swift start to the independent evaluation of
that experience, as mandated of the Secretary-General
in previous General Assembly resolutions.
The European Union believes that during this
process we have developed an improved understanding
of the implications of various forms of funding. We
need to continue to build on that and to improve the
funding architecture of United Nations operational
activities for development, in order to make it more
effective, transparent and accessible and more in line
with the national priorities of developing countries.
While we explore new ideas and concepts, we must
reiterate that it is increased coherence, efficiency,
transparency and accountability in the management and
delivery of United Nations development cooperation
that in the end will translate into the increased quantity
and quality of funding flows.
The European Union will continue to work
actively in all those crucial areas of United Nations
efforts in future sessions of the General Assembly and
in all relevant forums.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of Australia, Canada
and New Zealand.
Canada, Australia and New Zealand appreciate
the leadership and support of the Secretary-General
and of the Deputy Secretary-General and her team
throughout the journey to achieve this resolution. Of
course, we also appreciate the efforts of agencies,

10

Member States and civil society partners. We
particularly thank and congratulate the co-facilitators,
Ambassador Intelmann and Ambassador Jomaa, for
their significant work in fostering consensus. We
would also like to express our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, and especially to Vice-President
Ambassador Puri for the leadership necessary to
delivering the final agreement. Of course, as the
Secretary-General has noted, we should not forget the
vital contribution made by co-facilitators from
previous sessions — including, over the past two years,
our colleagues from Spain, Namibia, Ireland and
Tanzania, as well as by previous General Assembly
Presidents, especially Miguel d’Escoto Brockmann
during the sixty-third session.
Coming to a consensus has obviously been a
challenge. We all know that, and the collective efforts
of many have brought us to the adoption of today’s
outcome. As a result, however, the resolution strongly
demonstrates the commitment of Member States to
United Nations operational activities and the will to
make progress on reform efforts, ensuring a stronger
and more effective role for the Organization in the area
of development.
Canada, Australia and New Zealand are fully
committed to working with all partners to strengthen
the United Nations development system so that it can
respond more effectively to the needs and requests of
programme countries. It is our hope that key proposals
in the governance section of the resolution will help to
achieve more informed, responsive and committed
decision-making from the relevant intergovernmental
bodies. The relevance of the operational work of the
United Nations to today’s development challenges
vitally depends on that.
We look forward to the results of the independent
evaluation of the Delivering as One pilot initiative
during the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly
so that we can collectively improve our understanding
and, in turn, our support to those countries. We look
forward to seeing that evaluation carried out in line
with the highest standards of independence and
professionalism, and with United Nations norms and
standards for evaluation.
Canada, Australia and New Zealand are obviously
particularly pleased that the Assembly has acted
decisively to establish and operationalize the United
Nations entity for gender equality and the

10-43641

A/64/PV.104

empowerment of women. This is a key, historic
milestone that we have been working towards for a
long time — since the Beijing Declaration — and it is
important that we have achieved this in the lead-up to
September’s Millennium Development Goals summit.
UN Women will strengthen the voice and action
of the United Nations on gender equality and women’s
empowerment. It will also strengthen United Nations
operational support to Member States for the effective
delivery of our collective commitments, including the
promotion and protection of women’s rights under
national ownership and national leadership.
We all know that the empowerment of women is
an indispensable element in eliminating poverty. As we
have heard this week repeatedly in the Development
Cooperation Forum, empowering women legally,
financially and through education has significant
positive impact on the whole community, including
healthier and better-educated children, more responsive
governance, improved agricultural productivity and
improved newborn and maternal health.
Strong leadership of the new entity will have an
enormous impact globally, not just on women but on
girls and boys, women and men. We must not lose
momentum in following through decisively on this
resolution. We would ask the Secretary-General to
accelerate the recruitment for the head of UN Women
through an open and transparent process, and we urge
Member States to submit their best candidates quickly
to the Secretary-General.
We urge all Member States to lend their full
support to UN Women to ensure a smooth transition
period over the coming months, including through the
new executive board. We look forward to a strong,
strategic and technically skilled executive board to
support UN Women through the transition and beyond
in its full operations.
In conclusion, UN Women can certainly count on
Australia, Canada and New Zealand for strong support
over the coming years.
Mrs. Intelmann (Estonia): The process of
negotiation that has taken several years and a lot of
dedication on the part of many has reached an outcome
this afternoon. It was a privilege to be closely involved
in the final stretch and to build on the outstanding
results achieved by the previous co-facilitators on
system-wide coherence.

10-43641

Estonia hopes that the implementation of
resolution 64/289 will improve the response of the
United Nations development system to countries’
needs. We also hope that the creation of UN Women
will ensure greater coherence, help to overcome
previous fragmentation and create a strong advocate
for gender equality and the empowerment of women.
During the negotiations we witnessed the active
engagement of all Member States, for which we would
like to thank them sincerely and acknowledge that
without their flexibility and results-oriented mindset
we would not have reached a successful conclusion.
My sincere thanks go to the Secretary-General, the
Deputy Secretary-General, the Office of the Deputy
Secretary-General and the entire Secretariat for their
support and valuable help. I would like to convey
special thanks to the President of the General
Assembly and his Office and to the Vice-Presidents for
their engagement, support and leadership. Once more, I
would like to express my gratitude for and highlight
the outstanding work done by the Chairs of working
groups and all other delegations that have facilitated
our work and helped us on the way to reaching
consensus.
Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): It is a
pleasure to address the Assembly today and to offer my
congratulations on its adoption of resolution 64/289, on
system-wide coherence. This is a historic occasion and
a milestone in the work of the Organization and its
efforts to develop its working methods and adopt
reform measures that respond to the needs and
expectations of Member States and of every country of
the world in order to elevate our Organization to the
heights we all expect.
I would like to highlight the importance of this
occasion and to acknowledge the participation of all of
those who have contributed to this achievement. I shall
therefore try to use all the official languages of the
United Nations I can in expressing my gratitude. I
apologize for not having mastered all of them.
I would like to express my appreciation for the
great support of the President of the General Assembly,
Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki, during the negotiations on
the resolution. I thank him for his continued readiness
to provide support and encouragement during the
negotiations to achieve the results we have attained. I
also wish to thank the members of his staff and the

11

A/64/PV.104

Director of his Office, who provided us the necessary
facilities to further the negotiations.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to seize this historic opportunity
to extend my warmest thanks and appreciation to His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon for his personal
commitment, especially to the reform process and
generally for his tireless efforts to improve the working
methods of the Organization and enhance its
effectiveness and efficiency in all areas and at all
levels. At the same time, I extend my warmest thanks
to Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro, Deputy Secretary-General,
who has accompanied us in this process with a clear
perspective and provided all the help we requested
from her.
I cannot neglect to deeply and sincerely thank all
Member States, ambassadors, experts and advisors. In
particular, I would like to thank Ambassador Puri of
India for his incredibly committed, steadfast and hard
work, during which he put in late nights to enable us to
achieve this historic result.
I also wish to express my deep gratitude to the
members of the Secretariat, the men and women who
work in various United Nations agencies and organs
and several United Nations departments, who advised
us and provided us, generously and in a timely manner,
with the necessary information and needed clarification
when pessimism and doubt sometimes overtook the
process. I would honestly like to name them one by
one. In the interest of time, however, Ambassador
Intelmann and I would like to thank them all
collectively.
Without sincere and transparent cooperation
between Member States and regional groups, including
their willingness to get things done and reach tangible
results, this process would not have been successful. I
therefore thank the Ambassadors of Yemen and Egypt
as co-Chairs of the Joint Coordinating Committee of
the Group of 77 and the Non-Aligned Movement, the
Ambassador of Spain as acting head of the delegation
of the European Union, the United States, Russia,
China, Japan, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and, in
fact, all Member States without exception.
(spoke in French)
Among other things, resolution 64/289 provides
us with an entity on gender equality that will allow us
to make a difference with regard to all aspects of

12

women’s programmes. An entity of this scope will add
a new dimension to the work of the United Nations.
Our efforts henceforth should focus on practical
aspects of establishing the entity and implementing its
ambitious agenda.
My country, which has conferred privileged
status on women and a valued role as active and fully
participating partners, welcomes this result that brings
credit to us all. Tunisia, through its leadership and
based on its cutting edge initiatives in this area and its
extensive experience, will always fully support and
faithfully and actively contribute to supporting those
issues in its strategic choices.
With this resolution, governance of the
operational activities for development of the United
Nations will take place in an institutional and legal
framework that will be more harmonized, and therefore
more effective. We thus hope to have positive results in
the very near future.
(spoke in Spanish)
I would like to conclude by emphasizing that the
United Nations has demonstrated that, with the sincere
will of its Member States, the Secretariat and all of its
partners, reform is possible and that improving the
services of the Organization is our priority in order to
respond to the national needs of Members and all
social segments.
This exercise, which we are concluding today
with great success, is the best illustration of that fact.
Despite our differences, we as Member States have
together sent a clear message to the entire world that
we are capable of reconciling our differences, make
mutual concessions and establish as our absolute
priority the common interests of our peoples and of the
Organization.
Mr. Barton (United States of America): The
United States welcomes the adoption of this landmark
resolution creating UN Women — a new, consolidated
agency that will give one powerful voice to United
Nations efforts to strengthen gender equality and
empower women around the world.
Resolution 64/289 is the product of years of
effort and months of intensive negotiations on the final
details. It shows what we can accomplish when we
transcend traditional differences and work across
boundaries towards a common purpose. Let me express
our deep appreciation for the skill and dedication of the

10-43641

A/64/PV.104

two co-facilitators — the Permanent Representatives of
Estonia and Tunisia — and for the guidance that you,
Mr. President, and your designated representative, the
Permanent Representative of India, provided in the
crucial final stages of the negotiations.
Our efforts have also built on groundwork laid by
co-facilitators from the sixty-first, sixty-second and
sixty-third sessions of the General Assembly. They also
benefited from the personal commitment of SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and Deputy Secretary-General
Migiro. We thank them along with all of the experts
who laboured so hard to create this new body.
Let us be clear as to why this agency is so
needed. So many women and girls around the world
face daunting challenges — some common to all
women, some particular to their own unique
circumstances. So many women and girls will have
high expectations for this vital new agency. The United
States looks forward to working with UN Women,
which has an impressive mandate to deal with the full
range of issues that affect women’s lives — from
women’s rights to women’s economic empowerment;
from women, peace and security to women’s political
participation — to ensure that these high expectations
are realized.
This new agency must be a catalyst within the
United Nations system, ensuring that United Nations
funds and programmes and the Secretariat fully address
the issues within their mandates that affect women and
girls. We also expect UN Women to undertake new
activities on the ground to support women in areas that
have not yet been fully addressed by the United
Nations system.

and expanding the donor base. It also highlights the
need to improve executive board oversight by making
it easier for national policymakers from developing
countries to participate. The United States will
continue to work with our partners on those issues as
they arise.
The creation of this important new agency has
been a collaborative effort involving many actors over
many years, but, in a sense, our work has just begun.
Now that this entity is a reality rather than an
aspiration, we will all be put to the test. Now we must
demonstrate our collective commitment to making UN
Women a success and to improving the lives of women
and girls around the world.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate the two co-facilitators, the Permanent
Representatives of Estonia and Tunisia, and their
respective delegations for their patience and able
stewardship of the process that has led to the adoption
of resolution 64/289. Let me also extend our
appreciation to the Secretary-General, the Deputy
Secretary-General and their staff for their commitment
to this process. Finally, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and your able Vice-President, the
Permanent Representative of India, for urging on us
throughout the process.
We warmly welcome the adoption of resolution
64/289 on system-wide coherence. Our deliberations
and negotiations at the United Nations can at times
appear
tedious,
thankless
and
of
minimal
transformative effect. That is not the case today. This is
indeed a pivotal moment in the reform of the United
Nations.

To play that challenging and ambitious role, UN
Women will need a dynamic, strong and innovative
leader who will bring fresh perspective, great energy
and extensive skill to United Nations efforts to
improve the lives of women in the twenty-first century.
We urge the Secretary-General to appoint such a leader
before the start of the next session of the General
Assembly in September, as mandated by the resolution
we have just adopted.

The establishment of a United Nations entity for
gender equality and the empowerment of women is of
critical importance, as it brings together for the first
time the organizational structures, high-level
leadership and resources necessary to enable
Governments and the United Nations system to
significantly increase their efforts to fulfil their
promises on gender equality, women’s empowerment
and women’s human rights.

While we have naturally focused today on the
establishment of UN Women, we should also take note
of the significant progress that this resolution
represents in other areas of the system-wide coherence
agenda. The resolution recognizes the importance of
improving the system for funding operational activities

For Rwanda, which has emerged as a global
leader in the fight for gender equality and has the
highest percentage of women parliamentarians in the
world and a continuous commitment to promoting,
accelerating and sustaining gender equality, UN
Women offers us the opportunity to augment our

10-43641

13

A/64/PV.104

achievements. We expect UN Women to bring the
necessary leadership to shape and implement the
policies needed to empower women, advance equality
in a meaningful way and to hold us accountable to the
goals and aspirations we set for ourselves. We look
forward to the appointment of a strong UnderSecretary-General to give the entity the leadership it
deserves. My Government stands ready to support the
entity in every way possible.
The outcome document of the intergovernmental
meeting of the programme country pilots on
“delivering as one”, held in Kigali in 2009, stated that
the “delivering as one” approach had provided benefits
for achieving better development results through
increased national leadership and ownership in the
development partnership with the United Nations
system. It also stated that there was no going back to
doing business in the manner in place prior to the
“delivering as one” initiative.
The programme country pilots, of which Rwanda
is one, had the opportunity to present their country-led
evaluations in Hanoi a few weeks ago. They all showed
that implementing the “delivering as one” approach
had brought about valuable opportunities to further
strengthen the relevance, currency and comparative
advantages of the United Nations system in direct
support of the priorities and interests of programme
countries. They also reaffirmed that there was no going
back to doing business as usual and that “delivering as
one” was the future of United Nations development
activities. In that regard, we call on the SecretaryGeneral to proceed with the modalities for the
independent evaluation of lessons learned in
“delivering as one” pilot countries.
In conclusion, let me once again express our
gratitude to all those who have contributed to this
process. I urge everyone to ensure the swift
implementation of this resolution.
Mr. Kim Bonghyun (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, my delegation sincerely welcomes the adoption
of resolution 64/289. We believe that the resolution
will reinforce gender equality, the empowerment of
women and the governance of operational activities for
the development of the United Nations system in the
context of system-wide coherence.
I would also like to applaud the laborious efforts
of the co-facilitators and of Ambassador Puri of India
in bridging the various gaps among Member States

14

during the long and arduous negotiating period. More
than anything else, however, the commitment and
aspirations of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
Deputy Secretary-General Migiro for the realization of
the UN Women composite entity should be fully
recognized. Their commitments on the issue of systemwide coherence are integral to making the Organization
more effective and coherent.
As a strong supporter of the “delivering as one”
approach, Korea welcomes the decision of particular
countries to use common country programme
documents, consistent with the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework and other
initiatives, to move forward discussions on “delivering
as one”. As a new member of the Organization for
Economic
Cooperation
and
Development’s
Development Assistance Committee, my country is
planning to increase its overall official development
assistance, which we plan to disburse through multiple
channels, including the United Nations, in the
knowledge that the United Nations will effectively
deploy our resources. At the same time, we expect the
United Nations to continue to enhance its
accountability so that we can be convinced that our
resources are being used effectively.
As for the decline in core contributions against
non-core contributions to the United Nations
development system, we feel that the Organization
should continue to examine ways of how non-core
contributions can better meet development needs on
the ground, while making efforts to increase core
contributions. In that regard, the Republic of Korea has
been enthusiastic about the creation of a new gender
entity. We look forward to close coordination with it as
it sets out to fulfil its mandate.
I assure you, Mr. President, of my delegation’s
full and unwavering support as we move forward. We
are confident that the establishment of this singular,
synergistic gender entity will go a long way towards
fostering women’s empowerment throughout all parts
of the United Nations system.
Mr. Benítez Versón (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The Cuban delegation fully supports the statement
delivered by Mrs. Moushira Khattab, Minister of State
for Family and Population Affairs of Egypt, on behalf
of the Joint Coordinating Committee of the
Non-Aligned Movement and the Group of 77 and
China.

10-43641

A/64/PV.104

The resolution we have adopted today is the
outcome of an arduous process with which we are
satisfied. Transparency, inclusiveness and respect for
the opinions of all Member States have prevailed. We
are therefore grateful for the work of the co-facilitators
of the negotiating process, Ambassador Tiina
Intelmann of Estonia and Ambassador Ghazi Jomaa of
Tunisia. We would also like to express our gratitude for
the work undertaken by Ambassador Hardeep Singh
Puri of India in facilitating the achievement of a
satisfactory agreement for all of us in the final phase.
The creation of a new gender entity constitutes an
historic step in the fulfilment of the commitments
made at the Fourth World Conference on Women held
in Beijing in 1995 aimed at achieving gender equality
and the empowerment of all women in the world.
Cuba’s active participation and innovative proposals in
the negotiation of the new entity, whose establishment
we support, reflect our country’s tradition as a defender
of the advancement of women.
Together with the Joint Coordinating Committee,
Cuba encouraged most of the governing principles of
the new entity that are included in the resolution. In
particular, we defend the principle of universality
because the advancement of women must be a reality
in all countries and all regions. In the negotiations, we
championed the creation of a new Executive Board as a
governing body for the new entity, which will support
the efforts of Member States on the ground.
Furthermore, we promote the equitable geographic
composition of the Board based on the percentage of
the current membership of the General Assembly.
We hope that the new entity, in accordance with
the provisions of the resolution adopted today, will
develop specific mechanisms in the follow-up to
Beijing, including focus on the matter of populations
affected by the imposition of unilateral coercive
measures contrary to international law.
It is important that the transitional agreements
guarantee the continuity of the projects and
programmes of the United Nations Development Fund
for Women and the International Research and Training
Institute for the Advancement of Women until the
entity starts its work. Furthermore, aspects relating to
the regular budget of the entity, as well as the financial
regulation to be adopted for operational activities, must
be preceded by analysis by the relevant specialized
bodies.

10-43641

Although the resolution makes a clear appeal for
strict respect for the national priorities of the recipient
countries, the adaptation of the work of the United
Nations on the ground to these priorities and the
intention to impose single models of development and
assistance were specific reasons for the delay in the
negotiations that we have concluded successfully
today. For Cuba, the main purpose of the funds,
programmes and specialized agencies must be to
achieve the objectives of the recipient countries in
strict respect for the intergovernmental mandates
established and avoiding bias towards specific groups
of States. In this context, full transparency in the work
of the United Nations Chief Executive Board for
Coordination is essential.
Cuba has taken due note of the modality that
certain sister countries that are members of the Joint
Coordinating Committee have adopted in order to carry
out the work on the ground for the funds, programmes
and specialized agencies — the so-called “delivering as
one”. For our part, we are paying special attention to
the independent evaluation of this exercise, which will
be completed in the coming months.
Cuba believes that the process for the selection of
experts will be the exclusive responsibility of Member
States of each regional group, without interference
from the Secretariat or from other regional groups. We
hope that the evaluation will take place with the clarity
that the case deserves and that Member States will
receive due information on the implementation of the
evaluating process, its terms of reference and its
results.
The section of the resolution referring to
financing makes a clear appeal for ensuring that the
non-earmarked funds of the budgets, programmes,
funds and specialized agencies be the basis of its
operations. We are convinced that the critical mass of
resources to be mobilized will represent only a small
fraction of the exorbitant funds that are wasted on
weapons of all types in the world today.
Allow me to conclude by reaffirming Cuba’s
commitment to the implementation of the resolution
and our firm intention to continue to actively promote
gender equality and the empowerment of all women
and girls in the world.
Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Joint

15

A/64/PV.104

Coordinating Committee of the States members of the
Group of 77 and China and the Non-Aligned
Movement. We express our special gratitude to the
Permanent Representatives of Egypt and Yemen and to
the teams of their Missions for their efficient work in
coordinating the position of the two main groups of the
developing world, which allowed us to constructively
contribute fundamental elements to the resolution that
we have adopted today (resolution 64/289).
My delegation welcomes the conclusion of the
negotiations of the General Assembly on system-wide
coherence that have taken place over several years. We
trust that this resolution will allow us to strengthen
governance and the financing of the operational
activities of the United Nations for development and to
harmonize specific institutional practices. We look
forward to seeing the report that we have requested
from the Secretary-General on the independent
evaluation mechanisms, and we will follow up
developments in the “delivering as one” model and to
the common country programmes.
Colombia especially welcomes the conclusion of
the process of reform of the gender architecture and the
creation of the new gender entity of the United
Nations, UN Women. We are convinced that, with the
establishment of the entity, we have taken an historic
decision and a fundamental step towards strengthening
the ability of the United Nations to promote gender
equality and the empowerment of women throughout
the world.
My country values the work that has been done to
date by people who have committed themselves to the
four different entities that now have mandates in
women’s affairs. We must recognize, however, that the
reform adopted will allow us to put an end to
institutional
fragmentation
that
has
limited
opportunities for collective action. Today, we are
demonstrating that, with a constructive dialogue, it is
possible to find consensus on the reform processes
required by the United Nations in order to restore
coherence and strengthen the participation of all States
in the work of the Organization.
The new entity being established offers a unique
opportunity to raise the political profile of gender
equality and the empowerment of women at the United
Nations and in the international context. The
designated institutional set-up ensures the autonomy of
the entity in the normative operations and policies

16

defined in the instruments and resolutions of the
United Nations. It will at the same time strengthen
intergovernmental dialogue on the operational and
international cooperation aspects of gender issues
through the new Executive Board.
Colombia hopes that the operationalization of the
entity will enjoy the necessary financial, technical and
human resources to achieve the goals of incorporating
the gender perspective into all relevant activities of the
United Nations, as well as to give greater support to
States in their national efforts, which will allow us to
make progress towards gender equality and the
empowerment of women throughout the world. We
hope that the new entity will demonstrate constructive
and effective leadership based on efficiency,
transparency and accountability, and that it will be
fully capable of respecting the crucial purpose of the
United Nations — achieving international cooperation
in the different areas relating to its mandates.
To conclude, I would like to express my
delegation’s gratitude to all Permanent Representatives
who acted as facilitators in that process at recent
sessions of the General Assembly. In particular, we
acknowledge
the
efforts
of
the
Permanent
Representatives of Tunisia and Estonia and the
excellent work of the Permanent Representative of
India, whose mediation skills made it possible to
resolve the most critical issues at the final stage of the
consultations that we have completed today.
Colombia declares its backing for the new gender
entity and hopes that all States will support it
resolutely so that the principles, objectives and hopes
reflected in the resolution become a reality that
benefits all the women of the world.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): My delegation joins
in welcoming the unanimous adoption of resolution
64/289. We align ourselves with the statement made by
the Minister of State for Family and Population Affairs
of the Arab Republic of Egypt on behalf of the Joint
Coordinating Committee.
We would like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, Deputy Secretary-General Asha-Rose Migiro
and you, Mr. President, for the valuable guidance,
contribution and commitment to the general reform
process. On behalf of my delegation, I would like to
thank the facilitators, my colleagues Mrs. Tiina
Intelmann, Permanent Representative of Estonia, and
Mr. Ghazi Jomaa, Permanent Representative of

10-43641

A/64/PV.104

Tunisia, for their tireless efforts in bringing Member
States to this consensus decision on the establishment
of a new gender entity.
The decision follows almost three years of
extensive consultations and negotiations on the
structure and operational modalities of the entity. I am
pleased to say that the facilitators rose to the challenge,
personally investing a great deal of time and energy in
exploring the issues thoroughly and in seeking the
views of Governments, civil society representatives
and officials of the United Nations system through an
extensive series of thematic consultations.
We recognize the importance of a strengthened
United Nations gender architecture in advancing
women’s rights and the need to improve gender
equality and the empowerment of women in order to
build sustainable, just and developed societies. We also
recognize that gender equality is a prerequisite to
achieving the Millennium Development Goals and
other internationally agreed development goals. In that
regard, my delegation warmly welcomes the General
Assembly’s strong and unanimous support for the
establishment of a United Nations entity for gender
equality and the empowerment of women, to be known
as UN Women and to be operational by 1 January
2011.
We strongly believe that the new entity will bring
about an important shift in the United Nations work in
the area of gender equality and the empowerment of
women, and will enable it to respond better to the
challenges and more effectively to support countries in
their efforts to achieve their development goals. We
also welcome the fact that the entity will provide
guidance and technical support to Member States on
gender equality and the empowerment and rights of
women, as well as gender mainstreaming, through its
normative support functions and operational activities.
Botswana’s commitment to issues concerning the
empowerment of women continues to be inspired by its
accession to the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women and its
Optional Protocol, among other things. In that context,
our country has developed a number of national
gender-responsive instruments to guide its efforts.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate my delegation’s
unwavering commitment to the promotion and
protection of equal rights for all. We remain convinced
that we must all do our part in taking the actions

10-43641

needed, as set forth in our common endeavour to meet
universal goals.
Mrs. Kafanabo (United Republic of Tanzania):
The Government of the United Republic of Tanzania
welcomes the consensus adoption of resolution 64/289
on system-wide coherence. We align ourselves with the
statement made by Minister Moushira Khattab,
Minister of State for Family and Population Affairs of
the Arab Republic of Egypt, on behalf of the Joint
Coordinating Committee of the Group of 77 and China
and the Non-Aligned Movement. We join others in
congratulating our two facilitators, Ambassador
Intelmann of Estonia and Ambassador Jomaa of
Tunisia, for the achievements that we have registered
in all areas, in particular in strengthening institutional
arrangements for the support of gender equality and the
empowerment of women.
Mrs. Kaur (India), Vice-President, took the Chair.
In adopting the resolution, we should applaud our
achievement in the decision that we have taken today
to establish UN Women, an entity for gender equality
and the empowerment of women. The establishment of
UN Women should usher in a new era in our efforts to
achieve gender equality and the empowerment of
women. In that regard, we expect the gender entity to
have a strong presence in the field and to be better
resourced to support the efforts of Governments, in
particular those of developing countries, in promoting
gender equality and the advancement of women. It is
our expectation, too, that UN Women will ensure the
coordination and coherence of efforts to promote
gender equality and the empowerment of women
within the United Nations family in the field and at
Headquarters.
Furthermore, the establishment of UN Women
and the expectations placed in it should motivate
Governments to provide more voluntary contributions
to enable the entity to meet the needs of women in the
field. We look forward to the operationalization of UN
Women, and therefore call on the Secretary-General to
appoint a competent Under-Secretary-General of UN
Women as a matter of urgency. In that regard, we also
welcome today’s announcement by the SecretaryGeneral on the appointment of the Deputy SecretaryGeneral to oversee the transition period until a new
Under-Secretary-General is appointed. That will ensure
continuity in the process of putting in place the new

17

A/64/PV.104

entity. Women in the field have been eagerly waiting
for such a gender entity. Let us not delay them further.
As a pilot country for the “delivering as one”
initiative, we welcome the fact that the SecretaryGeneral is encouraged to proceed with the modality for
an independent evaluation of country pilots under the
initiative, and we wish to underscore the need for a
speedy execution of the independent evaluation of pilot
countries. We further welcome the support given
through the resolution to those countries that wish to
present a common country programme document to do
so. That is the path that the Government of Tanzania
wishes to take as, for our part, it will further strengthen
the coherence of United Nations programmes at the
country level. We therefore encourage Member States
to continue to support the Government of Tanzania and
other countries wishing to do that.
In conclusion, allow me also to recognize the
leadership that has been provided by the President of
the General Assembly, the Secretary-General and the
Deputy
Secretary-General
for
the
successful
conclusion of the negotiations.
Mr. Cuello Camilo (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): The Dominican Republic fully associates
itself with the statement made by Mrs. Moushira
Khattab, Minister of State for Family and Population
Affairs of Egypt, who took the floor on behalf of the
Joint Coordinating Committee of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Group of 77 and China.
The Dominican Republic shares the delight of the
Member States celebrating the adoption of resolution
64/289 on system-wide coherence, which creates a new
entity, UN Women, to bring together hereafter the work
previously carried out by four other institutions.
Millions of women and girls around the world await us
to recognize their rights and their needs, protection and
support for their families, justice, opportunities to learn
and grow without limitation or fear, to hold important
positions in the world and to enjoy equal opportunities
in their homes, classrooms and at work. The
Dominican Republic hopes that working with and for
them from a single institution will enable us to address
the many needs that have for so long been unmet in so
many corners of the world.
For this reason, the Dominican Republic
commends and thanks the Secretary-General, the
Deputy Secretary-General and the President of the
General Assembly for their leadership, as well as the

18

Vice-President of the General Assembly, the Permanent
Representative of India, for guiding us through the
difficult process of these past few days.
The Dominican Republic extends its appreciation
to the Permanent Representatives of Estonia and
Tunisia for their dedicated and tireless work at the
forefront of this process and for maintaining a
constructive spirit throughout, and to the chairs of the
regional groups for their work and spirit of flexibility.
We also extend our thanks to the members of the
Secretariat, whose assistance has been instrumental to
this process.
My country would like especially to thank and
recognize the Ambassadors of Egypt and Yemen,
representing the Joint Consultative Committee, and
members of their respective delegations for their
tireless sacrifice and outstanding work, their great
negotiating skills, their spirit of solidarity in defence of
the interests of all members of our group, their
determination to see our concerns reflected in the text
we have adopted today, and their endless efforts to
achieve the necessary agreements both within our
group and with other colleagues, all of which have
made it possible to reach this happy conclusion.
The Dominican Republic has a long tradition of
fighting for gender equality and the rights of women.
For that reason, since 1983 our country has hosted the
headquarters of the International Research and
Training Institute for the Advancement of Women
(INSTRAW), providing it with suitable physical
facilities and unflagging support, given the developing
countries’ high political interest in the Institute.
From the Dominican Republic, INSTRAW has
done important work with regard to gender training and
research. If this were not enough, INSTRAW houses
technology support teams that have allowed the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to
continue to function after the earthquake of 12 January
devastated its facilities in Haiti. Since then,
INSTRAW’s premises have housed MINUSTAH’s
logistical support operations, which could not function
in the neighbouring country.
The Dominican Republic believes that the
establishment of UN Women will raise the importance
of the gender issue to the same level as that of other
priority issues of the United Nations, including
development, human rights, peace and security. The
Dominican Republic trusts that the integration of

10-43641

A/64/PV.104

INSTRAW’s mandate into the functions of UN Women
will be effective, resulting in training and research
work with greater impact, supported by generous and
predictable resources and managed by efficient and
able personnel. The Dominican Republic hopes that
UN Women will pursue its training and research work
from its physical location in the Dominican Republic
for the sake of preserving the geographic balance of the
Non-Aligned Movement and the Group of 77.
The Dominican Republic is confident that the
experience and knowledge acquired by INSTRAW’S
staff will be recognized by UN Women, as they deserve
consideration within the same categories as other
United Nations personnel working in other agencies,
even though they have been working for many years
based on temporary contracts due to the lack of
predictable resources.
May the spirit of compromise that helped us
throughout the negotiation process show not only that
improving the United Nations system is not a mere
exercise in organizational engineering or spending
cuts, but that, with coherence, we can efficiently fulfil
the dreams of millions of girls and women worldwide
with dignity and without discrimination.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The delegation of the Russian Federation was
pleased to join the consensus adoption of resolution
64/289 on system-wide coherence. Like other speakers,
we thank the current coordinators of the negotiation
process, the Permanent Representatives of Tunisia and
Estonia, and their predecessors in those positions. My
delegation is convinced that, without their sustained
combination of diplomatic tact and assistance, we
would not have achieved this result. We give the
highest possible commendation to India’s efforts under
Mr.
Puri’s
very
professional
and
effective
chairmanship; he was able to resolve problems that
seemed at times to all of us insurmountable.
We further welcome the political will and spirit
of compromise shown by all participants in the
negotiation process, including individual States
Members and groups of States. This was to be expected
when the issue at stake was the harmonious functioning
of the United Nations system, including the important
issue of ensuring gender equality and expanding
women’s rights.
The resolution provides for a number of
important measures aimed at improving system-wide

10-43641

coherence and avoiding duplication. First and foremost
among those measures is reform of the United Nations
gender architecture and the creation of a new hybrid
body on that topic. This step is unprecedented in all its
aspects, as similar structures do not exist within the
structure of the Organization. We are satisfied by the
agreement reached on that question. We feel that the
compromise outcome will enable us to resolve the task
of improving the effectiveness of the United Nations in
this field.
We also believe that one guarantee of the
effective functioning of the future hybrid instrument is
the universal geographical scope of its mandate
covering all countries and all regions, for no State in
the world today is entirely free of violations against
women’s rights.
Another important element is this instrument’s
accountability to Member States. Its functioning will
be reviewed three years after the resolution’s adoption.
It is therefore important to prevent any disruption of
work during the so-called transition period. The
Russian delegation believes that the provisions of the
resolution will avert any such situation.
We also welcome the balanced wording of the
resolution regarding the management, financing and
assessment of the operational activities and
harmonization of procedures. We support the decision to
enhance transparency and accountability in the work of
the United Nations Chief Executives Board for
Coordination. We believe that this will serve as a sound
basis for enhancing the efficiency of cooperation among
Member States in the Economic and Social Council and
the Committee for Programme and Coordination.
A serious step forward has been made in regard to
the procedures for adopting common country
programmes. It was important that a realizable and
practical option was chosen, affirming the mandate and
prerogatives of the executive boards of programmes
and funds. Of course, at the same time, the Chief
Executives Board will of course continue to act as a
platform for discussion of the issues common to all
bodies at the country level, but it must preserve its
strictly unofficial status.
We welcome the “delivering as one” pilot
initiative. A great deal will depend on the precise
fulfilment of the agreements achieved on the
establishment of assessment bodies. We are ready to
participate actively in developing the format and

19

A/64/PV.104

modalities of a future possible independent assessment
system, with a thematic scope of work to be defined in
the United Nations operational activities. We believe
that the proposal submitted to the Secretary-General
will ensure agreement within the United Nations and
the involvement of all interested entities.
We believe that future discussion of the issue of
enhancing the effectiveness of the United Nations
system will take place within the framework of a
regular four-year review of its operational activities,
for which we should start preparing at the sixty-fifth
session of the Assembly. In this way, the process of
consultations on system-wide coherence has reached its
conclusion.
Finally, the resolution we have adopted today is
as yet only a document. When it comes to translating
its provisions into practical measures, its effectiveness
will depend on all of us. We States Members of the
United Nations are responsible for the decisions we
make and for the effectiveness of our Organization.
Mr. Sumi (Japan): At the outset, my delegation
would like to express our sincere appreciation to the
President of the General Assembly, Mr. Treki, and
facilitators Ambassador Intelmann and Ambassador
Jomaa for their dedicated leadership, patience and
tireless efforts, which have led us to an agreement on
today’s landmark resolution 64/289. We also extend
our appreciation to Ambassador Puri for his
commitment and excellent coordination during the
final stage of the negotiations. Our thanks also go to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Deputy SecretaryGeneral Migiro for their strong leadership. Had we not
had that leadership, we would not have achieved the
adoption of the resolution today.
My delegation welcomes the adoption by
consensus of the resolution on system-wide coherence
and its creation of a new entity, UN Women. In fact,
this is something of an historic moment, as our action
unites four currently separate gender-related bodies and
ensures that leadership will be provided at a higher
level by an Under-Secretary-General. We hope that the
Secretary-General will appoint the leader of the new
body in a timely manner. For its part, Japan will spare
no effort to support UN Women and its head in their
efforts to mainstream gender throughout the United
Nations system.
Throughout the discussions on this issue, it has
been Japan’s strong conviction that the United Nations

20

system should tighten the links between its normative
and policymaking functions and its operational
activities. The system should make the bottom-up and
the top-down processes echo one another, mutually
reinforcing each other in order to improve the
coherence and the effectiveness of the Organization’s
work, including in the area of gender equality and the
empowerment of women.
My delegation will carefully observe and check
to see if substantial efficiency gains are achieved in the
implementation of this hard-won resolution, and if the
savings generated are reinvested into programme
activities intended to address the real issues on the
ground in support of women in need of protection and
empowerment.
Finally, my delegation very much hopes that the
new entity, UN Women, will cooperate closely with
other agencies in a manner that contributes to the
mainstreaming of the gender perspective and policies
throughout the United Nations system and that
enhances the coherence of gender-related activities
conducted by various United Nations agencies on the
ground.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Like
other delegations, we associate ourselves with the
statement by Minister Moushira Khattab on behalf of the
Joint Coordinating Committee. We welcome the historic
adoption of resolution 64/289, creating the long-awaited
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN Women).
Almost four years after the publication of the
report of the High-Level Panel on United Nations
System-wide Coherence (A/61/583), and after prolonged
negotiations in which our country participated actively
in support, the joint efforts of Member States and civil
society have led to the creation of an entity that will
enable us to respond effectively to the aspirations of
women all over the world. We hope that UN Women will
be fully operational as soon as possible and that its
funding will be supported. We also call for the transition
process to be conducted in a way that will not
unnecessarily prejudice operations on the ground or
personnel working in the four institutions subsumed into
UN Women.
We would like to thank the Permanent
Representatives of Estonia and Tunisia as facilitators
of the process, the Permanent Representatives of
Yemen and Egypt for their leadership and

10-43641

A/64/PV.104

contributions, and the Permanent Representative of
India, Ambassador Puri, who contributed so much to
the success of the negotiations. Clearly, the President
of the General Assembly, the Secretary-General and the
Deputy Secretary-General deserve our gratitude and
thanks for this result. We also thank the staff of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women, the
International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women, the Office of the Special
Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women, and the Division for the Advancement of
Women, as well as all the experts who took part in the
negotiations for so many years.
We understand that every delegation has had to
make concessions, including us. We believe that the
higher good will prevail, and in this case the creation
of the entity is a benefit our country has long desired,
knowing that through it we are contributing to the
greater coherence, efficiency, transparency and
accountability of the United Nations system in matters
of gender and to its progress towards the gender
equality and the empowerment of women to which we
all aspire.
Ms. Rovirosa (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico welcomes the Assembly’s adoption by
consensus of resolution 64/289 on system-wide
coherence, establishing the new gender entity UN
Women. Its broad mandate and necessary leadership in
promoting the gender perspective throughout the
United Nations system will give new impetus to a topic
that is important to all.
I would like to express our gratitude to the
Permanent Representatives of Estonia and Tunisia for
the way in which they guided our discussions, and to the
Permanent Representative of India, Ambassador Puri,
who, in his capacity as Vice-President of the General
Assembly, was able to give the process the political
impetus necessary for its conclusion. Our thanks go to
all delegations for their contributions and efforts.
The establishment of UN Women reflects the
commitment of all States Members of the United
Nations to gender equality and the empowerment of
women. Moreover, it is an demonstration that we can
reach agreement and reconcile various points of view
for a higher common good. The recognition that gender
equality is a topic of universal scope and the
prioritization of the promotion and protection of the
human rights of women and girls are encouraging

10-43641

indicators of the impact that the new entity will have
on the lives of thousands of women and girls
throughout the world.
Working on the basis of those principles and
defining innovative areas for State participation, we
hope that a greater number of countries will support the
operational activities of the entity. However, there is no
question of reinventing everything. The key to success
will be in building on the experience and excellent
work carried out for years by such exemplary
institutions as the United Nations Development Fund
for Women and the International Research and Training
Institute for the Advancement of Women. In Latin
America and the Caribbean, these institutions are
widely recognized for their contribution to gender
equality in our region. We hope that the entity will seek
to strengthen their programmes and actions for the
women and girls of our region.
Civil society and non-governmental organizations
have always been at the forefront with regard to gender
equality and the promotion of women’s rights. We are
certain that they will continue to be strategic partners
of the entity and that the spheres of dialogue and
cooperation between States and civil society will
strengthen.
As we have frequently pointed out, my delegation
believes it of the greatest importance to increase the
coherence and effectiveness on the ground of the
United Nations development work. It is necessary to
maximize the benefits of international efforts for
development, in particular in a complex economic
context, such as that of the current economic and
financial crisis.
We believe that the adoption of this resolution
marks a significant development in that regard, given
the inherent difficulties in transforming a complex
system. We are convinced that, in the relevant areas,
the principles and mandates included in the resolution
will greatly contribute to increasing coherence in the
Organization’s work.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): By establishing the new
gender entity, UN Women, today, we are truly
rectifying an anomaly. We hope that this will prove to
be a historic day for us, and in particular for the more
than half the world’s population that is female, whose
prospects and possibilities in life are inferior to those
of boys and men in all countries. However, I believe
that it is also fair to say that it is a historic day for the

21

A/64/PV.104

other half of the human population — those men and
boys who benefit from healthy, educated girls and
women taking part in all aspects of societal activities.
The voluntary presentations of national policies on
gender equality and the empowerment of women in the
Economic and Social Council this week have revealed
that, while progress is under way in most countries,
women are still disadvantaged.
Now, we are entering a period of transition. The
new entity must be given the teeth and resources
needed to allow it to serve countries’ needs and
expectations. Leadership will be essential in that
regard. It is our view that the selection of the UnderSecretary-General to head the new entity is extremely
important. We trust that the Secretary-General will be
guided by Article 101 of the Charter and that we, the
Member States, will assist him in finding the strong
and competent leader that we need.
During the transition period, it will be
particularly important to ensure that all activities
currently carried out by the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) can
continue and that the dissolution of UNIFEM as a
separate entity does not translate into any disruption in
the field or at Headquarters.
Norway is among the countries that have
supported the gender structures of the United Nations
both politically and financially in the past, and we will
follow the appointment of the new leadership and the
transition process and assess how we can and will
contribute.
Mr. Govender (South Africa): My delegation
aligns itself with the statement made by Minister
Moushira Khattab, Minister of State for Family and
Population Affairs of the Arab Republic of Egypt, on
behalf of the Joint Coordinating Committee of the
States members of the Group of 77 and China and the
Non-Aligned Movement.
We are pleased to note that, five years after our
leaders committed to courses of action in the 2005
World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1), we can
proclaim — in addition to other achievements, such as
the establishment of the Human Rights Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission — another milestone in the
reform of the new United Nations by adopting
resolution 64/289 on system-wide coherence. That
collective effort bodes well for us, the international
community, in that we can look forward to other

22

outstanding areas of reform, including that of the
Bretton Woods institutions and the Security Council.
We are encouraged by the adoption of the
resolution in that it clearly signals to us that the work
of the United Nations will be enhanced by a more
coherent, integrated and well-coordinated machinery
that will continuously monitor how it conducts its
business by adopting better practices that will further
the development agenda by integrating its governance
framework, by further aligning its funding and
programmes in a coherent and proactive manner
consistent with country programmes and priorities, and
by undertaking regular evaluations through a lessonslearned approach.
The adoption of the resolution today marks an
additional achievement, first, for the women of our
world in according overdue recognition by elevating
issues that are core to the well-being of women;
secondly, for the United Nations as the integral global
representative body by taking forward a powerful
mandate on behalf of women; and thirdly, for the
international community by bolstering our commitment
to continuing to empower, advance and protect the
interests of women.
We look forward to the earliest operationalization
of the new entity and count on its head being an ardent
champion of the challenges and concerns of the
billions of women around the world, especially on
pressing social issues, such as poverty, health,
education and violence. We also anticipate that the new
Under-Secretary-General will amplify the economic
and political voice of women.
On consolidating the former United Nations
gender agencies and programmes into the new body,
we recognize that their mandates and functions will
continue at the country level. I wish to express my
delegation’s sincere appreciation for the sterling work
and contributions that those agencies and programmes
have made in furthering the interests and concerns of
women. South Africa will work closely with the new
entity, UN Women, in carrying out its mandate.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 114.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

10-43641
