S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9052nd meeting

Thursday, 2 June 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hoxha/Ms. Dautllari. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Silveira Braoios
Mr. Li Kai
Ms. Lebatteux
Mrs. Onanga
Mr. Anyanah
Ms. Bhat
Ms. O’Sullivan
Ms. Nyakoe
Mr. Arrocha Olabuenaga
Mr. Richardsen
Mr. Leonidchenko
Mr. Azzam
Mr. Rice-Howell
Mr. Simcock

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Strengthening accountability
international law

and

justice

for

serious

violations

of

Letter dated 24 May 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Albania to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/418/Rev.1)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-37001 (E)
*2237001*

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: I would like to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than three minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collar of the
microphone will prompt speakers to bring their remarks
to a close after three minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Switzerland.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
At the outset, let me congratulate you, Sir, on your
presidency and wish you and your team good luck. I
would like to thank you for organizing this debate on
such a critical topic, and I thank the briefers for their
invaluable contributions
A world without accountability is a world in
which impunity replaces the rule of law and peace
and security are no longer guaranteed — a reality
that is unfortunately experienced by many victims. If
impunity is allowed to go unchecked, it encourages
new violations. Accountability is therefore crucial to
preventing atrocities, and it is incumbent upon States
and the Security Council to implement the existing
accountability mechanisms, continually refine them
and establish new ones where necessary. I should like
to underscore three points.
First, States have the primary responsibility to
investigate and prosecute the most serious crimes
and violations of international law. They must
ensure that violations are documented and that they
are independently and impartially investigated and
prosecuted, regardless of their perpetrators. To that
end, States must use existing tools, such as the relevant
tribunals, accountability mechanisms, the exercise
of universal jurisdiction and international judicial
assistance. Switzerland encourages all Member States
to ratify the Rome Statute, cooperate fully with the
International Criminal Court (ICC), and support
the International Court of Justice and comply with
its decisions. We must also develop the tools at our
disposal, such as by adopting a convention on crimes
against humanity.
Secondly, the Security Council should act in
a unified manner to support national, regional and
international accountability efforts, In particular, it
must refer situations to the ICC and support swift and
decisive action to prevent or end atrocity crimes. We
2/42

02/06/2022

recall the importance of the code of conduct developed
by Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group
and encourage all Member States to join it.
We also highlight the importance of General
Assembly resolution 76/262, which provides for the
convening of the General Assembly following the
exercise of the right of veto in the Security Council. If
the Council is unable to act, it is imperative to explore
other avenues, such as the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and the
Independent Investigative Mechanism for Myanmar,
as well as to establish other instruments such as the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on Ukraine. Switzerland calls on Member States to
acknowledge and support the work of such independent
and impartial mechanisms.
Thirdly, accountability should therefore be
complemented by other judicial and non-judicial
measures related to truth, justice, reparation and
guarantees of non-recurrence. By emphasizing the
rights of victims, survivors and their families and the
accountability of perpetrators, transitional justice is a
powerful tool for preventing the recurrence of violence.
As former Secretary-General Kofi Annan said,
“The battle for freedom and justice is never hopeless,
but it is never finally won. Every morning, we must
wake up ready to fight it again”.
Justice is a common good to be preserved and
enhanced. We have a responsibility to put the tools for
ensuring accountability to good use. As a candidate to
the Security Council, Switzerland remains committed
to ensuring that combating impunity is not just words
but actions we take together.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mrs. Ponikvar Velázquez (Slovenia): At the outset,
we would like to thank and congratulate the Albanian
presidency of the Security Council for organizing
today’s important open debate. We also thank the
briefers for their insightful remarks.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statements to be
made by the observer of the European Union, the
representative of Austria on behalf of the Group of
22-37001

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Friends of the Rule of Law and the representative of
the Marshall Islands on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Accountability following the aggression against
Ukraine. We wish to make some additional remarks in
our national capacity.
We fully support the goal of today’s discussion,
which aims to explore ways to develop and strengthen
accountability mechanisms, not only at the level of the
State but also at the regional and international levels.
It should be noted that strengthening the interplay
between international legal frameworks and national
accountability mechanisms is also crucial.
In that context, Slovenia, together with Argentina,
Belgium, the Netherlands, Senegal and Mongolia,
is a member of the core group of the Mutual Legal
Assistance initiative to adopt a new convention with the
aim of providing inter-State cooperation mechanisms
for the investigation and prosecution of the most serious
international crimes, namely, crimes against humanity,
war crimes and genocide. In addition to supporting the
International Criminal Court (ICC), the initiative seeks
to find a solution that will help to improve the principle
of complementarity — the fundamental principle of the
ICC. The initiative embraces both States parties and
non-States parties to the Rome Statute.
It is paramount to ensure effective international
legal cooperation at the global level. Efforts should be
also focused on supporting the efficient functioning of
international criminal justice, including by enhancing
accountability. Slovenia strives for a strong, independent
and impartial International Criminal Court, which is
one of the cornerstones of the fight against impunity.

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Just as it is important to hold perpetrators to
account for their crimes, it is also important that we
take a victim-centred approach. In that regard, Slovenia
supports the ICC with regular contributions to the
Trust Fund for Victims. This year, Slovenia also made
a voluntary contribution to the Office of the Prosecutor
of the ICC to help cover the increased workload of
his Office.
Slovenia would like to emphasize that
accountability contributes to a broader sense of justice,
both within and outside affected societies. It also
prevents the recurrence of violations and contributes to
the deterrence of crimes by helping to address the root
causes of conflicts. Accountability is an integral part
of prevention.
Respect for the rule of law and human rights are
the foundations of maintaining international peace and
security. It is clear that adherence to international law
should be improved. We need to act decisively when
serious violations occur. In that regard, the Security
Council has a key role to play, and any action it takes
must be clear, swift and decisive.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Marshall Islands.
Ms. Muller (Marshall Islands): I am pleased to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Accountability following the aggression against
Ukraine, consisting of 48 Member States and the
European Union.

In one of the most recent examples of the efforts
being made to speed up the process of holding to
account the perpetrators of the most heinous crimes,
Slovenia joined 42 States parties to the Rome Statute in
referring the situation in Ukraine to the International
Criminal Court.

The Group welcomes today’s open debate as a vital
opportunity to address the multiple accountability
initiatives focused on Russia’s military aggression
against Ukraine. During the past 100 days of that
full-scale invasion, the people of Ukraine have been
fighting for their freedom, identity and right to exist,
while showing extraordinary courage and resistance.
We would also like to use those real-time experiences to
help inform today’s wider discussion on strengthening
accountability and justice.

In that regard, Slovenia also welcomes the initiative
to create a special tribunal for the punishment of the
crime of aggression against Ukraine, as well as the
establishment by the Human Rights Council of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on Ukraine to investigate all alleged violations and
abuses committed during Russia’s military aggression
against Ukraine.

The Group remains horrified by the widespread
images and reports of the indiscriminate killings of
civilians, as well as attacks on civilian infrastructure
and acts of sexual and gender-based violence in
Ukraine. Conflict-related sexual violence, including
rape, is not an inevitable by-product of war but a blatant
violation and abuse of human rights and international
humanitarian law that may constitute war crimes.

22-370013/42

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Conflict-related sexual violence must be countered
through effective accountability measures, which
in turn contribute to deterrence and prevention. In
that regard, we welcome the signing of a framework
agreement of cooperation between the Government of
Ukraine and the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
The principles of accountability underpin the very
foundation of the United Nations. The public credibility
of the institution rests upon our collective ability to
guarantee the rights of victims and their families and
hold States and individuals acting on their behalf to full
account for the egregious violations of international
law playing out before us.
We once again urge the Russian Federation to
abide by the International Court of Justice ruling of
16 March, in which the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations ordered Russia to immediately suspend
its military operations in Ukraine.
We also welcome and support the many initiatives
committed to documenting and investigating the crimes
committed following Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine in order to bring perpetrators to account,
including the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on Ukraine and the ongoing investigation by
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.
We encourage continued and strengthened
coordination among accountability stakeholders,
including with regard to practices that prevent the
retraumatization of victims through multiple interviews
and protect the integrity and validity of information
supplied to a court.
While separate and autonomous accountability
initiatives at all levels should strengthen dialogue
among themselves towards coordinating their efforts,
while avoiding duplication where possible, and should
share best practices to ensure the effective and rigorous
collection of evidence on the ground, due regard is also
needed to ensure that victims are safeguarded and given
the necessary support in line with a victim-survivorcentred approach. Those key principles apply when
collecting and documenting the necessary evidence for
all crimes, including crimes of sexual and gender-based
violence and crimes involving children.
We also underline the fact that civil society actors
continue to have an important role in documenting
violations of international law. Their further cooperation
4/42

02/06/2022

and coordination with accountability initiatives will
help to address best practices for evidence collection
and the appropriate treatment of information.
We underscore the need to address two immediate
challenges to accountability initiatives — open
access to documentary evidence and the availability
of witnesses.
Finally, we agree that justice does not end with
truth and that victims should have access to appropriate
remedies as well. Greater political will is necessary to
deliver justice that is more than symbolic. The world is
watching us all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Antonini (Italy): At the outset, let me
congratulate Albania on its first-ever presidency of
the Security Council. Let me also commend you,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s timely meeting,
as well as the briefers for their insightful remarks.
Accountability and justice are universal values.
They are fundamental pillars of the rules-based
international order. When serious violations of
international law are committed, perpetrators must be
held to account and justice must be served, regardless
of where the violations occur and by whom they
are committed.
Italy has been a staunch supporter of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) since its establishment. In a few
weeks, we will celebrate 20 years since the entry into
force of the Rome Statute. While its ratification is not
yet universal, the ICC represents the most advanced
institutional legal model, delivering criminal justice in
cases of war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide
and the crime of aggression. We must continue to
defend its integrity and independence, while ensuring
its effectiveness.
Following the start of the unprovoked war of
aggression by the Russian Federation against Ukraine,
Italy joined 42 States in referring the situation in
Ukraine to the ICC Prosecutor. We must make sure
that those responsible for atrocities are held to account
and eventually brought to justice, whether before
competent national courts or the ICC. Italy supports
all investigative activities carried out on the ground.
Together with other partners, we are working to ensure
that the ICC is able to meet its increasing workload, in
Ukraine and elsewhere.
22-37001

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Italy also supports the fact-finding mechanisms
established by the United Nations in order to ensure
accountability for the grave violations of human
rights law and international humanitarian law,
including sexual and gender-based violence, that are
reported to have been committed in Myanmar, Syria
and Ukraine. Those mechanisms are not a substitute
for criminal justice, but they complement and support
the investigative activities carried out by national and
international prosecutors.
Accountability and justice are essential ingredients
for advancing the mission of the United Nations in
maintaining and restoring international peace and
security. The Security Council must shoulder its primary
responsibility in that respect. The establishment of the
ad hoc International Criminal Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda, the creation of the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon and the referrals of the situations
in the Sudan and Libya to the ICC are all examples of
the Council delivering on its mandate.
However, all too often in the past 10 years the
Council has been unable to act owing to the threat
of the veto or the actual exercise of the right of veto
by one of its permanent members. Italy supports all
initiatives aimed at limiting the exercise of the right
of veto when atrocity crimes are committed, including
the French-Mexican political declaration on that
subject launched in 2015. The use of all powers under
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations and
the application of all the procedural provisions of the
Charter, including those of Article 27, paragraph 3, are
also key to ensuring that the Security Council initiates
and supports accountability and justice mechanisms.
Let me conclude with two observations.
First, the perspectives, rights and interests of victims
and witnesses are essential elements of any functioning
international criminal justice and accountability
system. Italy is proud to have strongly advocated for the
insertion in the Rome Statute of article 68, paragraph
3, which provides for the participation of victims in
proceedings before the ICC.
Secondly, accountability and justice for egregious
violations of international law must also be ensured at
the level of inter-State relations. In that respect, Italy
welcomes the decision of the International Court of
Justice of 16 March, ordering Russia to immediately
suspend its military operation in Ukraine. We will also
continue to support Ukraine’s legal action before the

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

International Court of Justice, as stated in the joint
statement of 20 May signed by Italy together with over
40 other member States and the European Union.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Santos Maraver (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain aligns itself with the statements to be made
by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Austria, on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Rule of Law, as well as the statement
made by the representative of the Marshall Islands
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Accountability
following the aggression against Ukraine.
I would also like to thank the Albanian presidency
for bringing this topic to the Security Council, and I
thank those who have participated in this debate.
My country is convinced that much remains to
be done to ensure that the most serious violations of
international humanitarian law, in the form of war
crimes, violations of international human rights law,
genocide or crimes against humanity, violations of the
prohibition of the use of force in international relations
or crimes of aggression, do not go unanswered.
Beyond formal statements condemning such acts by
States, groups of States or international organizations,
we have the tools — including the powers of the Security
Council — to ensure that political, military or any other
type of action that seriously violates the norms that we
have established for ourselves are not gratuitous and
have consequences for those who take them.
The impunity that we have seen, and continue
to see today, in conflicts initiated before the one we
are regrettably witnessing today in Ukraine planted
the seeds of the most serious violations that are being
perpetrated today on Ukrainian soil. The reason such
conduct has entered the political and military calculus
is because on other occasions in the recent past
such conduct has served to achieve political results
without serious consequences for the perpetrators.
Strengthening accountability today must have the
preventive effect of avoiding recourse to such conduct
in the future.
Strengthened by that belief, Spain continues to
participate in all initiatives aimed at strengthening the
accountability tools of the international community.
To that end, together with other States parties to the
Rome Statute, Spain participated in the process of

22-370015/42

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

02/06/2022

referring the war situation in Ukraine to the Office of
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.

Spain has also offered all kinds of support to
both the Office of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, with respect to that and other situations,
and the Office of the Prosecutor of Ukraine itself for
the preparation of future criminal prosecutions. My
country has furthermore supported the promotion of
fact-checking processes with respect to the Ukraine
case, such as the establishment by the Human Rights
Council of the Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine.

Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s open debate. I would also like to
thank the briefers for their remarks.

My country would like to underscore that the
various mechanisms and measures to strengthen
accountability can and must be mutually reinforcing and
must never contribute to the dilution of accountability
or the confusion of concepts. Indeed, ensuring that
individuals are held accountable under criminal law is
perfectly compatible with the initiation of proceedings to
establish State responsibility, whether legal or political,
and with the creation of fact-checking mechanisms.
To that end, Spain will always continue to support
the complementarity of all types of measures and
initiatives, provided that they be mutually reinforcing
and correspond to the specific scope of the responsibility
in question. All such measures and initiatives must
contribute to preventing war crimes, genocide and
crimes against humanity.
Spain is in favour of conceiving the jurisdiction
of the International Criminal Court in matters of
aggression as broadly as possible, because the system
of the Rome Statute and the International Criminal
Court, whose centrality my country has defended since
its establishment, enshrines two basic ideas: first,
that international criminal justice must be permanent
justice, regardless of which party prevails in an armed
conflict; and that membership of the Rome Statute
system should not be seen as ceding or limiting the
sovereignty of a State, but rather as a guarantee of
protection against hypothetical aggression against the
territory of a State that has ratified the Rome Statute,
together with the protection of its population from the
most serious violations of international law.
Spain will always support any effort to strengthen
accountability mechanisms for the most serious
violations of international law. That also includes a
renewed appeal to the Security Council to harness all
its resources to contribute to that effort.
6/42

Croatia aligns itself with the statements to be
made by the observer of the European Union and by
the representative of Austria, on behalf of the Group
of Friends of the Rule of Law, as well as the statement
made by the representative of the Marshall Islands
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Accountability
following the aggression against Ukraine. I would like
to add some additional remarks in my national capacity.
We have witnessed far too often the inability of
the international community to either prevent the
perpetration of atrocity crimes or to punish them when
they occur. Concerning Croatia’s own experience in
that regard, let me quote a recently deceased Brazilian
International Court of Justice judge, Augusto Cançado
Trindade, who stated that in Croatia, “it was not exactly
a war, it was a devastating onslaught of civilians”. While
that happened 30 years ago, we see the same patterns
repeating themselves.
We have a moral, political and legal obligation to
step up the prevention of atrocity crimes and ensure
accountability for perpetrators, should such crimes
nevertheless occur.
Accountability not only helps provide justice
for victims but also prevents future atrocities. When
pursued properly, it deters future violations and
supports reconciliation processes and sustainable
peace. Therefore, combating impunity and promoting
justice and accountability are important components
of our responsibility to protect populations from
atrocity crimes.
Accountability mechanisms can take various forms.
Fact-finding missions, investigative mechanisms,
commissions of inquiry and hybrid and international
courts and tribunals, including the International
Criminal Court, as well as national proceedings
in third States under the principle of universal
jurisdiction, all provide complementary avenues to
enable accountability when and where domestic justice
systems prove insufficient.
Let me illustrate how that works in practice with
the example of Ukraine. The Human Rights Council’s
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
22-37001

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

on Ukraine can relatively quickly provide a broad
overview of the violations committed, outlining their
causes and consequences, but it can only help to launch
legal proceedings. The International Criminal Court, as
well as Ukrainian and other national criminal courts, can
prosecute individual perpetrators, but those proceedings
may take many years. Finally, the proceedings of the
International Court of Justice also take years, but they
may help to establish State responsibility.
It is therefore important that the work of various
mechanisms be well coordinated and that, taken
together, their results successfully address various
aspects of accountability for crimes committed, in
Ukraine and anywhere else.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Marschik (Austria): I very much congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council.
Today I have the honour of speaking on behalf of
nearly 50 members of the Group of Friends of the Rule
of Law: Angola, Argentina, the Bahamas, Belgium,
Burkina Faso, Canada, Cape Verde, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, the
European Union, Finland, France, Germany, Guatemala,
Iceland, Italy, Japan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Mexico, Moldova, Mongolia, Mozambique, the
Netherlands, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
the Republic of the Congo, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Timor-Leste,
Uganda, the United Kingdom, Uruguay and my own
country, Austria.

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Without respect for international law, in particular
the Charter of the United Nations, our world would be
dominated by the mighty. We would suffer the rule of
power for the benefit of the few instead of the rule of law
for the benefit of the whole international community.
We consider the rule of law as an essential
condition for sustainable peace. Over the past years,
our international order, based on international law, has
been facing increasing pressure. Three months ago,
the General Assembly adopted resolution ES-11/1 by
an overwhelming majority, condemning the Russian
aggression against Ukraine as a violation of the United
Nations Charter. That instance is by no means the only
violation of international law that we have witnessed
in recent history. One thing is clear — we all need
to increase our efforts to adhere to and implement
international law.
Treaties and customary law must be respected.
Jurisprudence and international courts and tribunals
must be complied with. Those responsible for violations,
in particular atrocity crimes, including war crimes and
grave violations of international human rights law,
must be held accountable.
Today’s debate is an important reminder that
the international community must act decisively to
prevent internationally wrongful acts and strengthen
accountability and justice for serious violations of
international law. If we do not act, we undermine the
foundation of our international system.

The Group of Friends of the Rule of Law welcomes
this high-level debate on strengthening accountability
and justice for serious violations of international
law and thanks the presidency for preparing a very
useful concept note (see S/2022/418, Rev.1, annex) in
that regard.

To strengthen the law, we therefore need prevention
and reaction. We must seek to prevent violations of
international law from happening in the first place.
The possible consequences of a wrongful act must
be clear and strong enough from the outset to deter a
potential abuser. The accountability of individuals and
the responsibility of States must be used as instruments
of deterrence to enable prevention. We must continue
our efforts to protect populations from mass atrocities:
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity.

An international order based on international law
and the rule of law is an indispensable precondition for
lasting peace and security. Rules that are internationally
respected, enforced and upheld make the world safer,
more stable and more predictable. In a nutshell,
the security of our citizens depends on everybody
complying with the rules.

If a violation of international law that threatens
international peace and security occurs, the Security
Council must take clear and decisive action to stop
the violation if it is ongoing, including by enforcing
judgments of the International Court of Justice, and to
ensure that States and individuals are held accountable.
In order to close the impunity gap, the Security Council

22-370017/42

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

should make use of its power to refer cases of atrocities
to the International Criminal Court.
The world expects us and the United Nations
system to deliver on the promise of maintaining peace
and security. We are strongly committed to enhancing
respect for international law and are ready to discuss
ways to strengthen its institutions and the rule of law.
We hope that the ongoing discussions on Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982) will allow us to elaborate ideas to
that end.
Indeed, the veto initiative showed that new
procedures can be adopted to increase accountability
and legitimacy within the United Nations system. In
that context, we note the initiatives on the use of the
veto in the case of mass atrocities, including the FrenchMexican initiative and the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group code of conduct. We should be
courageous; we should think outside the box to identify
other new forms, instruments or procedures to deter
potential violators, strengthen international courts,
tribunals and other judicial institutions and encourage
full compliance with international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of Finland, Iceland,
Norway, Sweden and my own country, Denmark.
It is appalling to hear reports of atrocity crimes
continuously being committed around the world. Let
us be clear: genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity and other gross violations of international
law can never be excused.
Russia’s unprovoked military aggression against
Ukraine has once again reminded us of the importance
of an international response to atrocities. We have
witnessed indiscriminate killings of civilians, as well
as sexual and gender-based violence and attacks on
civilian infrastructure, including schools and hospitals.
Conflict-related sexual violence and rape are a blatant
violation of human rights and may constitute war
crimes. It is not an inevitable by-product of war; it is a
crime that can be prevented and must be punished.
We strongly urge Russia to comply with the
legally binding order of the International Court of
Justice of 16 March and immediately suspend its
military operations in Ukraine. We fully support the
investigation by the Prosecutor of the International
8/42

02/06/2022

Criminal Court into the situation in Ukraine, as well
as national investigations. All perpetrators must be
held accountable.
Important work is also carried out on the ground
by several actors, including the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and civil society to
collect and preserve evidence.
We welcome accountability initiatives such as the
establishment of the Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine
and the activation of the Moscow mechanism of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
In both New York and Geneva, the Group of Friends
of Accountability following the aggression against
Ukraine will continue to support those efforts.
Atrocities are not limited to the war in Ukraine.
It is equally important to continue the fight for
accountability in the Sudan, Syria, Myanmar, Ethiopia
and elsewhere. Victims of atrocities deserve justice, no
matter who they are or where they are.
Criminal responsibility for the most serious
international crimes must be achieved through the
domestic and international prosecution of the individuals
responsible. As Nordic countries, we are unwavering in
our support for the International Criminal Court. We
are also committed to the elaboration of a convention
on crimes against humanity, which would give States
the necessary additional tools to prevent and punish
such crimes at the national level.
The Security Council is entrusted with the primary
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security. In fulfilling its mandate, it must respond
decisively to atrocity crimes wherever they occur. The
use of the veto in the Council is unacceptable in the
context of atrocity crimes. We welcome the resolution
on the veto initiative adopted by the General Assembly
in April, which is a step in the right direction (General
Assembly resolution 76/262). We fully support and urge
other Member States to join initiatives to limit the use
of the veto in that context, including the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group code of conduct
and the Franco-Mexican initiative.
The Security Council also has the power to
advance accountability by referring situations to the
International Criminal Court (ICC). We urge the
Council to look into further ways it can support the work
of the ICC, in particular in relation to the situations it
has referred to the Court.
22-37001

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Our ultimate goal must be to prevent atrocity
crimes from happening in the first place, and rigorous
compliance with international law, in particular
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
is the only way to achieve that. As enshrined in the
responsibility to protect, the primary responsibility
to protect populations from atrocity crimes lies with
States. When atrocities do occur, accountability must
be ensured to help prevent them from happening again
and to deliver justice to their victims. I want to assure
the Council that the Nordic countries are steadfast
supporters in the global fight against impunity.

a permanent member of the Security Council, which
considerably undermines the Council’s authority
through its failure to execute its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
That has been demonstrated by Russia’s use of its
power of veto to block Security Council resolutions
denouncing its invasion of Ukraine. That in turn has
compelled the Organization’s membership to enhance
the role of the General Assembly, in accordance with
its mandate under the Charter of the United Nations, in
order to prevent deadlock in the Security Council and
maintain the rules-based international order.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia.

We would like to emphasize that the Assembly’s
recent adoption of resolution 76/262, on the creation of
a standing mandate to convene a debate in the General
Assembly when a veto is cast in the Security Council,
constitutes significant progress in terms of holding
the Security Council accountable for a failure to act.
We would like to take advantage of that momentum to
encourage Member States to join the code of conduct
formulated by the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group and to pledge not to vote against
credible Security Council draft resolutions that are
aimed at preventing or ending genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes. We also urge them to support
the political declaration on the suspension of veto
powers in cases of mass atrocity launched by France
and Mexico.

Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): At the outset, I would like
to join others in expressing our deepest condolences on
the passing of His Excellency Judge Cançado Trindade
of the International Court of Justice.
I thank Albania for organizing this open debate and
the briefers for their statements.
Latvia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of the Marshall Islands on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Accountability following the
aggression against Ukraine, and with the statement to
be made by the representative of the European Union in
its capacity as observer.
Ensuring accountability is our collective
responsibility, because allowing impunity for atrocities
has serious consequences for international peace.
Latvia therefore strongly supports the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 and the Independent Investigative Mechanism
for Myanmar. Today, however, we would like to urge
the international community to turn its attention to
Russia’s ongoing war against Ukraine, assisted by
Belarus, and the atrocities being committed against
innocent people in Ukraine. For more than three months
the international community has stood in solidarity
with Ukraine, calling for an end to the war and to the
deliberate killings of civilians, as well as sexual and
gender-based violence against women and children and
the destruction of civilian infrastructure.
We believe it important to note that the war in Ukraine
is of an exceptional nature, as it is being perpetrated by

Latvia has taken several practical steps to call the
aggressor to account for its atrocities in Ukraine. We have
joined the unprecedented referral to the International
Criminal Court on the situation in Ukraine in order
to enable the Prosecutor to open investigations into
allegations of war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide perpetrated in Ukraine. In order to facilitate
investigations and prosecutions before the Court, Latvia
has nominated national experts and provided voluntary
contributions in the amount of €100,000.
Most notably, Latvia’s judicial authorities, together
with Estonia and Slovakia, recently became members of
a joint investigation team, along with the International
Criminal Court and the Prosecutors-General of Ukraine,
Poland and Lithuania. The competent authorities of
Latvia have also launched criminal proceedings for
war crimes and crimes against humanity and peace
committed by Russia’s armed forces in Ukraine, in
order to obtain and document evidence. In order to
draw further attention to the need for prevention
and punishment of atrocities, Latvia stands ready

22-370019/42

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

to support work on drafting a convention on crimes
against humanity.
Last but not least, Latvia has taken a decision
to participate as a third party in the case relating to
allegations of genocide brought by Ukraine against
Russia before the International Court of Justice. In
that connection, we join others in strongly urging
Russia to respect the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and to comply with the legally binding
order of 16 March of the International Court of Justice
to immediately suspend its military operation on
Ukraine’s territory.
I would like to conclude by recalling the
fundamental principles of the Nuremberg trials:
“Crimes against international law are committed
by men, not abstract entities, and only by punishing
individuals who commit such crimes can the
provisions of international law be enforced.”
We are of the view that the solidarity and
political will of the international community must be
maintained in order to effectively address the issue
of accountability for atrocities in Ukraine. The range
of accountability processes that have been initiated
and the considerable amount of evidence documented
and collected of atrocities committed in Ukraine give
us confidence that justice for the victims of Russia’s
crimes will be delivered.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bulgaria.
Ms. Stoeva (Bulgaria): Bulgaria aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered on behalf of the European
Union and the statement delivered by the representative
of the Marshall Islands on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Accountability following the aggression
against Ukraine.
I would like to express our appreciation to Albania
for organizing this open debate on an issue of paramount
importance that should remain high on our agenda. I
would also like to thank all the briefers for their various
insights and suggestions.
Justice is essential to peace, and the investigation
and prosecution of all atrocities through national,
regional, international and hybrid mechanisms should
be supported by the Council and by the international
community as a whole. Without justice properly
served and without accountability, the prospects for
10/42

02/06/2022

reconciliation are significantly undermined, human
rights are denied and a culture of impunity flourishes.
Without accountability, peace cannot be sustained,
and conflicts are perpetuated. Accountability is not
only a remedy but also a strong deterrent and a very
effective instrument for prevention. Accountability is
also closely linked to the issue of reparations, which are
crucial at the stage of economic recovery from conflict.
Nonetheless, we read and watch reports of deliberate
and indiscriminate attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure that amount to war crimes in various parts
of the world on a daily basis. It is no longer breaking
news when we hear about attacks targeting medical
facilities and incidents of rape, extrajudicial executions
or looting, leading to brutal abuses of human rights and
violations of international humanitarian law that leave
the most vulnerable barely surviving and place entire
populations at risk. Unfortunately, there are too many
cases in that regard, with Syria, Myanmar, the Sudan
and Venezuela being only a few. As an international
community, we are failing to deliver in terms of
ensuring that justice is served.
The Russian Federation’s illegal, unprovoked and
unjustified aggression against Ukraine is the latest
example. We have witnessed brutality across Ukraine
on a scale that words fail to describe. Even wars have
rules, and the Russian Federation is violating them all.
Those crimes cannot and will not go unpunished. In
that connection, Bulgaria supports the full range of
international investigations into atrocities in Ukraine,
including those conducted by the International
Criminal Court, the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
We welcome the opening of the International Criminal
Court’s investigation into atrocity crimes committed
in Ukraine upon a referral by 43 States, including
Bulgaria, and we intend to further engage with all the
relevant stakeholders to achieve our common objectives
in ensuring justice. We need to join forces to assist the
Office of the Prosecutor-General of Ukraine and lawenforcement agencies to ensure that a comprehensive
and transparent record is made of civilian casualties,
that all evidence is properly collected and that
testimonies are well documented so that justice can be
served and recovery and reconciliation achieved.
The Security Council has a special responsibility,
particularly in cases of serious violations of
international law, both for preventing them and for
ensuring that accountability is sought, and it must own
22-37001

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

that responsibility if the United Nations is to remain
relevant. The veto should never be used in cases of
atrocity crimes. We therefore urge all States that have
not yet done so to sign the political declaration on the
suspension of veto powers in cases of mass atrocity,
and, more importantly, to refrain from using the veto.
Bulgaria is pleased to have been among the initiators
of General Assembly resolution 76/262, on the veto,
adopted on 26 April. It is a step in the right direction,
aimed at ensuring that veto power is not misused. In
addition, the drafting of a convention on crimes against
humanity would certainly fill a gap in the treaty
framework and would strengthen the instruments
available to ensure accountability. Bulgaria supports
the start of negotiations to that end.
Lastly, the international community has to make
it explicitly clear that there is no room for impunity
anywhere and that all perpetrators will be brought to
justice without delay. We owe it the victims, but most
of all we owe it to ourselves.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Gonzato: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The candidate countries North Macedonia, Montenegro
and Albania, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Georgia, Andorra and San Marino, align
themselves with this statement.
Accountability is the premise of international
justice, which in turn is the premise of international
peace. Accountability is the antidote to a culture of
impunity that perpetuates mistrust and undermines
access to justice, the rule of law, good governance
and lasting peace. The cases of the Sudan, Syria,
Myanmar, Venezuela and Ethiopia attest to that effect.
Take the example of the Sudan. Upon referral by the
Security Council in 2005, the former President of the
Sudan, Omar Al-Bashir, was the first sitting President
to be pursued by the International Criminal Court
(ICC) and the first person to be charged by the ICC
for the crime of genocide. However, neither of the
two arrest warrants against him has been enforced.
The impunity of Mr. Al-Bashir and others has eroded
the trust of the Sudanese people in the justice system
and continues to be an obstacle to the achievement of

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

peace and stability in the Sudan. Another example that
is very vivid in our minds is Ukraine. Three months
ago, Russia launched a military aggression against
Ukraine, an act that has been strongly condemned by
the international community. Meanwhile, the shelling
of schools, hospitals and residential buildings, the
deliberate killing of civilians and sexual violence
have intensified, heinous crimes that defy the calls by
the General Assembly and the International Court of
Justice for Russia to cease hostilities.
Expectations are high for the United Nations to
deliver on its raison d’être and prevent atrocity crimes
from happening around the world. The use of the veto in
cases of atrocities remains a matter of serious concern
for us. The use of the veto prevents the Security Council
from discharging the important function entrusted
to it by the Charter of the United Nations. Strength
does not lie in casting a veto preventing the Security
Council from stopping a humanitarian catastrophe. It
lies in preventing the killing of innocent people. In that
regard, we support the French and Mexican initiative
on the use of the veto in cases of mass atrocities and
encourage those that have not yet done so to sign the
political declaration on the suspension of veto powers
in cases of mass atrocity and the code of conduct of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group.
We also welcomed the General Assembly’s initiative in
April in adopting resolution 76/262, on the use of the
veto, which is a step in the right direction.
The EU has consistently held that the ICC is
a beacon of accountability, because the Court has
consistently delivered on its apolitical mandate. Upon
referral by 43 States, the ICC Prosecutor has opened
an investigation into the situation in Ukraine. Two
weeks ago, the Prosecutor deployed 42 experts to
probe into alleged crimes falling under its jurisdiction.
The ICC and the Prosecutors-General of Ukraine,
Poland, Lithuania, Estonia, Latvia and Slovakia, with
the assistance of the European Union Agency for
Criminal Justice Cooperation, have joined efforts in
a joint investigation team, the first of its kind. Other
initiatives include the establishment of the Group of
Friends of Accountability following aggression against
Ukraine and the Atrocity Crimes Advisory Group for
Ukraine, established by the EU, the United States and
the United Kingdom. Such coordination is an example
of good practices in documenting and mapping serious
violations of international law. We are confident that all

22-3700111/42

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

02/06/2022

such national and international efforts, combined with
efforts by civil society, will lead to accountability.

such incendiary acts are led, conducted or cultivated by
States at the highest political level.

Yet accountability is not only about criminal
investigations and prosecution. It is also about State
responsibility and compliance with judicial rulings and
orders. In that regard, we strongly urge Russia to comply
with the legally binding order of the International Court
of Justice of 16 March. And accountability is also about
preventing atrocities. We therefore support the work on
formulating a convention on crimes against humanity
that will fill a gap in the treaty framework and give
additional tools to States to prevent and punish such
crimes at the national level.

Time and again, Armenia has alerted the
international community to the dangerously mounting
level of hate speech and racist rhetoric dominating
the political discourse in Azerbaijan, where State-led
anti-Armenian policies, extensively reported and
documented by international institutions, seek to
dehumanize one particular nation, in a manifest
demonstration that genocidal ideology does not belong
merely to the past. The fact that a large-scale military
aggression was unleashed amid the unprecedented
global pandemic in the fall of 2020 is a crime of global
proportions in itself and should be evaluated and
addressed as such. The attempt to resolve the Nagorno
Karabakh conflict by the use of force caused thousands
of deaths and devastation, putting the lives of tens of
thousands of civilians under existential threat.

In conclusion, let me stress that accountability is
not only a strong deterrent but also key to successful
reconciliation processes and the consolidation of peace
in post-conflict societies.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): I would like to
congratulate Albania on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council and express our appreciation for
the participation of the Prime Minister of Albania, His
Excellency Mr. Edi Rama, in today’s debate. We thank
Judge Joan Donoghue, President of the International
Court of Justice, Ms. Michelle Bachelet, United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, and Professor
Dapo Akande for their insightful remarks.
As we reflect on the challenges related to justice and
accountability in upholding international law, we are
reminded that impunity for past atrocities can lead to the
most serious violations, whose ultimate manifestations
are genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity.
We are also reminded that strengthening accountability
and justice for such crimes is essential to the realization
of the right to truth, justice, reparations and guarantees
of non-recurrence.
As a long-standing advocate of the genocide
prevention agenda, Armenia supports efforts to
advance the early-warning capacities of the United
Nations to monitor and respond to conditions
that create a risk of the imminent commission of
atrocities, including systematic policies promulgating
hate speech, incitements to violence on the basis of
ethnicity or religion and the denial, justification or
even glorification of atrocity crimes, especially when
12/42

Azerbaijan has yet to abide by its obligations under
international humanitarian law vis-à-vis the Armenian
prisoners of war and civilian hostages who continue
to be held in captivity. It should commit in good
faith to preserving Armenia’s cultural and religious
heritage and effectively address anti-Armenian
rhetoric, including at the level of public officials and
institutions, in accordance with the provisions of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination.
As the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations, the International Court of Justice has a central
role to play in ensuring justice and accountability and
upholding faith in international law. Armenia remains
strongly committed to strengthening the accountability
and justice agenda, which necessitates an in-depth
understanding of the patterns of the past, as well as
of recurring violations and a victim-centred approach,
particularly in conflict situations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): Australia thanks Albania,
in particular Prime Minister Rama, for convening this
important debate. We also thank today’s briefers for
their valuable insights.
Accountability is an essential element of the rulesbased international order. It is critical to upholding
international peace and security. As we meet today,
Russia is continuing to commit flagrant violations of
22-37001

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

international law in Ukraine, with a growing list of
atrocities. That must only underline the international
community’s resolve to ensure accountability. Today’s
debate invites us to consider how we can hold the
perpetrators of serious violations of international
law to account. That requires us to strengthen
accountability and justice at the national, regional and
international levels.
Accountability starts at home. It is the primary
responsibility of States to investigate and prosecute
the most serious crimes of international concern. It
is essential that all States strengthen their domestic
criminal justice systems and enhance their capacity
to conduct genuine investigations and prosecutions
of those crimes. However, Australia recognizes that
accountability and justice can be delivered through
a range of mechanisms and initiatives. In addition to
national efforts, Australia strongly supports the crucial
role of international accountability initiatives such as the
International Criminal Court (ICC), the Human Rights
Council and international investigative mechanisms.
Australia is committed to working with such bodies
to advance accountability and ensure that they deliver
on their core mandates. The ICC is especially key to
investigating and prosecuting international crimes
when a State is unable or unwilling to do so. We were
pleased to recently provide additional support to assist
the ICC Prosecutor and his Office, and we are also
pleased to be co-sponsoring the establishment of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
Ukraine mandated by the Human Rights Council as part
of efforts to hold Russia to account. The Commission
of Inquiry will be critical in investigating and reporting
on evidence of human rights abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law.
While accountability efforts may be distinct
and autonomous, we encourage greater coordination
among such efforts at all levels. That will contribute
to the success of all such efforts and where possible
help to avoid duplication and the retraumatization of
survivors. It is imperative to ensure that the design
and implementation of all accountability efforts
adopt a survivor-centred approach, integrate gender
perspectives and address intersecting inequalities. It
is our shared responsibility to seize this opportunity
to strengthen accountability and justice for serious
violations of international law at every level.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cyprus.

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Hadjichrysanthou (Cyprus): My delegation
aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of
the European Union, as well as with the statement of
the Group of Friends of Accountability following the
aggression against Ukraine, and we would like to make
some additional remarks.
The 1945 International Military Tribunal at
Nuremberg established the bedrock principles of
international law, such as individual accountability for
crimes against humanity and war crimes, and above
all it achieved clarity about aggressive war, which
now constitutes an international crime. The body of
law created in the aftermath of the Second World War
decisively changed the course of international law and
the protection of human rights. Today we therefore have
a solid international criminal justice system, which
includes national courts, ad hoc international tribunals
and, notably, the International Criminal Court (ICC),
which is an integral part of the international rulesbased order and the central institution in the fight
against impunity and in the pursuit of justice.
Cyprus, itself a victim of aggressive war without
any ensuing accountability, remains a strong supporter
of the ICC and will continue to work for the universal
ratification and full implementation of the Rome
Statute, including the Kampala amendments on
the crime of aggression. Cyprus believes that full
cooperation between the Court and the United Nations
is crucial. Security Council members are kept informed
of violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights law in the situations on its agenda. In
that regard, they can and must ensure accountability
through referrals to the ICC if credible accountability
mechanisms are lacking.
Furthermore, the Council needs to ensure the
timely execution of the Court’s decisions and of ICC
arrest warrants in particular. Cyprus also believes that
the time is right for the International Law Commission’s
draft articles on crimes against humanity to be enshrined
in an international treaty. The draft convention on the
prevention and punishment of crimes against humanity
presents an opportunity for the international community
to coalesce around a common denominator and
demonstrate collective action for atrocity crimes. We
also stress the role of the International Court of Justice
as an accountability mechanism for State responsibility
under international instruments, including the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide. Cyprus recognized the compulsory

22-3700113/42

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice in 1988
and we encourage all Member States to do the same.
Accountability through fair trials for the most
serious violations of human rights law and international
humanitarian law is the cornerstone of international
justice. We must continue to build on the progress that
international law has made so far and strengthen the
rule of law through an effective and robust international
criminal legal system. Above all, we must do better
in enforcing the rules and utilizing the institutions
we already have. We have a collective responsibility
to cultivate a culture of accountability to deter the
commission of future crimes. Failure to do so will only
undermine international peace, since it will embolden
authoritarian regimes to commit more crimes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Chatrnúch (Slovakia): At the outset, I would
like to welcome today’s open debate and thank the
briefers for their valuable insights.
Slovakia aligns itself with the statements made on
behalf of the European Union, the Group of Friends
of Accountability following the aggression against
Ukraine and the Group of Friends of the Rule of Law.
I will focus on six points that are important from
our national perspective. First, accountability and
justice both start with prevention. Apart from ensuring
strict adherence to international law as the best means
of prevention, the Security Council, as well as other
Member States, can and should do more in that regard.
Early-warning systems, in particular, have proved to
provide a reliable analysis of situations where the level
of violence and tension is likely to lead to atrocities.
Sadly, proper follow-up action by the Security Council
has been lacking. At the domestic and international
levels, a strong and robust legal and institutional
framework is necessary not only to ensure individual
criminal responsibility but because it is the best way
to deter future violations. In that context, Slovakia
strongly urges all Member States to work to formulate
a new convention on crimes against humanity this year.
Secondly, if atrocities or other serious violations
of international law occur, unity in condemning
such violations and calling for accountability is
indispensable. In cases such as the most recent Russian
aggression against Ukraine, it is also a matter of the
very existence of States and of the international order.
14/42

02/06/2022

Thirdly, the Security Council, which bears the
primary responsibility for international peace and
security, cannot remain silent, something that we
have witnessed on multiple occasions in relation to
the situations in Myanmar, Syria and, most recently,
Ukraine, to name a few. In that context, Slovakia would
like to point to the code of conduct regarding Security
Council action against genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes, as well as the FrenchMexican initiative on veto restraint in cases of mass
atrocities. Negative votes in such cases are not just a
betrayal of the victims but a mockery of their suffering.
Fourthly, the primary responsibility to investigate
and prosecute international crimes lies with States. In
the case of a State’s inability or unwillingness to fulfil that
obligation, the existence of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), as an independent judicial institution of
last resort, is crucial.
Slovakia once again expresses its unequivocal
support for the ICC and urges all States to ratify or
accede to the Rome Statute. To close the impunity
gap, the Security Council should use its power to
refer situations to the Court and ensure appropriate
follow-up.
Fifthly, accountability for atrocities must not be
limited only to bringing perpetrators to justice. Victims
and survivors must be paid adequate attention and
provided with all forms of assistance in order to restore
their rights and dignity and enable them to return to
their lives and familial and societal roles, as well as to
ensure that effective remedies for the harm suffered are
obtained.
Sixthly, beyond individual criminal responsibility
for serious violations of international law, we must not
forget to invoke the responsibility of States for their
internationally wrongful acts. In that context, Slovakia
highly appreciates the work of the International Court
of Justice and its vital role in the peaceful settlement of
disputes.
We reiterate our firm call on all States to accept
the Court’s jurisdiction and respect its legally binding
decisions, including its recent order on provisional
measures of 16 March in relation to the aggression of
the Russian Federation against Ukraine. The Council
should also pay closer attention to instances of
non-compliance.
22-37001

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

I also take this opportunity to express Slovakia’s
condolences to, and solidarity with, Brazil and the
family of Judge Cançado Trindade, whose passing is a
great loss to the international law community.

group. We also welcome the recent unanimous adoption
of General Assembly resolution 76/262, according
to which every use of the veto must be explained to
the Assembly.

Having witnessed the atrocious violations of
international law by the Russian Federation in close
proximity to our country, Slovakia expresses its firm
commitment to the international rules-based order, with
accountability and justice as its inherent components.

We urge Russia to comply with the 16 March order
of the International Court of Justice, which is binding
under international law, and to immediately suspend
its military operations in the territory of Ukraine.
Estonia supports all efforts to ensure the conduct of
independent and effective investigations into crimes
committed by Russia in Ukraine and to ensure justice
and accountability.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): Allow me to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s high-level open
debate on this crucial topic. I would like to thank the
briefers for their insightful interventions.
Estonia aligns itself with the statements made by the
observer of the European Union and the representative
of the Marshall Islands on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Accountability following the aggression
against Ukraine.
It is of the utmost importance that the most serious
crimes of concern to the international community as
a whole should not go unpunished. Such grave crimes
threaten the peace, security and well-being of the world’s
populations. Impunity leads to a distorted understanding
of right and wrong, as well as the commission of new
crimes. The atrocity crimes committed by the Soviet
Union during the Second World War went unpunished
because the winners of the war did not face judgment.
The effects and consequences of that today include
Russia praising the Soviet Union’s heroic history and
attempting to restore it. New generations have been
raised on that myth and do not attribute any guilt to
Stalin for the crimes that were committed.
We regret that the Russian Federation has held the
Security Council hostage with its veto power and that it
has not been possible to determine and condemn its fullscale aggression against Ukraine, in blatant violation
of the Charter of the United Nations — although I am
glad that like-minded countries are using this arena to
confront Russia’s disinformation and lies.
With regard to the veto, we need to step up our
efforts to refrain from its use, especially in cases of
mass atrocity crimes. We reiterate our strong support to
the French-Mexican initiative and the code of conduct
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency

It is our common duty to bring the perpetrators of
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide to
justice. We support meaningful progress this autumn
here in New York on the draft articles on crimes
against humanity drawn up by the International
Law Commission.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) plays a
particular role in dealing with atrocity crimes and
bringing justice to victims. Estonia was among the
countries that referred the situation in Ukraine to
the Court, and we appreciate that the Prosecutor
expeditiously launched the investigation.
Criminal proceedings have been initiated in Estonia
based on the universal jurisdiction of States to collect
evidence of war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed in Ukraine. Estonia has also joined the joint
investigative team on alleged core international crimes
committed in Ukraine, which has been set up with
the support of Eurojust to facilitate investigations and
prosecutions in the States concerned, as well as those
that can be submitted to the ICC.
In cooperation with the Court’s Trust Fund for
Victims, Estonia organized an online seminar on
12 May to mark the twentieth anniversary of the Rome
Statute’s entry into force, with a particular focus on the
victims of atrocity crimes in the Court’s proceedings
and the role and activities of the Trust Fund. We call on
all the members of the Council and on the international
community to continue striving to put victims first
and to cooperate with all international accountability
mechanisms in order to achieve justice and reparations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Espinosa Cañizares (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): We can and must shift from a culture of

22-3700115/42

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

02/06/2022

impunity for mass human rights violations and other
international crimes to one of accountability and
responsibility. We are capable of making Ms. Navi
Pillay’s words a reality. The States Members of the
United Nations have a responsibility to do that, in
which the Security Council has a central role to play.

and justice convened by France and Peru in March
2019. Whether in Myanmar, Yemen, Ukraine, Syria
or elsewhere, we must honour our commitment made
at the 2005 World Summit to enhance the relevance,
effectiveness, efficiency, accountability — and thereby
the credibility — of the United Nations system.

I would like to thank the Albanian delegation for
organizing this open debate and wish it success during
its presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June. I also thank the briefers for their statements.

Today we want to invite the Council to revitalize
that promise by way of implementation. The rule of
law furthers the protection of civilians, the protection
of children and the peaceful settlement of disputes. It
also addresses emerging threats and moves forward the
women and peace and security agenda, non-proliferation
and the fight against illicit arms trafficking. If elected
to the Council for the 2023 to 2024 term as a member
of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States,
Ecuador’s work would be guided by those mutually
reinforcing and complementary elements, along with the
extremely valuable support of the entire membership.

I want to reaffirm that States have the primary
responsibility for respecting and ensuring human
rights. As other delegations have pointed out today,
the Council has previously expressed concern about
several genocide suspects not having successfully been
brought to justice.
We also know that we can strengthen accountability
and the fight against impunity by prosecuting the
perpetrators of genocide, crimes against humanity, war
crimes and other serious violations of international law
in international criminal justice systems, special and
hybrid courts or specialized chambers of national courts,
as recognized in several resolutions of the Council,
including resolution 2150 (2014). Accountability and
justice are key to peacebuilding processes and postconflict reconciliation. We need to benefit from the
virtues of transitional justice without compromising
accountability for human rights violations and
reparations for victims, so that when peace is achieved
it will last.
Our Organization’s main vocation is peace. States
have a responsibility for conflict prevention, which is
also one of the Council’s primary objectives. In my
delegation’s view, we do not have many alternatives if
we intend to progress towards increased accountability
and transparency.
The rule of law and justice need to work in synergy
with the United Nations, and the Organization’s
principal organs, including the International Court of
Justice, need to be strengthened. A strong International
Criminal Court is also required to complement this
work, and all Member States of the Organization must
be regarded equally. I hope to elaborate on the Rome
Statute during the Arria Formula meeting to be held on
24 June.
Much progress has been made since the Arria
Formula meeting on human rights, accountability
16/42

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malta.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I would like to begin by
congratulating Albania on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council and by thanking you, Mr. President,
for organizing this high-level open debate. We are
firm in our belief that accountability is a fundamental
precursor of international peace and security. We also
thank the briefers for enriching today’s discussion by
sharing their thoughts and insights.
Malta aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union. I would like to add
the following remarks in my national capacity.
The international community must strive to make
sure that those who commit war crimes and crimes
against humanity be held accountable — for example,
in the case of the prosecution of those involved in
human trafficking. While jurisdictional constraints
do not always allow for such prosecutions, the use of
targeted sanctions is one of the ways that individuals
have been held accountable.
Every conflict today is mired in sexual and genderbased violence, which is a threat to international peace
and security. Member States affected by conflict need
assistance to address impunity if they are to prevent
and deter future violations. Malta reiterates that gender
equality and the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women and girls are fundamental requirements for
achieving accountability.
22-37001

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

The International Criminal Court (ICC) is also
central in the fight against impunity. For the Court to
fully achieve its mandate, it requires the full cooperation
of States. The Council’s referral of situations to the
Court, including active follow-up on such referrals,
helps promote accountability.
However, national capacities also need to be further
developed to ensure that crimes can be dealt with where
they are committed and that investigations and fair trials
can be pursued domestically. The ICC’s Trust Fund for
Victims functions thanks to public and private donors,
both as part of the Court’s response to victims of crimes
under its jurisdiction and in providing reparations. That
is part of a system of effective remedies that victims
can obtain for the harm they have suffered.
In Syria, the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 is
playing a critical role in the collection and preservation
of information and evidence. We greatly value the
Mechanism’s victim- and survivor-centred approach
and commend the efforts it has undertaken to clarify
the fate of missing persons. Their families deserve
to know the truth. Malta will also continue to call
on the Council to refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court.
Turning to Ukraine, we commend the referral by
43 Member States of that situation to the Court, and
the ICC Prosecutor’s recent opening of an investigation
into alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity.
We should all extend our support to the Court, as it
has constantly delivered on its mandates and remains a
beacon of accountability.
We also call for compliance with the ruling issued
by the International Court of Justice on 16 March, which
ordered Russia to immediately suspend its military
operations in Ukraine. Effective prosecution as well as
compliance with the judicial rulings emanating from
the principal international organs are required in order
to ensure justice and accountability.
Accountability is a communal responsibility.
Cooperation between States and among national
competent authorities, including through sharing
information and best practices, is crucial for halting
criminal networks in their tracks. Accountability is

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

not something to be considered after the fact. Rather,
it needs to be a motivating principle for many of the
actions that we take. Perpetrators must never forget that
justice will ultimately prevail.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania.
Ms. Vest (Lithuania): We would like to thank
Albania for convening this timely and important
open debate.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statements made
by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of the Marshall Islands on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Accountability following the
aggression against Ukraine.
Accountability is fundamental to the integrity
of international justice and a vital prerequisite for
international peace and security. It constitutes a core
United Nations principle.
As of today, 14 weeks have passed since Russia
launched its unprovoked, unlawful and unjustified
war of aggression against Ukraine. Russia and its
accomplice Belarus bear full responsibility for the farreaching consequences of this war, ranging from threats
to nuclear safety and the potential use of chemical
weapons, to the tremendous hardships being caused by
global food insecurity.
Lithuania continues to condemn the war in the
strongest possible terms and will support all efforts to
ensure independent and effective investigations into
the crimes committed by Russia in Ukraine. Russia
must comply with the binding order of the International
Court of Justice of 16 March and immediately suspend
its military operations across the internationally
recognized territory of Ukraine. We will use every
option to support Ukraine in its efforts before the Court,
including through intervention in the proceedings.
The determination of the international community
to fight impunity and ensure accountability and justice
for all grows stronger with each passing day of Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine. Gruesome reports by
United Nations officials, civil society and journalists
continue to mount.
Speaking of gross violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
we are shocked by the overwhelming and detailed
evidence of targeted killings, including of journalists,

22-3700117/42

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

02/06/2022

as well as of sexual and gender-based violence, torture,
arbitrary arrests, abductions, forced disappearances,
the use of cluster munitions in residential areas and
the mass deportations of civilians to Russian territory.
Lithuania will vigorously support the activities of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on Ukraine, which was established by the Human
Rights Council.

would like to share the following remarks in my
national capacity.

As the first Member State to refer the situation in
Ukraine to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Lithuania will also continue to support the
Office of the Prosecutor in its investigation concerning
alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed in Ukraine. In March, at the initiative of
Lithuania, Eurojust supported Lithuania, Poland and
Ukraine in setting up the joint investigative team on
alleged international crimes committed in Ukraine. We
welcome the decision of the Prosecutor of the ICC to
join the team, as well as that of other Member States that
joined recently. Fact-finding and evidence-gathering
are crucial for fighting impunity. We maintain that
cooperation among national investigators based on
universal jurisdiction will enhance the documentation
and mapping of crimes committed and assist in
identifying those responsible.

The Security Council has a crucial responsibility in
that regard, which it fulfilled in the past in establishing
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. The
Council also referred two situations to the International
Criminal Court — the situation in Darfur was referred
in 2005, and the situation in Libya in 2011. With those
actions, the Council sent a clear message to victims
that justice would be delivered, and to perpetrators
that they would be held accountable. That message also
calls for respect for, and the protection of, international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.

On 6 May, Lithuania hosted an international
conference on legal mechanisms for ensuring
accountability for the crime of aggression against
Ukraine. Participants signed the Vilnius communiqué,
which reiterated that impunity for international crimes
must end and that individuals responsible for war crimes
and crimes against humanity must be prosecuted,
while encouraging the establishment of an ad hoc
international criminal tribunal for investigating and
prosecuting the crime of aggression. We will continue
our efforts to pursue all legal avenues in order to ensure
that accountability prevails.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Zellenrath (Netherlands): I would like to thank
you, Madam President. I am glad to see you presiding
over the Security Council this afternoon.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with
the statements made by the observer of the European
Union and by the representative of the Marshall Islands,
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Accountability
following the aggression against Ukraine, and I
18/42

The Hague is the proud host city of the International
Court of Justice, the International Criminal Court (ICC)
and many more international organizations that play a
key role in maintaining and advancing the international
legal order. Ensuring accountability when international
crimes are committed is a key element of that order.

Member States therefore expect the Council to act
when gross violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law are taking
place, which makes the use of the veto in such situations
especially troubling. And that certainly includes the
situation in Syria. A veto cast in the Council that
prevents it from standing up for victims or that lets
perpetrators believe they can act with impunity is in
effect a veto cast on the pursuit of justice.
That is why the Netherlands supports the code
of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group with regard to Council action
against genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes, and why it welcomes the French-Mexican
initiative for the permanent members to renounce the
use of the veto in situations of mass atrocities.
That is also relevant to the current situation in
Ukraine, on which the aggressor itself used the veto
(see S/PV.8979). If and when the Council is unable to
act, other avenues will have to be taken to ensure justice
and accountability. That is why it is so important that we
all support the investigation of the ICC on the situation
in Ukraine, as well as its investigations concerning
other countries.
As the famous author Isabel Allende once said, few
things are as dangerous as power with impunity. That is
why the international community created a rules-based
22-37001

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

order, with clear norms and accountability for when
those norms are breached. The Council has stood up
for that principle in the past, and we expect it to do so
again, for the sake of the international legal order and
to deliver justice for victims.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of North Macedonia.
Mr. Danailov Frchkoski (North Macedonia):
We would like to thank the Government of Albania
for organizing today’s open debate and to wish it
a successful presidency of the Security Council
this month.
North Macedonia aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
The Republic of North Macedonia is committed to
the international rules-based order. In that context, we
recall that it is essential to pursue credible and effective
accountability. We must strengthen justice and
accountability in order to advance our work in fighting
impunity. We share the view that the International
Criminal Court (ICC) is an integral part of the
multilateral architecture that upholds the rule of law. It
is a central institution in the fight against impunity and
the pursuit of justice.
The Council has a crucial role in maintaining
international peace and security. In the current
circumstances, preserving peace and security requires
us to make every effort to urge adherence to international
law and international humanitarian law, as well as to
pursue accountability. Prioritizing accountability is
a prerequisite for halting and preventing violations
of international law, international criminal law,
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
Russia’s unprovoked and unjustified aggression
against Ukraine is a blatant violation of international
law, every principle enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations and, above all, the values of humankind.
Mass indiscriminate strikes on civilian sites persist.
Russia has continued to conduct strikes in urban
areas, leaving civilians and cities without access to
basic human needs. We join others in expressing our
grave concern about the continuing attacks on civilian
objects, including hospitals, medical facilities, schools
and shelters.
The findings and investigations to date in the cities
of Bucha and Mariupol lead to the clear conclusion

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

that war crimes and crimes against humanity have
been committed there. The magnitude of the sexual
abuse and violence committed against women and girls
is also of grave concern. The perpetrators of those
crimes and violations of international human rights
law and international humanitarian law must be held
accountable and brought to justice.
We fully support the investigation launched by the
ICC Prosecutor into war crimes and crimes against
humanity in Ukraine, backed by the referrals of 43
States, including North Macedonia. We also welcome
the International Court of Justice’s provisional measures
ordering Russia to suspend its military operations and
withdraw immediately from the occupied territory.
As a current member of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) troika, we
would like to highlight the OSCE Moscow mechanism
as an important instrument aimed at establishing the
facts and circumstances of possible cases of war crimes
and crimes against humanity in order to present them to
relevant accountability mechanisms and international
courts and tribunals.
Making fuller use of, and ensuring sustainable
funding for, existing human rights mechanisms is
also essential for supporting accountability processes.
North Macedonia believes that we should make better
use of the work and information gathered by the special
procedures of the Human Rights Council. Today we
would like to reiterate our support for the establishment
of the Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine by that
Council, in particular for the Commission to swiftly
begin its work.
In conclusion, in the coming period it will be
particularly important to curb any political process that
could undermine accountability for gross violations of
human rights. We must do our utmost to ensure access
to justice for the victims of the human rights violations
and crimes committed in Russia’s senseless aggression
and in the other conflict zones around the globe. Those
responsible for grave atrocities must be punished for
their wrongdoings and crimes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Dvali (Georgia): At the outset, let me express my
delegation’s appreciation to the Albanian presidency of the
Security Council for organizing this important open

22-3700119/42

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

debate. I would also like to thank the briefers for their
comprehensive and informative briefings.
Georgia aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of the Marshall Islands, on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Accountability following the
aggression against Ukraine. Let me add the following
remarks in my national capacity.
International law and the rules-based international
order are the foundations for a peaceful, just and
prosperous world, while the principles of international
law, such as sovereignty, territorial integrity, the
non-use of force and the inviolability of frontiers,
are at the core of the rules-based international order.
Alarmingly, today we are witnessing constant attacks
on international law and the rules-based order. In that
regard, let me draw the Security Council’s attention to
my country’s experience.
In 2008, Russia launched a full-scale military
aggression against Georgia, leading to the illegal
occupation of two of my country’s inseparable parts
and the ethnic cleansing of local populations. Despite
the calls of the international community, hundreds of
thousands of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
refugees from the occupied territories continue to be
deprived of their fundamental right to return to their
homes in safety and dignity.
Moreover, on a daily basis we see grave, ethnically
targeted human rights violations in the occupied
territories and along the occupation line, including
illegal detentions and kidnappings, the restriction of the
right to the freedom of movement and the prohibition
of education in the native Georgian language, among
others.
Despite Russia’s attempts to circumvent its
responsibilities and create a narrative of so-called
new realities, the European Court of Human Rights
delivered a judgment on 21 January 2021 legally
establishing the fact that Russia is occupying and
exercising effective control over Georgia’s Abkhazia
and Tskhinvali regions. The Court found Russia
responsible for committing human rights violations on
the ground, including ethnic cleansing and hindering
the return of IDPs to their homes.
Unfortunately, Russia’s aggression against its
neighbours, which is in breach of international law and
the international rules-based order, is a well-established
20/42

02/06/2022

pattern of its actions. More than three months have
already passed since Russia started its premeditated,
unprovoked and unjustified full-scale aggression
against Ukraine. Russia’s indiscriminate military
attacks, including its use of internationally banned
weapons, constitute a grave violation of international
law, including international humanitarian law and the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
As the targeted shelling of civilians and civilian
objects continues, we hear daily reports of executions,
rape, torture, inhumane treatment and other human
rights violations that amount to war crimes. Russia’s
ongoing aggression has already prompted one of the
fastest-growing humanitarian and displacement crises
in recent history.
We reiterate our unwavering support for Ukraine’s
independence and sovereignty, the inviolability of
its frontiers and its territorial integrity within its
internationally recognized borders, including Crimea.
We call on Russia to comply with the provisional
measures of the International Court of Justice
of 16 March, ordering it to immediately stop the
aggression, withdraw all its forces from the whole
territory of Ukraine and allow immediate, safe and
unfettered access to all international humanitarian and
human rights mechanisms therein.
We also call on Russia to do the same with regard
to the occupied regions of Georgia by fulfilling the
European Union-mediated ceasefire agreement of
12 August 2008.
In conclusion, I urge the international community
to spare no effort to ensure accountability for all
gross violations of international law in all parts of the
world. We must exhaust all the relevant international
legal mechanisms to ensure that justice is served for
serious crimes and violations and that offenders are
held accountable.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would like to thank
Albania for convening this open debate. I also thank
Judge Donoghue, President of the International
Court of Justice; Ms. Bachelet, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights; and Professor
Akande for their briefings.
I would like to emphasize three elements that are
critical for upholding the rule of law in international
22-37001

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

relations and to share Japan’s concrete actions in
that regard.
The first element is the theme of today’s meeting:
strengthening accountability. Situations in which
violations of international law are overlooked and
no one is held accountable will have ripple effects
elsewhere in the world and seriously undermine the
stability and prosperity of the international community.
For that reason, Japan referred the situation in Ukraine
to the International Criminal Court and looks forward
to Prosecutor Khan’s continued progress in the
investigation. Japan also welcomes United Nations
efforts to strengthen accountability in other parts of the
world, including in Syria.
The second element is strengthening national
ownership of the rule of law. Japan has played a
leading role in extending support for the Extraordinary
Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia since its inception.
The trials of those Courts have provided crucial steps
towards the conclusion of the entire peace process in
Cambodia and have contributed to delivering justice
and strengthening the rule of law in the country.
The third critical element is restoring the rights
and dignity of victims and survivors. Since 2020, Japan
has served as a board member of the Global Fund for
Survivors of Conflict-Related Sexual Violence and will
contribute €2 million, in addition to the €4 million we
have contributed to date, in order to ensure access to
reparations and redress for survivors.
Japan will continue to actively engage in global
advocacy for enhanced international cooperation
to realize victim’s access to justice, remedies and
assistance. Japan firmly supports efforts for justice
and accountability. Respect for the rule of law and
sustaining peace will never be achieved without
tackling impunity. Japan will continue to work together
with our partners to that end.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Zahneisen (Germany): I am very happy to see
you, Madam President, presiding over this meeting. We
wish Albania luck in its important presidency of the
Security Council, and we also thank it for organizing
this timely and very important open debate. My thanks
also go to the briefers for their valuable insights.

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Germany fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I
would like to add a few points in my national capacity.
In an Arria Formula meeting on accountability
held in Ukraine on 27 April, Russia’s war of aggression
against Ukraine was condemned unanimously — with
the exception, of course, of the aggressor and a few
of its allies. At that meeting and ever since, we have
condemned the brutal violence perpetrated against
civilians during the course of the ongoing war and
have repeatedly called for accountability for the
crimes committed.
Six weeks later — on day 100 of the war — Russia
is still waging its aggression against Ukraine, using
inconceivable brutality against civilians. New
worrisome facts emerge every day. The unjustifiable,
unprovoked and illegal war of aggression by the
Russian Federation is an act against the founding ideas
and the basic principles of the United Nations. It is a
blatant violation of the Charter of the United Nations,
a grave breach of Ukraine’s territorial integrity and
an act against the fundamental rights of every human
being who suffers from the aggression.
The crimes, atrocities and infringements of
international law committed by Russia, and above all the
killing of so many innocent people as a consequence of
the war, must stop immediately. The perpetrators must
be held accountable in accordance with international
law. I repeat — there must be no impunity for war
crimes. The perpetrators of atrocities in Ukraine and
elsewhere, including all responsible State officials and
military leaders, must be held accountable. For us,
accountability not only means criminal investigation
and prosecution but also implies State responsibility.
We strongly urge the Russian Federation to comply with
the legally binding order of the International Court of
Justice of 16 March.
Germany is strongly committed to accountability
and the rules-based international order. We therefore
welcome Ukraine’s efforts to petition the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations in order for
it to provide judgment on Russia’s military action
and its unsubstantiated allegations. Germany will
explore all possible options to support Ukraine in
its proceedings before the International Court of
Justice. The investigation by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) is more important
than ever. We need to ensure that the ICC Prosecutor

22-3700121/42

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

is well equipped to carry out his work as effectively
and as speedily as possible. It is imperative that the
international community as a whole support the
ongoing investigations and collection of evidence of
crimes committed.
As an established mechanism with 123 State
parties, the ICC remains the focus of our efforts for
bringing those who have committed international
crimes in Ukraine to justice. Germany will contribute
an additional €1 million to the ICC, and it will second
personnel to the Court. Additional funding has also
been provided for the mission of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights in Ukraine. In order to make the
investigations as efficient and swift as possible, a group
of experts will be supporting this process.
In cases in which the ICC cannot be seized with
a specific situation, it is important that national
jurisdictions take up the task. Such proceedings, often
under the principle of universal jurisdiction, have
offered some justice to the survivors. They also send a
clear message to perpetrators that there is no impunity
for their atrocities. As has been mentioned several times
today with regard to Syria, German prosecutors will
continue to pursue cases under universal jurisdiction
against the torturers of the Syrian regime. They will
also continue to prosecute crimes committed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Da’esh.
The German Federal Public Prosecutor General
has also opened structural investigations into war
crimes committed in Ukraine to prepare the ground
for individual indictments on charges of war crimes.
Moreover, we will continue to supply the Ukrainian
authorities with equipment to help conduct the many
difficult investigations on the ground.
The international community must continue to
stand united and uphold international law and the
United Nations Charter. International law accounts for
every person and is the yardstick for every Government
worldwide. It is late in the day, and we are forty-ninth
on the list of speakers, but we had a question we wanted
to ask of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
who has travelled to China and published a statement
on the human rights situation, in particular on the
Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region. Following up
on this visit, we would ask, what are her next steps
to contribute to achieving accountability for the
widespread and systematic human rights violations
reported in this region? When will she publish her
report on the situation?
22/42

02/06/2022

In conclusion, for my country, it is imperative for us
to document, condemn and prosecute war crimes around
the world — both through international instruments and
national legal systems. The perpetrators — whatever
their position or rank — must understand that there is
no respite or safe haven for them. Germany will remain
firmly committed to supporting all efforts in this
regard. We owe it to the victims of atrocious crimes
and to their families.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Bamya (Palestine): At the outset, we wish
to congratulate Albania on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and for convening
today’s important meeting on accountability and
justice. We also join other delegations in thanking the
eminent briefers for their efforts and their briefings.
At the end of the Second World War, the community
of nations determined that it was imperative to establish
an international law-based order. It enacted rules, not
directed against anyone, but for the benefit of all, so as
to advance a more just and peaceful world. But if we call
them rules, everyone has to abide by them. They must
either be observed, or their breach sanctioned. This
is especially true for the gravest crimes — genocide,
crimes against humanity, war crimes and the crime of
aggression. There is no rule of law without enforcement
of the law, and international law is no exception.
Accountability is critical to deterring the
commission of crimes and to delivering justice for
victims. It aims at replacing fear with hope in the hearts
of survivors, and to replace arrogance with fear in the
minds of their tormentors. It means ensuring that,
instead of having no safe haven for victims, there is no
safe haven for perpetrators of crimes.
In Palestine, we are well placed to speak of the
importance of accountability, as we have endured the
consequences of its absence for too long. As the former
Human Rights Council Special Rapporteur S. Michael
Lynk stated:
“There is no other grave international human
rights situation ... in the world today with which the
Security Council has spoken about in such quantity
and with such critical clarity, but acted with such
passivity” (A/75/532, para. 37).
The Palestinian people suffer from the most
protracted protection crisis and accountability crisis
22-37001

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

in the world. This situation warrants decisive actions
beyond condemnations to end the world’s longest
military occupation, which is a cost-free occupation,
maintained and sustained by impunity.
As I address the Council today, millions of
Palestinians are still refugees unable to return to their
homes. Millions are living under violent military
occupation and colonial rule. Some 2 million have been
living under an inhumane blockade in Gaza for the past
15 years. Tens of thousands are living under threat of
forcible displacement in Masafer Yatta, Jerusalem and
the Jordan Valley. And an entire nation continues to
endure dispossession and displacement, discrimination
and denial of rights. As I address the Council today, no
Palestinian is safe. Those who the law was designed
to protect are the ones who are the most vulnerable
and exposed to the crimes of this illegal occupation.
Our civilians, including children, are killed on a daily
basis. Women, journalists, health workers and human
rights defenders are targets, killed in broad daylight,
by perpetrators who believe they have nothing to worry
about. When will they finally be proved wrong?
Either we stand for accountability, or we stand
against it. Selective justice allows for denied justice;
it therefore condones and perpetuates injustice. How
can we call our multilateral system an international
law-based order when there are perpetrators of crimes
who are never held to account and victims who are
always deprived of justice? If any country wants to be
recognized as a champion of accountability, it cannot
at the same time obstruct accountability for crimes
committed against the Palestinian people. Palestine has
become the yardstick for the credibility of the calls for
justice and accountability.
Israeli actions have been condemned repeatedly
by the Security Council, the General Assembly, the
International Court of Justice, the Human Rights
Council, special rapporteurs and human rights treaty
bodies, and yet Israel continues to be shielded from the
consequences of its own actions. Even when we join
the International Criminal Court (ICC), seeking justice
instead of vengeance, some try to deter the Court instead
of deterring the criminals. How is that compatible with
calls for accountability? Many look at the situation
in Palestine as a critical test for the credibility and
impartiality of the ICC — a test it cannot afford to fail.
There is no claim more offensive and shameful than
stating that prosecuting war crimes and crimes against

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

humanity would hinder peace efforts. How can it be
that acting to deter and halt crimes against innocents
contradicts the pursuit of peace, while allowing and
enabling the perpetration of such crimes is somehow
compatible with the pursuit of peace? It cannot be,
neither in theory nor in fact.
In conclusion, despite being deprived for decades
of its protections, the Palestinian people still believe
in international law and its authority. We call for
upholding the rule of law. Our calls should be heeded,
not denounced or denied. The exceptionalism accorded
to Israel must end. It contradicts the international lawbased order, has emboldened Israeli aggression and
prolonged the historical justice against the Palestinian
people with disastrous consequences.
We know where impunity has led. It can be seen
in the lives that Palestinians are living today under
colonialism and apartheid. It is time for a different path
that only accountability can pave.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Khan (Pakistan): My delegation thanks the
Albanian presidency for convening today’s debate on
the important topic of strengthening accountability and
justice for serious violations of international law.
I wish to thank you, Madam President, the briefers
and those who have spoken before me for their valuable
remarks and fresh perspectives on today’s topic.
The world order established after the Second
World War is based on three interlocking and mutually
reinforcing sets of obligations: the obligations arising
from the United Nations Charter that outlaw the use
of force and encourage States to resolve their disputes
through peaceful means; the principles of State
responsibility for wrongful acts committed by a State
in the conduct of its international relations; and the
responsibility of each State to protect its populations
from genocide and other atrocities.
In accordance with those arrangements, the prime
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, under Article 24 of the United
Nations Charter, rests with the Security Council. Over
the years, in discharging its functions the Council
has contributed to the fight against impunity for
serious violations and crimes in specific, practical and
diverse ways. The seminal moment in the history of
accountability for serious violations arrived when the

22-3700123/42

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Council, applying a broad sweep of its powers under
Chapter VII of the Charter, chose to establish ad hoc
tribunals with a mandate to advance accountability for
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Despite that often-declared strong stance and
commitment of the Council, in many parts of the world
violations of international law persist and continue
to have an adverse impact on international peace
and security. Selectivity and double standards in the
implementation of Security Council resolutions and
decisions, especially on long-standing disputes, remain
a principal cause of concern. In fact, it has proved to be
the system’s Achilles heel. In addition, concepts such as
the responsibility to protect, as articulated in paragraphs
138 and 139 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome
document (General Assembly resolution 60/1), continue
to remain divisive, particularly because its application
remains driven solely by political considerations.
As a result, serious violations in situations of illegal
occupation with clear Security Council mandates can
easily spiral to genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity in the absence of international scrutiny
and accountability.
The Jammu and Kashmir dispute is a glaring
example of such a brutal occupation where international
law has been flouted for decades. Over the span of the
past 75 years, India has not only forcibly denied the
right of self-determination to Kashmiri people, but
also committed gross and systematic violations of
international law. More than 900,000 Indian troops,
who have remained deployed in the Kashmir Valley for
decades, have resorted to the worst forms of torture,
rapes, renditions, forced displacement and other grave
breaches of international criminal law, including by
using live ammunition against civilian protesters in the
form of pellet guns, blinding innocent young people and
leaving many others injured. They have ransacked and
pillaged towns, villages and neighbourhoods to impose
what India’s own leaders have themselves called a final
solution for Jammu and Kashmir.
Since 5 August 2019, India has embarked upon
a sinister plan to transform occupied territory
from a Muslim majority State to a Hindu majority
territory, violating the Fourth Geneva Convention and
international law. Appeasement by the international
community would only encourage further impunity.
We call on the Security Council to immediately
take cognizance of the compelling evidence of those
international crimes in Indian-occupied Kashmir and
24/42

02/06/2022

hold Indian officials and personnel accountable for such
activities, atrocities and grave breaches of international
humanitarian law.
In conclusion, let me say that the universal and
consistent adherence to the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter is imperative not only to
ensuring the credibility and legitimacy of the United
Nations system, but also to strengthening accountability
and justice for serious violations of international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Venezuela.
Mr. Pérez Ayestarán (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): In the founding Charter
of our Organization, the peoples of the United Nations
reaffirmed their faith in fundamental human rights,
the dignity and worth of the human person and the
equal rights of men and women, while declaring their
determination to promote social progress for all. For
its part, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
emphasizes that,
“Everyone has the right to a standard of living
adequate for the health and well-being of himself
and of his family, including food, clothing, housing
and medical care and necessary social services”.
Despite the that, the so-called international
community and, more specifically, some permanent
members of the Security Council have failed more than
a third of humankind, that is, more than 2.5 billion
people, who, according to independent experts of
the United Nations, are today suffering the negative
effects of the illegal enactment and implementation of
unilateral coercive measures in more than 30 countries.
Such measures, by all accounts, represent not only
flagrant violations of international law, but also
massive violations of their human rights, particularly
their right to life, development, food and health, among
many others.
That being the case, we must recognize that
the issue under consideration at today’s meeting
faces a fundamental contradiction. There is a clear
contradiction in raising the issue of accountability and
justice when at this same table sit representatives of
Governments, such as the United States and the United
Kingdom, that, by their deliberate actions, seek to kill
entire peoples through starvation, poverty and disease.
It is impossible to speak of accountability and justice
while at the same time promoting in this organ a climate
22-37001

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

of international impunity, which ultimately encourages
the crimes by which such countries seek to satisfy their
desire for neocolonial domination at all costs.

them, on the basis of a non-existent exceptionalism,
through which it seeks to convert its national laws into
universal laws.

In 1970, the Declaration on Principles of
International Law concerning Friendly Relations
and Cooperation among States, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, recalled the duty
of States to refrain in their international relations
from exercising, applying or encouraging coercion
or economic, political or any other kind of measures
against the political independence or territorial integrity
of any State or to achieve its subordination. For its part,
the International Court of Justice, in 1986, ruled that, in
the light of the principle of non-intervention, methods
of coercion are illegal when they seek to interfere in
the sovereign affairs of States, such as the choice of
their political, economic, social or cultural system, or
the formulation of their foreign policy.

In that context, it is worth recalling the remarks
of the former United States Ambassador to Venezuela,
William Brownfield, who in 2018 noted the following:

That being the case, at this meeting we reiterate
that unilateral coercive measures are indisputably
illegal and are part of a coldly calculated experiment to
create pain and suffering. It is a planned and deliberate
policy of aggression, which was even escalated amid
the worst pandemic in the past 100 years, to violate the
human rights of entire peoples, including 30 million
Venezuelan men and women.
Since at least 2015, when our country was brazenly
declared a so-called unusual and extraordinary threat
to the security of the United States, more than 502
unilateral, restrictive and punitive coercive measures
have been illegally applied against Venezuela. The
economic, commercial and financial blockade that has
been imposed de facto and in a generalized manner
against our country has resulted in considerable human
and financial losses for the nation, as well as in the theft
of at least $30 billion in accounts and property of our
country abroad, in addition to the loss of more than 14
tons of our country’s gold reserves, which were looted
by the British Government.
According to former United States National
Security Advisor John Bolton, the unilateral and
extraterritorial coercive measures enacted by his
country, applied without any kind of authorization from
the Security Council, that is to say, illegally, seek to use
the immense economic power of the United States to
benefit the interests of its Government; in other words,
to exert pressure on other States, coerce their sovereign
will and obtain various kinds of advantages from

“We must treat this as an agony, a tragedy that will
continue until it finally reaches an end ... And if we
can do something to accelerate it, we must do it, but
we must do it understanding that this is going to have
an impact on millions of people who are already
having difficulties in finding food and medicines ...
We cannot do this and pretend that it will not have
an impact, we have to make a hard decision, the
desired end justifies this severe punishment”.
The Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court states that the crime of extermination includes
the intentional imposition of living conditions,
including the deprivation of access to food or medicine,
that lead to the destruction of a part of the population.
The statements I mentioned earlier clearly constitute an
open confession by the United States Government with
respect to the commission of crimes against humanity
against my country’s people.
On that basis, today before this organ, we denounce
the most serious, cruel and systematic violation, on
the part of all Governments that promote and apply
unilateral coercive measures with impunity, of human
rights and international law, including international
human rights law, international humanitarian law,
international criminal law, international trade law
and the law of international responsibility, as well
as international human rights treaties; the purposes
and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations; the relevant judgments and resolutions of the
International Court of Justice, the General Assembly
and the Human Rights Council; and the norms
governing the immunities of States and their property.
In that context, we wish to take this opportunity to
express not only our regret but also our serious concern.
Today, as humankind faces multiple challenges and
common threats and as we are called upon, in an
unprecedented manner and within the framework of an
effective and inclusive multilateralism, to work together
to strengthen international cooperation and solidarity,
we are simultaneously observing the largest and most
aggressive wave of unilateral coercive measures since
the Second World War. We wish to warn of the dangers

22-3700125/42

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

and grave consequences that such a criminal policy will
undoubtedly have, either directly or indirectly, on the
lives and well-being of all of our peoples, especially the
most vulnerable.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela wishes
to conclude by urgently calling for the complete and
immediate elimination of all so-called sanctions and
for the establishment of mechanisms that, where the
most serious crimes have been committed, provide due
attention and reparations to victims, one the one hand,
and promote accountability and justice, on the other.
We must put a stop to the prevailing cycle
of impunity that has resulted in encouraging the
perpetration of atrocity crimes and serious violations
of international law against entire peoples and nations,
which are being punished for simply having decided, in
a free and sovereign manner, to be masters of their own
destiny and to reject any attempt at foreign domination.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Arboleda Niño (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome this debate, which highlights the pertinence
of accountability when the international community is
confronted with grave violations of international law.
In this era of accountability, the efforts of the
United Nations should focus on strengthening and
rendering more effective the existing mechanisms
designed to address crimes committed in the context of
armed conflict and other situations of violence, as well
as to ensure reparations for victims and the prevention
of new conflicts. In that context, we would like to
highlight some of the lessons learned in Colombia.
First, the transitional justice arrangements under
way in Colombia have at their core the victims of the
serious crimes committed over years of violence in
the country. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace, the
Truth Commission, the Unit for the Search for Persons
Deemed as Missing and the Victims Unit were created
with the objective of guaranteeing the rights of victims,
ensuring their participation in the various processes
and operating under the fundamental principle that
there is no path to peace without the recognition of
responsibilities and the guaranteed rights of victims to
truth, justice, reparation and non-recurrence.
Secondly, we could not have developed the
current institutional framework without our previous
experiences with the Justice and Peace Law of 2005,
26/42

02/06/2022

which addressed the grave violations committed by
armed groups. That framework also taught us about
the advantages of focusing our investigative efforts
on macro-cases in order to clarify accountability
and patterns of commission of those types of
crimes, especially by those with the highest level
of responsibility.
Thirdly, it is clear to Colombia that all efforts
made in the area of accountability and the fight
against impunity at the national level must correspond
to measures taken on the international stage and be
permanently coordinated with multilateral bodies. Our
country has therefore benefited from the support of both
the International Criminal Court (ICC) and the United
Nations system in general, resulting in achievements
that have been sustained over the long term.
Fourthly, while crimes that occurred in the past must
be addressed, we must bear in mind that States have
many other obligations. Detailed planning is therefore
vital in order to identify long-term sources of funding
to deliver results that make such processes irreversible.
Fifthly, the participation of women, indigenous
communities and communities of African descent and
other vulnerable groups is crucial to the success of any
such process.
In October 2021, the Prosecutor of the ICC took
the decision to close the preliminary examination
concerning my country that had been open since 2004.
In doing so, the Prosecutor reaffirmed that our judicial
institutions, namely, the ordinary and transitional
justice institutions, were adequately equipped for the
proper administration of justice and met international
standards. The Prosecutor noted that those institutions
have the necessary capacity to deliver justice for
serious crimes of international concern that may have
been committed on our territory or by our nationals.
Taking into account all of the progress it has
made, Colombia is a member of the Group of Friends
of Accountability following the aggression against
Ukraine, and in that capacity we align ourselves with
the statement of the representative of the Marshall
Islands on the Group’s behalf.
Our primary concern since the aggression
began has been to seek actions that the international
community can take in order to ensure that the crimes
committed do not go unpunished. We believe that all
States Members of the United Nations must take the
22-37001

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

responsibility to ensure that the various accountability
processes in place in Ukraine operate in a coordinated
manner. We must promote initiatives that consistently
emphasize the protection of victims and the full exercise
of their rights.
Colombia is a model for a process that, with
international support, ensures accountability and
enables justice to address serious violations of
international law. We trust that both the Security
Council and other United Nations organs, as well
as Member States themselves, can strengthen and
institutionalize, in a joint and coordinated manner, the
international legal principles on which accountability
is based in order to consolidate and safeguard one of
humankind’s greatest achievements.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Penaranda (Philippines): We are pleased to
take part in this conversation on developing a global
strategy to enhance the role of the international
community in holding States and those who act on
their behalf accountable for serious violations of
international law.
International law is the cornerstone of the
international order. The Charter of the United Nations
is our fundamental starting point, enumerating the
principles of international law concerning friendly
relations and cooperation among States. We hold those
principles sacrosanct.
Under the Charter, the Security Council has a
critical role in upholding the international order and
the rule of law that underpins it. It holds the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and
security. In examining the steps that the Security
Council could take to strengthen and institutionalize
the international legal principles of accountability and
related accountability mechanisms in order to have an
impact in practice, the Philippines encourages Member
States to revisit documents related to the Charter, in
particular the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful
Settlement of International Disputes, which the General
Assembly adopted by consensus via resolution 37/10, of
15 November 1982.
The Declaration states that Member States should
help strengthen the Council’s role in any situation that,
if left to continue, would be likely to endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security. To

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

that end, among others, Member States could take the
following actions.
First, Member States could bring to the attention of
the Security Council any dispute or situation that might
lead to international friction or give rise to a dispute.
Secondly, Member States could encourage the
Security Council to make wider use of the opportunities
provided for under the Charter to review disputes or
situations that, if left to continue, would be likely to
endanger the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Thirdly, Member States could consider making
greater use of the fact-finding capacity of the Security
Council, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations. The Security Council may also request advisory
opinions of the International Court of Justice on legal
questions arising within the scope of its activities,
including on the present issue of institutionalizing
international legal principles of accountability and the
related accountability mechanisms in order to have an
impact in practice. With regard to the other ways and
means to strengthen accountability mechanisms at the
State, regional, and international levels, the preliminary
views of the Philippines are as follows.
Concerning documentation, the mapping of serious
violations of international law and the identification
of perpetrators of international crimes at the national
level, relevant legislation is imperative. The Philippines
has enacted a law on crimes against international
humanitarian law, genocide and other crimes against
humanity that defines international crimes and
their perpetrators.
With regard to enhancing accountability, the
proposed accountability network between the
International Court of Justice, the International
Criminal Court, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, various legal regimes
and regional institutions needs further study. Member
States could request that the Secretary-General
prepare a report on operationalizing it for further
study by the General Assembly, including through the
Sixth Committee.
Concerning participation, the Philippines sees value
in capacity-building through education and awareness
for vulnerable groups on issues of accountability. The
most vulnerable groups often have the least access
to information on their rights and opportunities. The

22-3700127/42

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

media, civil society and victims’ organizations are an
important constituency. As stakeholders, they enhance
and help sustain accountability, as well as help in
establishing truth.
With regard to reparations, there should be better
identification, documentation and monitoring of victims
and the offences against them. We note that it has taken
decades to compensate past victims of international
crimes. There should be adequate, effective and prompt
reparations for harm suffered.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that in
strengthening accountability and justice, we should
first strengthen the structure and methodologies of the
institutions that hold violators accountable.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Madam President, I would like to congratulate
Albania on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We appreciate the
holding of this important open debate on strengthening
accountability and justice for serious violations of
international law.
International criminal law has unquestionably
made great strides in the past few decades, thanks
to the development of relevant State practice and the
establishment of specialized international tribunals
for cases involving individual criminal responsibility
for the commission of international crimes, thereby
establishing legal principles, drawing the attention
of the international community to the gravity of such
crimes and promoting concepts related to the prevention
of impunity. In that regard, Jordan stresses the major
role that was played by the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, as well as the role that
the International Criminal Court is now playing in
strengthening international criminal justice. However,
despite that progress, we continue to witness serious
violations of international humanitarian law and
international criminal law, especially in the context
of armed conflicts both international and internal, as
well as a lack of adequate efforts on the part of the
international community to deter the commission of
international crimes.
In the brief time allowed for this statement there
is no room to cite all the reasons for the continuing
28/42

02/06/2022

violations and ongoing impunity for them. However,
some of the most important involve a lack of political
will and the prevalence of selectivity in addressing
crimes committed based on the situation or dispute
concerned, along with the influence of political factors
on criminal prosecutions in international tribunals.
And for the reasons I have just discussed, the Security
Council has unfortunately not played an effective role
in addressing most of the gravest international crimes.
The assassination of Palestinian journalist Shireen
Abu Akleh by the Israeli occupation forces is a clear
example of such selectivity within the Security Council
in the context of addressing international crimes.
Political considerations prevented some members
from even describing it as a war crime in the Council’s
press statement (SC/14891). International tribunals
cannot work alone or prosecute every perpetrator
of international crimes. It is therefore of the utmost
importance for countries to exercise their national
prerogatives concerning such crimes in accordance
with their international legal obligations. They
should forbid immunity for the perpetrators, in line
with the provisions of international law. The relevant
tribunals must guarantee justice, human rights and
the non-politicization of trials. States must cooperate
to achieve international criminal justice. They must
not provide safe havens for the perpetrators of such
crimes. They must assist one another in enforcing
their jurisdiction and providing the necessary legal
assistance, evidence and information.
The commission of international crimes by State
officials or forces implies international responsibility
for those States. Those officials and forces must be
held accountable, and States must ensure reparations
for the damage they have caused to the victims and
their families. The international community must put
a stop to such crimes, prevent them from recurring
and hold the States involved responsible for the
crimes perpetrated by their officials or forces. The
international community must also work to alleviate
the impact of such crimes on victims. In that regard,
Jordan supports the Trust Fund for Victims under the
aegis of the International Criminal Court and calls on
countries to provide similar mechanisms.
There continues to be a gap in the international
legal system with regard to crimes against humanity
that cannot be covered by the provisions of the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court alone.
Jordan calls on the General Assembly, specifically
22-37001

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Sixth Committee, to begin serious negotiations
for establishing an international convention on crimes
against humanity, based on the provisions adopted by
the International Law Commission in that regard.
In conclusion, establishing international criminal
justice is part of the peacebuilding process. The
perpetrators of international crimes must not be allowed
to enjoy impunity so that the parties to an armed
conflict can reach peace agreements or arrangements.
Jordan therefore stresses the importance of maintaining
peace tracks during conflicts in parallel with efforts
to achieve legal accountability for the perpetrators of
crimes, as durable peace cannot be achieved without
ensuring justice for the victims.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Bae (Republic of Korea): I would like to thank
Albania for convening today’s timely open debate,
and my gratitude also goes to all the briefers for their
thought-provoking interventions.
Accountability is both a means and an end in itself.
As an essential component of the rule of law, it accords
with our shared sense of justice. Ensuring accountability
also serves as an instrument to deter the recurrence of
atrocities, build trust in post-conflict societies and help
restore the dignity of victims. The polar opposite of
accountability, namely, unrelenting impunity for gross
violations of international law, constitutes a threat to
international peace and security, and therefore pertains
to the mandate of the Security Council.
Our journey from impunity to accountability has
not been linear. The Security Council has played an
instrumental part in seeking accountability by setting
up tribunals and referring situations to the International
Criminal Court. Yet there have been setbacks and
obstacles. Wide accountability gaps remain, and
they loom even larger in cases of gross violations of
international law. Our focus of concern now is on how
to fill such gaps in the unfolding crisis in Ukraine.
My delegation would like to highlight a few points
to strengthen our resolve and guide us towards zero
impunity for flagrant breaches of international law.
First, accountability is a duty, not a choice. It is part
of addressing serious violations of human rights and is
prescribed by treaties such as the Geneva Conventions
and the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide. In the face of allegations

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

of such violations, the State concerned is obliged to
investigate and address the issue of accountability.
Secondly, accountability is about truth. Establishing
truth is an integral part of ensuring accountability. As
crucial as a State’s obligation to address serious human
rights violations is its duty to cooperate in fact-finding.
That is a building block for ensuring accountability,
and the failure to do so must not be taken lightly. In
that vein, my delegation would like to emphasize that
States must counter false narratives and not engage in
the spread of disinformation, which hinders the pursuit
of truth.
Thirdly, accountability is for victims. We must not
forget the victims and should accord them a rightful
place in our pursuit of justice. Only by empowering
survivors and their communities can peace be
sustainable and justice complete. Our first step is to
listen to their stories.
Fourthly, accountability can be better achieved
through
teamwork.
Our
endeavours
towards
accountability are often multifaceted, and they therefore
require coordination. Despite various jurisdictions
and mandates, judicial and investigative bodies can
converge on the same objective of addressing serious
violations of human rights law and international
humanitarian law.
Our efforts to ensure accountability need resources
and political will, and expectations are high for the
Security Council to fulfil the role of leading and
supporting that political will. Only the Council
is endowed with the authority to create a binding
obligation for States to cooperate in the pursuit of
accountability and truth.
Lastly, my delegation would like to recall that
patience and perseverance are salient features of
seeking accountability. The question should not be
whether, but how, and when, perpetrators will be held
accountable. Only with such conviction can the genuine
impact of deterrence then follow.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mrs. Inanç Örnekol (Türkiye): We thank the
Albanian presidency for organizing today’s important
and timely debate, which is being held at a moment
when international law is under heavy strain. We
also extend our appreciation to the briefers for their
insightful remarks.

22-3700129/42

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

International law is foundational to the United
Nations, and the Security Council has a special role to
play in ensuring that it is respected. Sadly, as highlighted
by many delegations earlier today, international law
continues to be severely violated around the world,
particularly in conflicts, resulting in immense human
suffering. Yet the current dynamics in the Council do
not allow for a meaningful discussion on upholding
international law. The issue of the situation in Ukraine
is the most recent and visible example.
In discharging its responsibility, the Council acts
on behalf of all Member States, and it must do so in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
The use of the veto to protect narrow national interests
in situations of mass atrocities is not in line with the
spirit of the Charter. As a result, the Council cannot
adequately deliver on its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
In that vein, we commend initiatives aimed
at limiting the casting of negative votes in cases
of mass atrocities by both permanent and elected
members. Initiatives by France and Mexico, as well
as Liechtenstein on behalf of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group, are steps in the
right direction.
By the same token, we welcome the adoption by
consensus in April of General Assembly resolution
76/262, entitled “Standing mandate for a General
Assembly debate when a veto is cast in the Security
Council”. Türkiye is one of the main sponsors of that
highly relevant resolution, which aims to provide a
mechanism to ensure accountability among United
Nations organs, in accordance with the Charter.
Accountability is the bedrock of the rules-based
international order. It is the path to peace. Addressing
continuing impunity is vital not only for the delivery
of justice but also for preventing the recurrence of such
crimes in the future.
Of course, the primary responsibility to investigate
and prosecute the most serious crimes of international
concern lies with national justice systems. However,
where national judicial systems fail to tackle impunity,
the international community, in particular the Security
Council, is responsible for taking the necessary
and appropriate measures to promote, and ensure
accountability for, international crimes of that nature.
30/42

02/06/2022

In that regard, it is worth noting the decisive
steps the Council has taken in the past. Through its
resolutions establishing the International Tribunals
for the former Yugoslavia in 1993 and for Rwanda in
1994, the Council has had an undeniable impact on the
development and interpretation of international law, in
particular international criminal law.
Türkiye closely follows and fully supports the work
of the successor institution — the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. We are proud to
have a highly qualified national serving as a judge in
that legal body, and we applaud the Mechanism for the
remarkable progress it has made, especially in 2021,
towards the completion of its core judicial work. As
the Security Council’s biennial review of the progress
of the work of the Mechanism approaches, we express
our support for that important body in successfully
continuing to carry out its mandate.
Türkiye’s voluntary financial support to the
Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone, which was
established pursuant to an agreement between the
United Nations and the Government of Sierra Leone to
address serious crimes committed during that country’s
civil war, is another example of our commitment to
supporting justice and accountability mechanisms.
Needless to say, we also commend the Council
for creating the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in 2017, with
a mandate to collect, preserve and analyse evidence of
heinous crimes committed by Da’esh.
In the instances when the Council has failed to
act, however, the General Assembly has searched for
alternatives, such as the creation of the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 (IIIM). We take this opportunity to reiterate our
full support for the IIIM, as well as all other international
mechanisms that document and investigate war crimes,
crimes against humanity and violations of international
humanitarian law committed on a daily basis in Syria
by the regime and by terrorist organizations.
Similarly, we support the Independent Investigative
Mechanism for Myanmar, which was established in
2018 by the Human Rights Council.
22-37001

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Such mechanisms are solid examples of
the international community’s commitment to
accountability, and they can constitute best practices
that can be replicated with regard to documenting
serious violations of international law.
To conclude, I would like to emphasize that
safeguarding and promoting international law, as well
as working to ensure its progressive development in
addressing and tackling global needs and challenges,
has been a key foreign policy priority for Türkiye.
We have also contributed to those efforts through the
presence of a national serving as a member of the
International Law Commission. Türkiye will continue
to play its role in global and regional efforts to uphold
the rule of law and ensure accountability, both of which
lie at the core of international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate your friendly
country, Madam President, on your presidency of the
Security Council. I would also like to thank you for
organizing this open debate on a very important subject
and the briefers for their thorough briefings.
The Kingdom of Morocco reiterates its commitment
to respect for international law, human rights and
international humanitarian law, accountability and
the fight against impunity. We continue to believe
firmly that when serious violations of international
law are committed, reparations are also a crucial tool
for reconciliation. The fight against impunity is vital
because it responds to the need to hold individuals
responsible for their acts, on the one hand, and allows
the victims to receive justice, on the other. The most
serious violations of international criminal law and
international law in general, such as crimes against
humanity, war crimes and genocide, have no place in
our world. That is why it is crucial to ensure that they
do not go unpunished. In that regard, the role played by
the international criminal tribunals established in order
to prosecute those responsible for serious violations of
international law, and by the residual mechanism that is
continuing their work, is to be commended.
As the world continues to address the challenges that
have resulted from the coronavirus disease pandemic,
efforts must be strengthened to ensure continued
respect for the rule of law. The pandemic must not serve
as a pretext to erode previous gains, particularly in the

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

areas of human rights and humanitarian law. The rule
of law is not something at the mercy of circumstance
but rather the result of lasting, long-term commitments,
as well as continued effort and concrete action. In
that context, Morocco’s commitment to the rule of
law, democracy and its corollaries is unfaltering and
enshrined in its Constitution.
When it is respected, international law is a vital
tool for preventing situations that could lead to serious
violations of international law, and conflict prevention
efforts are therefore also central. The Security Council
has often affirmed that the rule of law and justice
are fundamental elements of conflict prevention
and the peaceful settlement of disputes and form the
foundations for lasting peace. Drawing lessons from
the conflicts that humankind has seen, we can see that
peace and security, respect for the territorial integrity
of States and respect for human rights and the rule of
law are intrinsically linked.
We also urge for fully respecting and implementing
the ban enshrined in many instruments on recruiting
children as soldiers in armed conflicts, including by
armed groups. There is a special obligation to protect
children, who are particularly vulnerable. In that regard
we should point in particular to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement
of children in armed conflict, and emphasize that the
recruitment of children has been designated a war
crime by the Statute of the International Criminal
Court and by other instruments before it, which
characterize the recruitment and enlistment of children
as serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. Those responsible for such crimes
must be held to account.
The United Nations has an essential role to play
in the peaceful settlement of disputes, a crucial factor
in the prevention of conflicts and the maintenance of
peace. We are pleased that over the past two decades
the Organization has developed a broad range of
key tools, including a solid normative and practical
framework guiding its efforts and those of other actors
in conflict mediation and peacekeeping. In that context,
we welcome the Secretary-General’s new agenda for
peace initiative, included in his report on Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982), which will undoubtedly contribute
to strengthening the role of the United Nations in
maintaining, building and sustaining peace.

22-3700131/42

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Turay (Sierra Leone): The delegation of Sierra
Leone congratulates the Albanian presidency and
commends it for holding this important open debate.
We would like to take this opportunity to restate
our unwavering commitment to accountability and
justice, that is, independent and impartial justice for
serious violations of international law. We see the
strengthening of accountability and justice mechanisms
at both the national and international levels as critical
not only to maintaining international peace and security
but to achieving sustainable development. Sierra Leone
reaffirms the view that under Article 24 of the Charter of
the United Nations, the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security and must therefore undertake the
primary role, on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations, in addressing accountability gaps and
ending impunity.
Sierra Leone’s commitment to accountability
and justice is informed by its transitional justice
experience, including the establishment of the Special
Court for Sierra Leone, created by a treaty between the
United Nations and the Government of Sierra Leone
in 2002 and authorized by resolution 1315 (2000). The
Special Court was meant to address an impunity gap,
and that was during a period seen as a golden era for
international criminal justice under the leadership of the
Security Council. In the context, however, describing
an era as “golden” may be counterproductive, since it
denotes a regrettable regression for accountability and
a persistence of impunity. It is against that background
that I would like to highlight three points aimed at
strengthening accountability and justice for serious
violations of international law.
First, the development of a global strategy to
institutionalize and strengthen international legal
principles of accountability should be based on full
respect for international law, particularly in our
approach to conflicts and other persistent challenges.
In ensuring full respect for international law, due
regard must be given to the issue of its legitimacy in
accounting for the views of our pluralistic multilateral
system, and to the central point that international
law must be applied consistently. Compliance and
accountability must therefore not be selective.
32/42

02/06/2022

Secondly, being a State party to the Rome Statute
establishing the International Criminal Court, Sierra
Leone welcomes the recognition of the right of victims
to participate in proceedings, to have protection, support
and legal representation and to obtain reparations. For
the first time in history, that recognition in the Rome
Statute has granted survivors of mass atrocities a voice
in the administration of justice. That approach should
now have gone beyond being seen as mere innovation
and should be pursued and applied universally as part
of the global strategy to strengthen accountability and
justice. In calling for a universal, victim-centred view,
we also acknowledge the importance of linking it to a
gender-sensitive and inclusive approach.
Thirdly, and in this regrettable era of disinformation
and misinformation, it is vital to safeguard the
crucial role of the media, civil society and victims’
organizations in strengthening accountability both
nationally and internationally. There must be full
respect for the principles safeguarding the protection
of the media, civil society and human rights defenders,
including victims’ organizations, in covering or working
in conflict situations and dangerous environments. It
is these groups that are usually the first responders
and witnesses to the facts and truth. Reinforcing their
protection and accountability for violations of their
protection must be absolute.
In situations where we have existing accountability
mechanisms or such mechanisms are contemplated,
outreach and a field presence are essential. In that
regard, I would like to point to the experience and work
of the innovative outreach section of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone, which served as a hub for engagement
with the communities directly affected to ensure that
the accountability mechanism was responsive to their
needs and could provide access to impartial information.
Let me close by urging the Security Council to
continue, in the light of its mandate under Article 24 of
the United Nations Charter, to take effective measures
to maintain international peace and security and
suppress breaches of peace through, inter alia, criminal
accountability to end impunity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Albanian presidency of the Security
Council for convening today’s important meeting.
22-37001

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

As far as general international law, as laid down
in the articles on responsibility of States, adopted by
the International Law Commission on 9 August 2001,
is concerned,
“[e]very internationally wrongful act of a State
entails the international responsibility of that State”.
Under international criminal law, all those who engage
in conduct considered to be prohibited and criminalized
bear individual criminal liability. States are required to
investigate, without undue delay, reports of war crimes
and other serious offences and to prosecute and punish
the perpetrators.
Despite clear obligations set forth in international
law, the lack of accountability continues to challenge
peace and justice and prevent progress in sustainable
development. First and foremost, selectivity and double
standards should have no place in issues relating to
the universally recognized norms and principles of
international law, the principles of accountability and
the identification of the perpetrators of international
crimes. Combating impunity for serious violations and
broader transitional justice are imperative and must be
systematic and universal. It is critical to consistently
and resolutely oppose and reject any attempts and
actions aimed at imposing the culture of impunity for
serious violations, misinterpreting international law,
promoting territorial claims and undermining the unity
and territorial integrity of States.
Azerbaijan’s experience of the 30-year-long
unlawful occupation of its territories by Armenia,
since the early 1990s, accompanied by numerous war
crimes committed against our people, the complete
levelling of thousands of our cities, towns and villages,
the barbaric destruction of our cultural heritage and the
forcible displacement of hundreds of thousands of our
citizens, is a graphic illustration of the deficiency of
accountability mechanisms. The condemnations and
binding demands contained in unanimously adopted
resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884
(1993) were simply ignored by Armenia, while the
mediation led by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe failed to facilitate a negotiated
settlement. On the contrary, over this period, Armenia
spared no effort to consolidate and cement the results of
the aggression and colonize the occupied territories of
Azerbaijan, thereby abusing the peace process and the
ceasefire, in clear violation of international law.

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Another act of aggression by Armenia, in the fall
of 2020, became a logical consequence of its decadeslong impunity. Direct and indiscriminate missile
attacks that struck Azerbaijani cities and districts,
including with the use of internationally banned cluster
bombs, killed and wounded hundreds of civilians
and destroyed numerous civilian objects. Azerbaijan
resolutely responded in order to liberate the occupied
territories, restore its territorial integrity and protect its
people, acting exclusively on its sovereign soil, in full
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and
international law.
The 30-year-long armed conflict has now been
resolved. This was a long overdue development
demanded by the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and justice. Further, to restore justice,
Azerbaijan instituted proceedings to hold Armenia to
account for its past and ongoing egregious violations of
international law, including at the International Court
of Justice and the European Court of Human Rights.
Additionally, several individuals were prosecuted
and punished for war crimes and terrorist and
mercenary activities.
At the same time, Azerbaijan initiated the process
of normalizing inter-State relations with Armenia
based on mutual recognition and respect for one
another’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within
our respective internationally recognized borders.
We look forward to the commencement in the near
future of negotiations on a bilateral peace treaty and
tangible progress in this direction within a reasonable
time frame, along with the early reopening of transport
routes and the delimitation and demarcation of the State
border between our two countries.
Strict compliance by States with their international
obligations is vital for preserving, building and
sustaining peace and enhancing cooperation.
Azerbaijan is determined to strengthen security and
stability, promote accountability and advance the
agenda of peacebuilding, reconciliation, reintegration,
peaceful coexistence and development in the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Dvornyk (Ukraine): I also recognize the
representative of Putin’s regime in the permanent seat
of the Soviet Union.

22-3700133/42

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Ukraine aligns itself with statements made by the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity as
observer, and by the representative of the Republic of
the Marshall Islands, on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Accountability following the Aggression against
Ukraine, respectively.
I would like to thank Albania for organizing today’s
important debate and all briefers for their briefings. I
would also like to express our sincere condolences to
the representative of Brazil on the passing of Judge
Antônio Augusto Cançado Trindade.
Almost a hundred days ago, while we were sitting in
this Chamber at an emergency meeting of the Security
Council (see S/PV.8974), the first bombs and rockets
hit peaceful Ukrainian cities and Russian soldiers
crossed the Ukrainian borders. They crossed to kill,
torture, destroy and plunder, not in violation of, but
in strict accordance with, instructions received from
their commanders. Mariupol and Bucha are the names
of the cities known throughout the world as synonyms
of Russian barbarism, and they are just two in a list
of dozens. Some 1,200 bodies of murdered civilians
were recovered in the Kyiv region alone, following
the Russian retreat. We will be able to calculate the
number of civilian casualties in Mariupol only after
the de-occupation of the city. However, it is clear that
dozens of thousands were killed. Approximately 200 to
300 war crimes are being committed in Ukraine every
day, with the general number exceeding 15,000 since
the beginning of the invasion.
Ukraine encourages all partners to join our efforts
aimed at ensuring justice within the framework of the
joint investigative team for Russia’s war crimes, in
which the European Union Agency for Criminal Justice
Cooperation and the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court are also participating.
Investigative mechanisms are working. This week,
two more Russian servicemen, artillerists Ivanov
and Bobikin, were sentenced for shelling civilian
infrastructure in the Kharkiv region. Regrettably,
such acts — war crimes — by Russia take place on a
daily basis, because they constitute a regular method
of warfare by Russia. Two days ago, French journalist
Frédéric Leclerc-Imhoff was killed as a result of the
shelling of the city of Lysychansk by Russian troops.
Ukraine has already initiated investigation into
the matter.
34/42

02/06/2022

Ukrainian children remain among the most
vulnerable to war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Our investigative bodies have already registered 1,042
criminal proceedings concerning invasion-related
crimes committed against children. As of today, at
least 261 children have been killed, 460 wounded and
145 are missing. We have already identified 11 Russian
servicemen suspected of child abuse. Ukraine will
continue to work to bring them, as well as others
responsible for war crimes, to justice. We will also
persist in struggling for the safe and rapid return
of more than 230,000 Ukrainian children forcibly
deported to Russia.
On 26 February, Ukraine launched a case against
Russia at the International Court of Justice on
allegations of genocide. On 16 March, the International
Court of Justice ordered Russia to immediately cease
its so-called special operation against Ukraine. We are
grateful to the President of the International Court of
Justice, who this morning recalled the legally binding
nature of that order, still awaiting its implementation
by Russia.
Ukraine has also been supportive of the idea of
creating a special criminal tribunal for the punishment
of the crime of aggression against Ukraine. Such a
tribunal for Putin, Shoygu, Gerasimov, Lavrov and
other Russian war criminals will be the final accord of
the war.
After 100 days of courageous resistance by the
Ukrainian army and the entire Ukrainian nation, it
is clear that this unprovoked and unjustified war of
aggression will end with Russia’s defeat — a defeat
that will be a victory for the entire civilized world, for
humanity and for justice. What we all need now is to
maintain resolve to bring that victory closer.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mrs. Maille (Canada): Like my predecessor, I
would like to start by expressing condolences to our
Brazilian colleagues on the passing of Justice Cançado
Trindade. It is a pleasure to also work with his son here
in New York City.
The protection of human rights and the fight against
impunity when those rights are violated are at the very
core of the rules-based international order. Canada
would like to thank Albania for organizing this open
debate on strengthening accountability and justice for
22-37001

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

serious violations of international law — one of the
most important challenges to achieving international
peace and security.
Canada has worked with many of those present
in this Chamber on our joint commitment to ensuring
accountability for war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide. We have also made particular efforts to
strengthen the integration of a gender-based perspective
into all that work. We joined with many Member States
in creating the International Criminal Court, which
plays a vital role within our multilateral system to
enhance respect for the rule of law and create a more
peaceful and just world. We are a strong supporter of
the Court and believe in its important role in pursuing
accountability and bringing justice to victims. That is
why Canada, along with several other partners, referred
the situation in Ukraine to the Court in early March.
Canada insists that there must be accountability for
any atrocities and serious crimes being committed in
the ongoing conflict. There has been appalling brutality,
targeting the civilian population. There are clear
patterns of violations of international humanitarian law
by Russian forces. As the horrific events in Ukraine
unfold before our eyes, it is clear that more must be done.
(spoke in French)
The Russian Federation is waging an illegal and
unjustifiable war of aggression against the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of
Ukraine. Russia’s actions are a flagrant violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as its purposes
and principles.
(spoke in English)
The principles of accountability underpin the
very foundation of the United Nations. If the Security
Council is unwilling, or unable, to take action, it is
incumbent upon the international community to take
action to prevent and address crimes of atrocity. For
that reason, Canada strongly supports efforts to
ensure accountability for atrocity crimes via other
mechanisms, such as the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism for Syria, the Independent
Investigative Mechanism for Myanmar and the recently
established commission of inquiry mandated by the
Human Rights Council to investigate violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law in the
context of Russia’s aggression against Ukraine.

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

The lessons from Rwanda, Syria and Myanmar
show that it is imperative to investigate and gather
evidence immediately in an orchestrated way so that
we can seek justice. Canada welcomes the comments
by the keynote speakers earlier this morning, and
we support efforts to enhance accountability for the
commission of atrocity crimes via the review of the
International Law Commission draft articles on the
proposed convention on the prevention and punishment
of crimes against humanity.
Canada is a long-time champion of justice for
victims of serious international crime as a means of
building international peace. We are confident that we
can contribute to effective, carefully considered global
responses in pursuit of human rights, accountability
and justice towards achieving peace and security.
Justice must prevail. There shall be no impunity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): This open debate is of singular importance
due to the critical times in which we are living, it
being necessary to specify that the observance of the
rule of law and international law as an essential part
of such times is a conditio sine qua non to guarantee
international peace and security — the pillar and
foundation for which this Organization was established
and the main function of the Security Council.
In recent months, we have witnessed a blatant
violation of international law. As we said previously
in other forums, we are concerned about Russia’s
unjustified invasion of the territory of Ukraine, which
is a clear example of a flagrant violation of the founding
Charter of the United Nations and of international
law as a whole — an unnecessary war, which has
claimed the lives of thousands and affected millions of
innocent people.
Those facts cause even greater dismay when we
see heart-rending images of Ukrainians found in mass
graves — acts that cannot go unpunished, as their
seriousness and gravity could constitute war crimes or
crimes against humanity.
A few months ago, the General Assembly adopted
resolution ES-11/1, which my country, Guatemala,
co-sponsored. It was adopted by an overwhelming
majority, condemning the aggression against Ukraine
as an illegal and unjustified act, representing a flagrant

22-3700135/42

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

violation of international law that undermines the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine.
Guatemala reaffirms its unequivocal support
for the International Criminal Court, as well as its
commitment to the fight against impunity. The Court
plays a fundamental role within the international
justice system, with the objective of putting an end
to impunity for the most serious crimes of concern to
the international community as a whole and ensuring
that their perpetrators are held accountable for those
reprehensible acts.
As a peaceful State, Guatemala values the methods
of conflict resolution based on the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and recognizes the
importance of the responsibility to protect. We take
fully into account the third pillar of that principle, which
emphasizes the role of the international community
in protecting populations at risk of suffering crimes
against humanity.
In its national legislation Guatemala prioritizes
respect for, and the observance of, human rights, which
are also an important pillar of our foreign policy. In
the current difficult circumstances, we believe that it
is necessary to renew our multilateral efforts to ensure
that justice and the rule of law prevail. We must do
everything in our power to ensure effective compliance
with international law. We must clearly learn from the
events that we are witnessing today and truly try to
fulfil the main purpose for which the United Nations
was established, namely, that of preserving future
generations from the scourge of war.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to thank Albania for convening
this open debate, which allows us to reflect on ways
to strengthen accountability and justice for serious
violations of international law.
Accountability is vital in order to deliver justice to
victims and deter future crimes. International crimes
are subject to individual criminal responsibility under
international law, and States have the primary obligation
to prosecute perpetrators. When a State is unwilling
or unable to investigate and prosecute international
crimes, the international community must take steps to
activate alternative accountability mechanisms.
36/42

02/06/2022

Fortunately, in recent decades States have made
progress in creating different mechanisms that
contribute to accountability efforts for serious crimes
under international law, such as the ad hoc international
criminal tribunals established by the Security Council
and the commissions of inquiry and fact-finding
missions established by the Human Rights Council.
One such milestone in the evolution of accountability
mechanisms was the establishment of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). Argentina is proud of the central
role it played in the Court’s creation and fully supports
its work and mandate to bring those responsible for
serious international crimes to justice. We call on all
States to cooperate with the ICC to ensure that the
perpetrators of such crimes are held accountable. The
Security Council must also make greater use of its
power to refer situations to the ICC in order to bridge
the impunity gap.
Argentina also attaches great importance to other
forms of cooperation that contribute to strengthening the
capacity of States to fulfil their primary responsibility to
investigate and prosecute. In that regard, we would like
to highlight the initiative for mutual legal assistance and
extradition for atrocity crimes promoted by Argentina,
Belgium, Slovenia, Mongolia, the Netherlands and
Senegal. There is no doubt that the development of a
multilateral treaty on the matter will help to strengthen
national capacities in the investigation and prosecution
of atrocity crimes. We encourage all States to join that
important initiative.
Another mechanism that contributes to strengthening
accountability is the International Humanitarian
Fact-Finding Commission, a body provided for in the
Protocol Additional I to the Geneva Conventions. Its
purpose is to investigate any fact that has been alleged
to constitute a grave breach of the Geneva Conventions
or Protocol I thereto and to facilitate, through its good
offices, the return to a position of respect for those
treaties. Argentina accepted the competence of the
Commission in 1996, and we encourage the use of
that tool for international humanitarian law in cases of
related violations.
In terms of best practices that could be replicated
and/or improved upon in relation to the documentation
and mapping of serious violations of international law
and the identification of perpetrators of international
crimes, I would like to highlight the work of the
renowned Argentine Forensic Anthropology Team.
22-37001

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

That non-governmental and non-profit scientific
institution applies methodologies and techniques from
different branches of the forensic sciences with respect
to missing persons in the areas of investigation, search,
recovery, determination of cause of death, identification
and restitution. The Argentine Forensic Anthropology
Team’s experts have worked in numerous countries
at the request of various national and international
institutions and have thereby contributed significantly
to the investigation of international crimes.
Accountability
for
serious
violations
of
international law and the need to restore justice
cannot be overlooked or sacrificed at the behest of
provisional or temporary political settlements. Peace
can be sustainable only if it goes hand in hand with
justice. Truth-seeking efforts are crucial to any peace
and reconciliation process and constitute an essential
component for the establishment of lasting peace in
post-conflict situations. Accountability is a key element
of strengthening the rule of law and must be at the core
of our peacekeeping, peacebuilding and overall conflict
prevention efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Lagatie (Belgium): Let me start by offering my
condolences to our Brazilian colleagues following the
passing of Judge Antônio Augusto Cançado Trindade
of the International Court of Justice.
I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
organizing this important high-level debate today.
Accountability for serious violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
is crucial to rebuilding sustainable peace based on the
rule of law and to restoring public trust and justice and
security institutions.
The fight against impunity is essential to prevent
new conflicts and atrocities in the future. While
Ukraine is the most recent example, it is unfortunate
that so many other violations and abuses have been
committed in other conflict situations, such as in Syria,
Ethiopia, Myanmar, Yemen and the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to name but a few.
Allow me to make three points today.
First, we believe that the International Criminal
Court (ICC) has a key role to play in the fight against
impunity when States are unwilling or unable to
investigate and prosecute the alleged perpetrators of

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

the most serious crimes. In less than a month, on 1 July,
we will commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the
entry into force of the Rome Statute. Belgium was one
of its founding fathers, and we take this opportunity to
call upon all United Nations States Members that have
not yet done so to ratify the Rome Statute, as well as its
amendments, and to cooperate with the Court.
Accountability cannot be achieved if States lack
the political will to execute arrest warrants issued by
the Court, protect victims and witnesses and fulfil their
financial obligations towards the Court. Belgium has
always been a defender of a stable budget for the Court
and has repeatedly made voluntary contributions.
The current situation in Ukraine should remind us
of the Court’s relevance. Twenty years after the entry
into force of the Rome Statute, we welcome the recent
deployment of 42 investigators by the ICC Prosecutor
to Ukraine as a concrete example of initiatives
for accountability.
(spoke in French)
Secondly, with the growing number of conflicts in
the world, we also note the increase in violations and
abuses of human rights and the most serious crimes,
including conflict-related sexual violence, which
Belgium condemns in the strongest terms. We have at
our disposition a solid international legal framework to
combat such crimes, and several States have adopted
legislative frameworks or national action plans in that
regard, but their implementation and the prosecution of
perpetrators remains problematic. The United Nations
must continue to provide support in order to strengthen
the capacity of national institutions.
Moreover, Belgium fully supports the efforts of the
International Criminal Court aimed at prosecuting the
perpetrators of sexual and gender-based crimes. We
also support the fact that sexual violence is a standalone designated criterion in sanctions regimes. We
invite the members of the Security Council to add a
greater number of individuals to sanctions lists on
that basis.
We are particularly concerned by the situation
of children impacted by armed conflict. Children
are among the most vulnerable victims and are not
always afforded the space that they need during legal
proceedings. Belgium therefore calls for children to
be systematically recognized as victims in a separate

22-3700137/42

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

category before national, hybrid and international
tribunals, as well as by transitional justice mechanisms.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Hernández Chávez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, allow me to take this opportunity
to express our deep condolences to the Brazilian
delegation following the passing of Judge Antônio
Augusto Cançado Trindade this week.
Chile thanks Albania for convening this pertinent
debate at a time when yet another war is affecting
the rights and lives of so many people, which calls
for comprehensive consideration of the issue in the
multilateral space. We also thank the briefers, who
provided us with a very relevant context. We agree
with the spirit of the concept note (S/2022/418/Rev.1,
annex), and the statements of several speakers, that
accountability is key to preventing and ending serious
violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, including the individual
accountability of those who perpetrate, plan or promote
such violations.
Strengthening the effectiveness of international
justice is essential to guaranteeing the rule of law at
the international level. In that regard, Chile attaches
great importance to the International Criminal Court,
and we hope that those States that have not yet done
so will join its Statute. Chile’s commitment to
international humanitarian law and the international
protection of human rights is unwavering. We remain
concerned about international crimes perpetrated in
various parts of the world and we support conducting
independent investigations for each of them. In that
regard, the International Criminal Court and its Rome
Statute provide a legal and institutional framework that
guarantees independent and impartial investigations
that will not be exploited for political ends but place
those people’s protection at their core.
Impunity is a scourge that encourages the
recurrence of violations of international humanitarian
law and undermines international peace and security.
In that regard, Chile believes that the international
community should adopt a multilateral approach,
especially through the United Nations and its Security
Council, which has the primary responsibility and duty
to provide a comprehensive solution to all threats to
peace that fall within its purview. We are also grateful
for the guiding questions raised in the concept note.
38/42

02/06/2022

With regard to the first question, as we just said,
Chile believes that it is imperative to promote accession
to the Rome Statute by as many Member States as
possible and greater cooperation on the part of the
Security Council with the Court.
Concerning the question on the creation of an
accountability network, we believe that the mandates,
the respective legal frameworks and the nature of
the institutions involved are specific and can prevent
duplication. Chile greatly values the International
Court of Justice, the International Criminal Court and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, each of which performs its functions
within its respective legal framework in a way that
strengthens the international rule of law as a whole and
prioritizes the protection of individuals in particular.
We also value and promote the independence of
international tribunals.
With regard to appropriate reparations for victims,
the issue has been raised in connection with several
international initiatives that should be explored.
Reparations have been a common feature in several
peace treaties, although they have often entailed
obligations for the defeated party alone. In many other
cases, they have responded to domestic initiatives to end
conflicts or internal instability. Unfortunately, in most
cases there have been no reparations for the victims,
and that must be remedied. In that regard, the Security
Council should determine which cases are relevant,
and where possible create the necessary conditions so
that accountability includes reparations for the victims,
including restitution or compensation, as well as the
material, medical, psychological and social support
needed, especially for women and girls.
Lastly, I underscore Chile’s commitment to truth,
justice, memory, reparation and non-recurrence in all
situations involving serious human rights violations. We
also note that this debate must not neglect transitional
justice in applicable cases, which has also been the
subject of other Council debates.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): South Africa welcomes
today’s timely debate on the further development
of accountability mechanisms at the national and
multinational levels to enhance accountability for
the most serious crimes known to humankind. This
debate clearly illustrates that if the perpetrators of
22-37001

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

serious violations of international law are not held
accountable, a culture of impunity will persist, and
conflict, which the Security Council is mandated to
address, will not cease. Today’s debate should be used
as an opportunity for us to assess how the Council
can assist and strengthen accountability for serious
violations of international law in conflict situations.
In doing so, the Security Council cannot permit double
standards. It should be consistent in the implementation
of international law and, specifically, in its adherence
to its own resolutions, in order to ensure that all who
violate international law are held accountable. If not, its
credibility will be eroded.
History teaches us that from the earliest times,
but especially over the course of the past century,
humankind has attempted to develop international
legal norms and rules and establish structures aimed at
preventing conflict and insecurity. That is also done to
manage the conduct of such problems, when they occur,
in a humane way and to provide accountability for the
perpetrators of the most serious crimes.
The Security Council should be commended for
previously taking innovative action to enhance the
protection of civilians and vulnerable groups during
armed conflict and ensure that the perpetrators of
international crimes are held accountable for their
actions. That was done with the establishment of the
ad hoc criminal tribunals with respect to the former
Yugoslavia, Rwanda and Sierra Leone, and with the
mixed and hybrid tribunals for a number of States.
However, despite those laudable efforts, merely nominal
efforts to achieve global justice continue with ongoing
international and non-international armed conflicts
in many parts of the world, which undermine human
security with violence and whose most severe impact is
on vulnerable groups.
Turning to practical measures to ensure
accountability for individuals, non-State armed
groups and corporate actors, we welcome the fact that
domestic courts of States are increasingly being used
to prosecute the perpetrators of gross human rights
violations during conflicts. Effective domestic justice
and accountability mechanisms form a cornerstone
for building accountability. The successful domestic
prosecution of human rights violators requires two
steps — the incorporation of international crimes
into the domestic law of States and investigation and
prosecution capacities.

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

South Africa has incorporated the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court, as well as the Geneva
Conventions and the Convention against Torture, into
its domestic law. That tightly woven tapestry ensures
that genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity,
torture and violations of international humanitarian law
can be prosecuted in South Africa’s domestic courts,
even if the crimes were committed in another State. The
incorporation of international crimes into the domestic
law of a State will also enhance mutual legal assistance
and the extradition of persons accused of having
committed the most serious crimes, and will give effect
to the international legal principle of aut dedere aut
judicare. A system of voluntary reporting by States with
respect to the incorporation of international crimes and
their investigation and prosecution into domestic courts
will enable States to share best practices.
South Africa supports the proposal to create an
accountability network among the International Court
of Justice, the International Criminal Court, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and regional justice institutions, including
the African Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights
and the African Commission on Human and Peoples’
Rights. We reaffirm the important role of civil society
initiatives in ensuring accountability and protecting the
rights of victims and note in that regard the Global Code
of Conduct for Gathering and Using Information about
Systematic and Conflict-Related Sexual Violence, also
known as the Murad Code, named after Nobel Peace
Prize Laureate Nadia Murad. The Code provides
the minimum standards for effective and victimcentric gathering of information about systematic and
conflict-related sexual violence, including with a view
to protecting the rights and dignity of victims and
promoting effective remedies.
Formal accountability mechanisms can benefit from
the work of more informal accountability initiatives,
such as truth and reconciliation commissions. Several
criminal investigations and prosecutions are under
way in South Africa based on information obtained
by the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. Such
commissions can also be of great value in ensuring that
victims obtain appropriate reparations.
In conclusion, we would like to stress that holding
perpetrators accountable for atrocities committed during
armed conflict should be considered by the Council as
part of the comprehensive conflict resolution approach.

22-3700139/42

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

02/06/2022

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar.

total number of internally displaced persons to more
than 1 million.

Mr. Tun (Myanmar): I thank the presidency of
Albania for organizing today’s open debate. I also
thank the briefers for their insightful briefings.

The military has weaponized the law as a tool to
instil fear by carrying out unjustifiable arbitrary arrests
and summary executions. The Independent Investigative
Mechanism for Myanmar, in its preliminary analysis,
concluded that crimes against humanity have likely been
committed in Myanmar. At the same time, we count on
the International Court of Justice and the International
Criminal Court (ICC) for their involvement in the issue
of ending impunity in Myanmar.

We are of the view that international law makes
our world a safer place for everyone, in particular
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and international criminal law, which were
born of humankind’s experiences of horrific atrocities
and seek to prevent their recurrence in the future and
preserve human dignity everywhere.
Every State has the primary responsibility to protect
its population from atrocities. However, when a State or
a State institution, which has the primary responsibility
to protect the population, becomes the perpetrator of
serious international crimes against its own people and
there is no domestic environment for accountability
for such crimes, the key challenge is not inadequate
international law; it is about how the international
community can effectively ensure accountability and
address pervasive impunity for egregious violations of
international law.

In January, the National Unity Government of
Myanmar therefore informed the International Court
of Justice of the withdrawal of Myanmar’s preliminary
objection to the admissibility of the jurisdiction of
the Court over the case Application of the Convention
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide (The Gambia v. Myanmar). In July 2021, the
National Unity Government also wrote to the Registrar
of the ICC, lodging an article 12 (3) declaration of
Myanmar’s acceptance of the jurisdiction of the ICC
over crimes committed in the territory of Myanmar
since 1 July 2002.

The Security Council, which has both responsibility
and enforcement power, must take appropriate actions
in such situations, in accordance with the letter and
spirit of the Charter of the United Nations. Serious
violations of international law and a failure to uphold
accountability embolden impunity and, as a result,
undermine peace and security, not only at the domestic
level but also at the regional and international levels.

The key root cause of the current instability in
Myanmar is the military junta’s total disregard for the
rule of law and its sense of absolute impunity for its
past and current criminal actions. Lasting peace in
Myanmar must start with ending military impunity.
Without accountability, the rule of law and security
sector reform, any political solution risks endless the
perpetuation of cycles of violence and instability.

What is happening in my own country, Myanmar,
essentially reflects the collapse of domestic rule of
law and justice after the illegal military coup d’état of
February 2021. The illegal military coup itself was a
gross violation of the rule of law, amounting to high
treason committed by the military generals against the
democratically elected Government.

Therefore, we fully support the ongoing
accountability efforts that focus on Myanmar, including
those of the Independent Investigative Mechanism for
Myanmar. In view of the evidence collected, it is the
time for the international community, in particular
the United Nations, to take effective action for the
sake of protecting the people and preventing any more
people in Myanmar becoming the victims of crimes
against humanity.

A human rights catastrophe is ongoing in Myanmar,
where a humanitarian emergency has unfolded. The
illegal military regime has brutally murdered more than
1,888 civilians and committed massacre after massacre.
The military’s indiscriminate attacks and collective
punishment against civilians, including the large-scale
deliberate arson of residential towns and villages, have
displaced more than 600,000 civilians, bringing the
40/42

Ensuring accountability is one of the essential tools
that can be used by the Security Council to address the
root causes of conflicts, ensure justice and promote
sustainable peace in many situations. We have seen the
Council use that tool in conflict situations in the past to
contribute to their long-term improvement.
22-37001

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

With regard to Myanmar, the Security Council
has a decisive and impactful role to play in its future,
especially by using the proven tools at its disposal
to end impunity, address accountability for crimes
against humanity and help create an environment that
is conducive to sustainable peace and justice and to
protecting innocent civilians in the country.
We gather here today to ensure accountability
for the perpetrators of serious crimes and other gross
violations of human rights law and humanitarian law
and to provide a remedy, under international law, for
the victims in affected communities.
In conclusion, on behalf of the people of Myanmar,
I appeal for greater political resolve and unity in the
Security Council to help end the current deteriorating
coup-inflicted disaster, in synergy with other United
Nations bodies. Unified, decisive action by the Security
Council can provide life-saving deterrence against
ongoing crimes in Myanmar.
The President: Before proceeding with requests for
further statements, considering the lateness of the hour,
I would kindly ask delegations to restrict themselves to
one further statement each.
The representative of India has asked for the floor
to make a further statement.
Ms. Bhat (India): I am constrained to take the
floor again to respond to some of the falsehoods and
malicious propaganda spread by the representative of
Pakistan, as its delegation is accustomed to doing, like
a broken record.
Today we are discussing how to strengthen
accountability and justice for serious violations of
international law. The irony is perhaps lost on the
representative of Pakistan, given the country’s shameful
history of committing genocide in what was then east
Pakistan and what is now Bangladesh, more than 50 years
ago, for which there has been no acknowledgement,
much less an apology or any accountability. Innocent
women, children, academics and intellectuals were
treated as weapons of war in an act of calculated
genocide carried out by the Pakistani army in what
it called Operation Searchlight. The reign of terror
unleashed by Pakistan on the population of what was
then East Pakistan saw hundreds of thousands brutally
killed. Several thousand women were raped.
My Minister said this morning that the pursuit of
accountability and justice cannot be linked to political

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

expediency. The representative of Pakistan presented a
living example to the Security Council of how a State
continues to evade accountability for serious crimes
of genocide and ethnic cleansing. To ask Pakistan to
reflect on that is perhaps asking too much, but the
least it could do is not sully the dignity of the Security
Council. The only contribution that Pakistan can make
is to stop its support for terrorism directed against my
country and people.
The representative of Pakistan also spoke of socalled changes in the composition of the union territory of
Jammu and Kashmir. The only attempts at demographic
changes are being perpetrated by terrorists supported
by his country, who have been targeting members of
religious minorities in Jammu and Kashmir, as well as
those who refuse to toe their line. However, I want to
assure him through you, Madam President, that India
will continue to take firm and decisive steps to respond
to cross-border terrorism.
Finally, let me correct another delusional statement
by Pakistan. The union territories of Jammu and
Kashmir and Ladakh were and will always remain an
integral and inalienable part of India. That includes the
areas that are under the illegal occupation by Pakistan.
No amount of rhetoric and propaganda from any country
can deny that fact. With regard to his other remarks, we
will not dignify them with a response.
The President: The representative of China has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Li Kai (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
protests the German representative’s exploitation
of this meeting to spread lies about Xinjiang. The
representative of China already made China’s solemn
position clear in his statement this morning. We
believe that the representative of Germany should have
listened carefully to our representative’s statement. He
should not pretend to be sleeping and neither should he
obsessively make repeated mistakes.
The President: The representative of Pakistan has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I give
him the floor.
Mr. Rashid (Pakistan): In response to the statement
by the representative of India, I first want to clarify that
Jammu and Kashmir is not and never has been a part
of India. The resolutions of the Security Council itself
define it as disputed territory. That is also printed on
all official United Nations maps. Among multiple other

22-3700141/42

S/PV.9052 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

resolutions, Security Council resolution 47 (1948) clearly
states that the question of the accession of Jammu and
Kashmir to India or Pakistan should be decided through
the democratic method of a free and impartial plebiscite.
India accepted that decision and is bound to comply
with it in accordance with Article 25 of the Charter of
the United Nations. Its refusal to do so for more than
seven decades constitutes a flagrant and continuing
violation of Council resolutions and the Charter. Living
in this alternative reality, India is defying and flouting
international law by illegally occupying the state of
Jammu and Kashmir. Only an occupier would oppose
the implementation of the Security Council resolutions
I mentioned, which promise self-determination to the
people of the disputed territory.
The people of Jammu and Kashmir have still not
been able to exercise their right to self-determination,
a right that has been promised to all peoples. The state
of Jammu and Kashmir still lingers as an unfinished
and incomplete part of the agenda of decolonization.
And now, since 5 August 2019, India has been on its
way to transforming the occupied territory from a
Muslim-majority state into a Hindu territory, in a
barefaced violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention
and every norm of international law. India’s talk about
terrorism and genocide is nothing but a smokescreen
for concealing its own State terrorism against Pakistan
in occupied Jammu and Kashmir and against its own
minorities. It has instigated, sponsored and abetted
State terrorism in each of its neighbours, including my
own country.

42/42

02/06/2022

Today more than 200 million Muslims, Christians
and other minorities face blatant discrimination in India.
That is manifested in acts such as the discriminatory
citizenship laws aimed at expelling Muslims; the
storming of mosques and churches by charged mobs;
the harassing and assaulting of worshippers; and
encroachments on religious freedoms that have resulted
in bizarre policies and legislation, such as the Citizenship
Amendment Act and the recent Karnataka hijab ban.
Those are just a few examples. It is perplexing and
mind-boggling that in the presence of those examples
India is wrongly and illegally asking Pakistan to take
action on genocide, while experts and academics are
now expressing reservations about the situation of
minorities in India. Only recently Mr. Gregory Stanton
of Genocide Watch mentioned that India is one of
the countries where there is a high probability of an
impending genocide. The racist and radical ideology of
discrimination against minorities has unfortunately not
only infected the social sphere but has also seeped into
all the organs of the Indian State — the legislature, the
executive and even the judiciary.
We ask the Council to demand that India end its
State terrorism and abide by its obligations under
international law, including the implementation of the
resolutions of the Security Council.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 6.45 p.m.

22-37001
