United Nations

A/RES/59/231

General Assembly

Distr.: General
22 February 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 85 (c)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2004
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/59/483/Add.3)]

59/231. International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 44/236 of 22 December 1989, 49/22 A of 2 December
1994, 49/22 B of 20 December 1994, 53/185 of 15 December 1998, 54/219 of
22 December 1999, 56/195 of 21 December 2001, 57/256 of 20 December 2002 and
58/214 of 23 December 2003 and Economic and Social Council resolutions 1999/63
of 30 July 1999 and 2001/35 of 26 July 2001, and taking into due consideration its
resolution 57/270 B of 23 June 2003 on integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and
summits in the economic and social fields,
Recalling also the inclusion of the item entitled “Disaster management and
vulnerability” in the multi-year programme of work of the Commission on
Sustainable Development, 1
Reiterating that, although natural disasters damage the social and economic
infrastructure of all countries, the long-term consequences of natural disasters are
especially severe for developing countries and hamper the achievement of their
sustainable development,
Recognizing the urgent need to further develop and make use of the existing
scientific and technical knowledge to build resilience to natural disasters, and
emphasizing the need for developing countries to have access to technology so as to
tackle natural disasters effectively,
Expressing its deep concern at the number and scale of natural disasters and
their increasing impact within recent years, which have resulted in massive loss of
life and long-term negative social, economic and environmental consequences for
vulnerable societies throughout the world, in particular in developing countries,
Recognizing the need to continue to develop an understanding of, and to
address, socio-economic activities that exacerbate the vulnerability of societies to
natural disasters and to build and further strengthen community capability to cope
with disaster risks,
_______________
1
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 9 (E/2003/29), chap. I,
sect. A.

04-49012

A/RES/59/231

Emphasizing that disaster reduction, including reducing vulnerability to
natural disasters, is an important element that contributes to the achievement of
sustainable development,
Stressing the importance of advancing the implementation of the Plan of
Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, 2 and its relevant
provisions on vulnerability, risk assessment and disaster management,
Noting the ongoing work of all the working groups established by the InterAgency Task Force for Disaster Reduction, namely the Working Group on Climate
Change and Disaster Risk Reduction, the Working Group on Disaster Reduction in
Africa, the Working Group on Risk, Vulnerability and Disaster Impact Assessment
and the Working Group on the World Conference on Disaster Reduction,
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
1.
of the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction; 3
2.
Invites Governments and relevant international organizations to consider
disaster risk assessment as an integral component of development plans and poverty
eradication programmes;
Welcomes the work of the ongoing preparatory process for the World
3.
Conference on Disaster Reduction, to be held in Kobe, Japan, from 18 to 22 January
2005;
Notes with appreciation the generous pledge made by the Government of
4.
Japan to cover costs of the World Conference, and welcomes the voluntary
contributions already made to facilitate the participation of representatives of
developing countries, in particular the least developed countries, in that event, and
invites those States that have not yet done so to make such voluntary contributions;
Reiterates its invitation to Member States, all United Nations bodies and
5.
the specialized agencies and other relevant intergovernmental agencies and
organizations, in particular the members of the Inter-Agency Task Force for Disaster
Reduction, to participate actively in the World Conference;
Encourages major groups, as identified in Agenda 21, 4 to contribute
6.
further to and actively participate in the World Conference, according to the rules of
procedure agreed upon by its Preparatory Committee;
Stresses the importance of close cooperation and coordination between
7.
the relevant institutions, in particular within the United Nations system and with
other relevant international organizations, in both the preparation of and follow-up
to the World Conference, within their mandate and taking into account their
comparative advantages and the need to avoid any duplication of work;
Also stresses that continued cooperation and coordination among
8.
Governments, the United Nations system, other organizations, regional organizations,

_______________
2
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–
4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 2, annex.
3
A/59/228.
4
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro,
3–14 June 1992 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions
adopted by the Conference, resolution 1, annex II.

2

A/RES/59/231

non-governmental organizations and other partners, as appropriate, are considered
essential to address effectively the impact of natural disasters;
9.
Recognizes the importance of linking disaster risk management with
regional frameworks, as appropriate, such as with the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development, 5 to address issues of poverty eradication and sustainable
development;
10. Also recognizes the importance of integrating a gender perspective as
well as of engaging women in the design and implementation of all phases of
disaster management, particularly in the disaster reduction stage;
11. Stresses the importance of identifying, assessing and managing risks
prior to the occurrence of disasters, for which it is necessary to combine the efforts
at all levels of the development, humanitarian, scientific and environmental
communities, as well as the importance of integrating disaster reduction, as
appropriate, into development plans and poverty eradication programmes;
12. Also stresses the need to foster better understanding and knowledge of
the causes of disasters, as well as to build and strengthen coping capacities through,
inter alia, the transfer and exchange of experiences and technical knowledge, access
to relevant data and information and the strengthening of institutional arrangements,
including community-based organizations;
13. Recognizes the importance of early warning as an essential element of
disaster reduction, recommends the implementation of the outcome of the Second
International Conference on Early Warning, held in Bonn, Germany, from 16 to
18 October 2003, and takes note of further work done in this regard, including the
establishment of the Platform for the Promotion of Early Warning 6 in Bonn;
14. Calls upon Governments to establish national platforms or focal points
for disaster reduction, encourages the platforms to share relevant information on
standards and practices, encourages Governments to strengthen platforms where
they already exist, urges the United Nations system to provide appropriate support
for those mechanisms, and invites the Secretary-General to strengthen the regional
outreach of the inter-agency secretariat for the International Strategy for Disaster
Reduction in order to ensure such support;
15. Requests the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, in his
capacity as Chairman of the Inter-Agency Task Force for Disaster Reduction, to
continue reviewing annually the work carried out by its working groups in order to
ensure their effective contribution to the attainment of the objectives of the Strategy;
16. Expresses its appreciation to those countries that have provided financial
support for the activities of the Strategy by making voluntary contributions to the
Trust Fund for the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction;
17. Encourages the international community to provide the necessary
financial resources to the Trust Fund for the Strategy and to provide the necessary
scientific, technical, human and other resources to ensure adequate support for the
activities of the inter-agency secretariat for the Strategy and the Inter-Agency Task
Force for Disaster Reduction and its working groups;

_______________
5
6

A/57/304, annex.
A/CONF.206/PC(II)/4, para. 14 (ix).

3

A/RES/59/231

18. Requests the Secretary-General to allocate adequate financial and
administrative resources, within existing resources, for the effective functioning of
the inter-agency secretariat for the Strategy;
19. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at
its sixtieth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution, in
particular on the outcome of the World Conference on Disaster Reduction, under the
item entitled “Sustainable development”.
75th plenary meeting
22 December 2004

4
