S/PV.8018

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8018

th meeting
Thursday, 3 August 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skau
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
General issues relating to sanctions
Enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-24261 (E)
*1724261*

S/PV.8018

Enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
General issues relating to sanctions
Enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations
sanctions
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Zerihoun.
Mr. Zerihoun: I thank you, Mr. President for the
opportunity to address the Security Council on issues
related to United Nations sanctions.
This Security Council discussion on sanctions is
set against a backdrop of wide-ranging and sustained
challenges to international peace and security. New
crises are straining the collective capacity to respond,
while older conflicts are simmering, without resolution
and with the potential to reignite. It seems timely,
therefore, to take stock of the efficacy of United
Nations sanctions, as was recently done for peace
operations, peacebuilding and the women peace and
security agenda.
Just as the causes of conflicts are complex
and interlinked, the responses must be effective,
complementary and mutually reinforcing. Sanctions
are not an end in themselves. At their most effective,
sanctions should contribute to a comprehensive political
strategy, working in tandem with other Charter-based
instruments, to prevent and peacefully resolve conflicts.
Today, 13 Security Council sanctions regimes play
an enabling role in preventing conflict, countering
terrorism and constraining the proliferation of nuclear
weapons. The Council has adopted tailored and
calibrated sanctions measures to deter unconstitutional
change of government; the illicit exploitation of
natural resources, which funds the activities of armed
groups; as well as violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, in particular sexual
violence in conflict as an act of terror. Conversely,
2/18

03/08/2017

sanctions measures have been adopted to support the
implementation of peace agreements and peacebuilding
efforts. The Council’s sanctions regimes on the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant/Da’esh and Al-Qaida,
as well as the regime under resolution 1718 (2006),
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, are
central to international efforts to tackle terrorism and
proliferation, respectively. Both have been continually
adjusted to meet specific and evolving challenges, with
due regard to the impact on civilian populations.
Security Council sanctions are also a flexible
instrument, subject to regular reviews, adjustments and
terminations. In 2016, three sanctions regimes — those
concerning Iran, Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia — were
terminated. While the Council has adopted 26 sanctions
regimes since 1966, it has also terminated 15 regimes
to date. That invalidates the often-heard criticism
that the Council establishes but does not terminate its
sanctions regimes.
In its commitment to continually reviewing its
sanctions regimes, the Council has also requested the
Secretary-General to take stock of various elements
of sanctions regimes. Since 2014, the SecretaryGeneral has provided assessments to the Council
on the arms embargoes in Somalia and the Central
African Republic, as well as on the sanctions regimes
in Liberia and Guinea-Bissau. In his next report to the
Security Council on small arms and light weapons, the
Secretary-General will provide lessons learned on the
implementation of arms embargoes in field missions.
Reviews of sanctions regimes have also resulted
in strengthening responses to growing threats. Last
year, the Council adopted resolutions 2270 (2016)
and 2321 (2016), which considerably strengthened the
existing sanctions regime on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. In Libya, the Council expanded the
prohibitions on the export of petroleum products and
designation criteria were adopted this year for acts of
sexual violence in the Central African Republic, as well
as in the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/Da’esh
and Al-Qaida sanctions regime. Moreover, the Council
has combined the robust enforcement of sanctions with
due respect for human rights through the Focal Point
for Delisting in the Secretariat and the Office of the
Ombudsperson for the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant/Da’esh and Al-Qaida sanctions regime. Over the
past decade, the Council has made important strides in
its due process commitments when imposing targeted
sanctions on individuals and entities.
17-24261

03/08/2017

Enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions

Effective United Nations sanctions require
the broad-based support of Member States and the
international community at large. Even the best
designed United Nations sanctions resolutions are not
self-implementing. Member States still need to fulfil
their implementation obligations. While there may
have been different assessments of the implementation
gap of United Nations sanctions, it is undeniable
that the diversity and complexity of targeted United
Nations sanctions regimes have imposed a considerable
burden of implementation on Member States and other
implementing entities.
In order to mitigate those difficulties, the Security
Council and its sanctions committees have enhanced
outreach to Member States, especially to regional
countries affected by sanctions. Sanctions committees
routinely meet with regional countries to discuss
implementation challenges. Chairs of sanctions
committees have also held open briefings, including
for regional groups, in order to promote awareness of
Council sanctions regimes. Those are supplemented
with the travel of committee Chairs to countries and
regions impacted by sanctions. That allows for the
accrual of first-hand understanding of the effectiveness
of sanctions measures.
Furthermore, all Security Council sanctions lists
have been made available in the six official United
Nations languages, with linkages to Security CouncilINTERPOL Special Notices, where available. The
Secretariat has also been working on the implementation
of an enhanced data model of United Nations sanctions
lists in order to deepen the information base, which will
allow for more accurate screening of individuals and
entities by relevant national and international authorities.
While those are all useful means to enhance the
application of sanctions, the implementation of United
Nations sanctions is necessarily a whole-of-Government
endeavour. Member States would benefit from even
greater in-country assistance. Sanctions are adopted in
New York, but they are mainly implemented at border
crossings, ports and airports, as well as in banking and
financial institutions, bringing together a multitude of
Government institutions at various levels, as well as
the private sector. Beyond Member States, the positive
experience of Council’s partnership with INTERPOL,
especially through the use of the Special Notices, should
be applied to other important partnerships, especially
the aviation and financial sectors.

S/PV. 8018

All previous State-led reviews of United Nations
sanctions have stressed the importance of coordinated
United Nations system-wide support to sanctions
regimes. Since 2014, under the leadership of the
Department of Political Affairs, the United Nations
Inter-Agency Working Group on Sanctions, which is
comprised of 26 United Nations entities, has continued
its work to ensure system-wide support to United
Nations sanctions. The Working Group is an important
forum for promoting better understanding of United
Nations sanctions regimes, facilitating the preparation
of sanctions assessment reports, and promoting
productive interactions among United Nations entities,
sanctions committees and sanctions experts.
The Department of Political Affairs, through its
Security Council Affairs Division (SCAD), has also
continued its support to the Security Council in the
design, implementation and evaluation of United Nations
sanctions. In recent years, SCAD has further enhanced
its support to the Council, sanctions committees and
their experts on substantive, procedural and technical
issues. Sanctions workshops and regime-specific
briefings were organized for incoming members of
the Council in order to explain working methods and
procedural issues, as well as the substantive aspects
of each sanctions regime. Furthermore, advisory
support was also provided to Member States in order
to facilitate the implementation of United Nations
sanctions regimes, in particular regarding exemption
requests and implementation reports.
The Security Council Affairs Division also
plays a key role in supporting and managing the nine
sanctions monitoring groups, teams and panels, which
are comprised of 59 sanctions experts. Since 2013, the
Division has organized an annual inter-panel workshop
for all sanctions experts. Since 2015, it has organized
an investigative techniques workshop for relevant
experts, in partnership with the United Nations Office
for Internal Oversight and Audit.
The importance of our support to sanctions experts
was, tragically, brought into sharp focus with the killings
in March of Ms. Zaida Catalán and Mr. Michael Sharp,
members of the Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Even as we continue to press
for full accountability for those abhorrent crimes, we
need to also reassess the security arrangements that
govern the work of sanctions experts in order to ensure
that such crimes never happen again. In that regard, the
findings and recommendations of the board of inquiry

17-242613/18

S/PV.8018

Enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions

will be instructive. We look forward to the support
of the Security Council in the implementation of the
necessary changes that may be required.
United Nations sanctions are a formidable
instrument for global peace and security. It is important
that they continue to be deployed in tandem with other
Charter-based instruments in the service of clearly
established objectives, and with respect for due process
and human rights.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Zerihoun for his briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zerihoun for his briefing, which
has made clear that sanctions are a vital part of the
Security Council’s arsenal. As Article 41 of the United
Nations Charter makes clear, they give real effect to
our decisions, turning words spoken in this Chamber
into tangible actions against those who threaten
international peace and security.
They are not our first resort, nor are they a
measure that we can ever take lightly, but we know that
sanctions work. They helped bring peace and security
to countries like Liberia and Sierra Leone. They helped
bring Iran to the negotiating table, which led in turn to
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. And sanctions
continue to play a vital role in the fight against Da’esh
and Al-Qaida in Iraq, Syria and beyond. All of these
examples illustrate not just the efficacy of sanctions but
the importance of using them together with the other
tools at our disposal.
The Iran deal was not forged from sanctions alone.
Our victory over Da’esh will not be secured through the
hard work of the Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, alone.
Sanctions must sit alongside all our other tools: direct
political dialogue, mediation, peacekeeping and special
political missions. And just as with all other tools of
the Council, it is important that sanctions remain fit
for purpose.
So I want to thank you, Mr. President, for bringing
this issue before the Council again so that we can consider
if there are further ways to improve our collective work
on sanctions. All future work on sanctions should build
on the great deal of valuable work that has already been
4/18

03/08/2017

carried out by States and stakeholders on this issue.
In particular, I want to highlight both the work of the
United Nations informal working group from 2006 and
also the high-level review of United Nations sanctions
led by Sweden and other sponsors. They have produced
good recommendations.
But as we all know, building the political
commitment required for effective follow-up has been
challenging. This issue of political will applies above
all when it comes to the serious implementation of
sanctions. For such measures to be truly effective, it is
absolutely essential that all States implement them fully.
It is not good enough just for the majority of countries
to do so. A chain is only as strong as its weakest link.
All Member States must recognize and respect
the fact that there can be no ifs, no buts: sanctions
agreed in the Council are legally binding Chapter VII
obligations. I recognize that even when there is strong
political will, implementation can be challenging, not
just for States but also for businesses. There is already
much good work in this area: outreach from sanctions
committees, the development of networks and capacitybuilding, the sharing of information and best practices
among States. But a great deal more can still be done,
especially on the most important of sanctions dossiers,
such as North Korea, where the number of States
reporting on implementation still falls far short of what
it needs to be.
That is why, Mr. President, we welcome further
consideration of your delegation’s recent suggestion
for a Secretary-General’s report on cross-cutting
issues related to sanctions. If this report builds on the
existing work I have referred to, draws lessons from
current sanctions regimes and offers concrete practical
suggestions on how to improve implementation and
effectiveness, then we think that this could be a valuable
addition to our sanctions work, one that will help set a
clear agenda for further improvements, building on the
high-level review and other efforts.
There is, quite simply, no clearer reminder of
the need to strengthen our sanctions capability that
the current situation that we confront in relation to
North Korea. Here we face a State that continues to
act in flagrant violation of multiple Security Council
resolutions, a State that continues to threaten not just
its region but the whole world in its reckless pursuit
of nuclear weapons and illegal missiles. Their latest
ICBM launch last week suggests a capability that puts
17-24261

03/08/2017

Enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions

most Security Council members, including the United
Kingdom, within range.
I have said before in this Chamber, but it bears
repeating today, that we as the Security Council must
act and must be prepared to use sanctions to raise the
cost to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of
pursuing these illegal actions.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, let me
thank Egypt for having organized this timely meeting on
sanctions, which are an important tool under the United
Nations Charter for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
The Security Council has a long-standing history
and practice of applying sanctions. However, several
key issues need to be considered to make sanctions
relevant, such as the best means of increasing their
effectiveness by making them more carefully targeted;
ensuring their worldwide implementation in the
most efficient and balanced way; averting negative
socioeconomic and humanitarian consequences for
innocent populations and third States; and preventing
double standards in their application.
Kazakhstan supports the need for Security Council
sanctions mechanisms and the implementation of
Council sanctions that are important preventive
measures and help sustain or restore international
peace and security. In accordance with Chapter VII of
the United Nations Charter, the use of sanctions, and
the subsequent use of force, should be undertaken with
caution. They must not be seen as an early response but
rather as a last resort, after all preventive and diplomatic
means have been exhausted.
Sanctions should be designed to modify
behaviour. Wherever possible, they must be subject
to a pre-assessment on the probable impact of the
proposed sanctions from a humanitarian point of
view, as well as enforcement and efficacy. Equally
crucial is the need for monitoring and regular review,
taking full account of collateral effects. Bodies
imposing or supervising sanctions must ensure the
maximum possible transparency and accountability,
accompanied by improved working methods and
processes. Correspondingly, Secretariat budgeting and
staffing on sanctions needs to be strengthened so as
to bring about substantial improvement in means of
sanctions enforcement.

S/PV. 8018

We join others in their recommendation that the
ad hoc Informal Working Group on General Issues
of Sanctions should be strengthened. My delegation
welcomes the restructuring of the Security Council
Affairs Division team so as to meet the needs of the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011). We hope that this process will be concluded
soon in order to reinforce technical and administrative
support for the Monitoring Team and thus fulfil
that high-profile mandate in a challenging security
and political environment. Every sanction regime
is unique and carefully tailored to address specific,
clear objectives. However, there is always room for
improvement, such as disseminating the best practices
of various committees so as to enhance the overall
effectiveness of United Nations sanctions regimes.
These also can be enhanced by greater cooperation and
information-sharing.
Throughout the sanctions phase, every effort
should be made to continue with diplomacy and
mediation so as to ensure that Member States comply
with Security Council resolutions. Sanctions should
have clear, precisely defined objectives and termination
criteria, and, when these have been met, they should be
lifted. It is important for the Security Council sanctions
committees to closely cooperate and engage in dialogue
with the Member States affected and raise their
awareness regarding the reasons for and the objectives
and nature of the sanctions measures undertaken.
Lack of awareness and absence of a relationship
with the affected Member States could potentially
erode the credibility of United Nations sanctions and
result in a reluctance to implement them. We also call
for close interaction among all interested Member
States so as to influence those States and bring about
regional global compliance.
Just as vital is timely information management
and sharing among the Council, Member States,
regional or subregional bodies and technical bodies,
including INTERPOL, the International Civil
Aviation Organization, the International Air Transport
Association, the World Customs Organization and the
Financial Action Task Force, with the aim of monitoring
covert illegal operations. The role of the private sector
is critical to uphold norms so that some entities do not
become illegal trading or export or import partners

17-242615/18

S/PV.8018

Enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions

with countries under sanctions regimes. We also call for
greater vigilance by chambers of commerce working as
key partners with all actors involved in this complex
and wide-ranging stakeholder arrangement.
Capacity-building for Member States that are at
various stages of the economic continuum is necessary.
States must be helped to understand and upgrade their
legal procedures and enact new domestic legislation
in keeping with United Nations standards. Similarly,
assistance in technical guidance and the provision of
equipment and scientific tools are necessary to detect
the inflow and outflow of money and goods that
constitute sanctions violations.
To conclude, Kazakhstan, as the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al Qa’ida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) and the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea will strive, as
part of the larger multilateral effort, to enhance United
Nations sanctions regimes as tools for promoting
regional and global peace and security.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Egypt for having its initiative to convene today’s
meeting. I would like to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Zerihoun for his briefing.
Under the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, sanctions measures, as one of the peaceful
means of conflict resolution, play a positive role in
maintaining international peace and security. Over the
years, the Security Council has established multiple
sanctions regimes to address conflict situations. Some
of those regimes have served their purpose and have
been lifted. At the same time, some sanctions regimes
have problems and require careful consideration by the
Security Council in order to improve them effectively.
We must pay particular attention to the following
aspects.
First, the use of sanctions by the Security Council
must be in full keeping with the provisions of the
United Nations Charter. There must be prudence and
responsibility when employing sanctions. As a matter of
priority, the Security Council should use non-coercive
means, such as negotiations, mediation and good
offices to respond to the threats to international peace
and security. The imposition of sanctions should be
predicated upon the exhaustion of non-coercive means.
6/18

03/08/2017

Sanctions are peaceful means and should therefore be
implemented in a peaceful manner, rather than being
imposed through the use of force.
Secondly, the Security Council’s decision to impose
sanctions must be part of an overall political settlement
package. Sanctions are not the end in themselves.
Sanctions alone cannot resolve issues. The fundamental
way out is through the use of political and diplomatic
means, such as dialogue and negotiation. In quite a few
cases, the weak link in the solution lies not with the level
of sanctions implementation, but rather with the lack of
progress in the political track. The Security Council’s
decision on the overall political package should be
advanced holistically. The implementation of Security
Council resolutions should not be selective. The use
of sanctions measures by the Security Council should
serve the overall purpose of the political process. It
should be conducive to the mediation and good offices
efforts by the relevant countries, regional organizations
and the United Nations, thereby truly helping to ease
the situation on the ground and reach solutions.
Thirdly, the Security Council should enhance
the relevance of sanctions in order to avoid negative
consequences. The Council should determinedly focus
on the key aspects of issues at hand and be prudent
when considering the measures and scope of sanctions.
Sanctions should serve the purpose of conflict resolution.
To the greatest extent possible, sanctions measures
should have a low negative impact on the general
population and third countries. In addition, sanctions
measures should not affect the normal legal trade and
economic relations of the sanctioned countries nor
people’s livelihoods and the humanitarian situation in
the countries concerned. As the situation on the ground
and the resolution process evolve, the Security Council
should conduct timely evaluations and assessments of
the sanctions measures and, as needed, adjust, suspend
and, ultimately, terminate them.
Imposing sanctions is a very important decision.
It should be done properly and strictly in line with
decisions taken by the Security Council so as to avoid
any attempt outside the framework of the Security
Council to impose unilateral sanctions or wilfully
expand their scope. As a permanent member of the
Security Council, China will continue to maintain its
prudent and responsible approach in addressing the
issue of sanctions so as to ensure that the sanctions
measures decided by the Security Council will serve
the ultimate purpose of the political process and be
17-24261

03/08/2017

Enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions

subject to it, in order for it to play its part in maintaining
international peace and security in a constructive and
positive manner.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We express appreciation to
the Egyptian presidency for organizing today’s briefing
on enhancing the effectiveness of sanctions, building
on the Arria-formula meeting held last month.
We thank the Assistant Secretary-General,
Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, for his very useful briefing.
As defined in the Charter of the United Nations and
as colleagues have indicated, sanctions are one of the
important tools at the disposal of the Security Council
for the promotion and maintenance of international
peace and security. As Assistant Secretary-General
Zerihoun stated and as is also self-evident, sanctions
are not an end in themselves. They are and should be
part of a broader political strategy, aimed at preventing,
managing and resolving conflicts. Without them, they
cannot achieve the desired results.
We recognize that sanctions have evolved
significantly over time. The way that the Security
Council uses sanctions has changed from its earlier
practice of imposing comprehensive sanctions to its
contemporary practice of applying targeted measures.
That is an important development, which would make the
sanctions regime more effective and, most importantly,
provide a mechanism to address the unintended and
adverse effects of comprehensive sanctions. If used
appropriately and in a targeted manner, we believe
that sanctions have the potential to exert pressure on
specific individuals or entities whose behaviour the
Council is seeking to influence.
We understand that important work has been done
in the past to review the efficacy of sanctions, following
the Council’s willingness, as shown in practice, to make
use of targeted sanctions more often and apply them to
a broader range of activities and more diverse kinds of
threats to international peace and security. We thank
the presidency for taking up this subject matter and its
effort to build on this important work. We agree that
sanctions should be carefully designed and implemented
to include clear objectives, as well as a defined scope
and to periodically review the progress made against
their objectives. More often than not, discussions tend
to be polarized with arguments in favour of or against
the application of sanctions in general terms. We do not
believe that that will help to make progress in enhancing
the effectiveness of sanctions.

S/PV. 8018

In our opinion, perhaps a better approach to
achieving the desired objective would be to look at
the merit of each case and its specific context. We
recognize that sanctions are not meant to stay in place
forever. If the situation warrants the modification or
lifting of a sanction, the Council should not hesitate
to take appropriate measures accordingly. However,
specific situations may also require that sanctions be
strengthened, and the Council should not shy away
from that. Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun
mentioned instances where that has happened. What
really matters is the reality on the ground, and the
importance of ensuring that the Council uses its tools
effectively so as to induce changes in behaviour. That
underscores the need for realism and pragmatism in
dealing with various situations. We are opposed to
politicizing sanctions and allowing double standards
in their design and implementation. Nonetheless,
we do not think that that should lead us to reject
the use of sanctions as a tool. Rather, we should
avoid politicization and double standards and apply
sanctions judiciously, when appropriate, and based
on the merits of the case. Moreover, the Council and
Member States’ level of enthusiasm and determination
for implementing sanctions should not differ from one
sanction regime to another. That is another reason why
we should continually review the way the Council uses
and implements this tool, and draw valuable lessons for
improving sanctions’ application and implementation.
Lastly, the important role that regional and
subregional organizations play in improving the design
and effective implementation of sanctions regimes
cannot be overlooked. Coordinating efforts with regional
and subregional organizations and mechanisms is very
important for the effectiveness of sanctions regimes. If
we look at the Constitutive Act of the African Union,
it has a much more progressive stance on the issue, and
it is one reason why we urge the Council to further
enhance its cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, including on the issue under discussion.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Egyptian delegation
for organizing today’s meeting and for the briefing
by Mr. Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs.
Sanctions are one of the most important instruments
in the Security Council’s toolbox. However, political
practice has shown that restrictive measures cannot
be an end in themselves. Their job is to assist in the

17-242617/18

S/PV.8018

Enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions

03/08/2017

achievement of political and diplomatic solutions to
conflict situations, and the Council alone has the right
to impose and use them in support of the clear and
legitimate goals that are enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.

undermine political and diplomatic efforts to resolve
crises, run counter to efforts to strengthen international
cooperation, violate States’ sovereignty and legitimate
interests and have nothing to do with the concerns of a
global Organization.

We recognize the importance of improving
sanctions. We believe they should be limited in
duration, subject to regular review and have clear
criteria for being phased out. It is important to ensure
that they focus on those who are genuinely responsible
for instigating crises. They should not harm civilians or
socioeconomic development, which is why it is essential
to study the situation carefully before introducing
them. Using restrictive measures to overthrow
objectionable regimes, including through economic
strangulation or by influencing their circumstances, is
unacceptable. We believe that the wilful interpretation
of sanctions decisions is illegitimate. Experience has
shown that it is liable to increase chaos and worsen
civilian populations’ suffering. It is also important to
ensure that sanctions texts do not depart from generally
recognized international legal standards. Sanctions
should never be wielded as a club against diplomatic
and consular representatives, whose activities have
been seriously complicated by expanded interpretations
of existing restrictions, constituting a violation of the
Vienna Conventions.

We are ready to continue constructive discussion
of the issue of improving sanctions mechanisms. In
that context, we believe it would be useful to return to
the results of the Council’s Informal Working Group
on General Issues of Sanctions. Its achievements,
including a final report (S/2006/997), made a significant
contribution to improving the effectiveness of the work
of the relevant Committees. Many of them could be
adapted to current realities.

With regard to the work of the Security Council
Sanctions Committees, I would like to emphasize that
any infringement on their prerogatives should not
tolerated. In particular, we see no need for duplicating
their powers by adding bureaucratic superstructures,
including working groups. Every sanctions regime
is individual and unique by definition, and what is
useful for some issues can be counterproductive
for others. It is important to emphasize that as an
intergovernmental organization, the United Nations
should reserve the prerogative of decision-making
for Member States. In that context, we are wary of
the idea of introducing supporters of stakeholders
into the decision-making chain. It is no secret that
they may be fronting for influence groups interested
in a particular outcome, not to mention the fact that
most of the Sanctions Committees have their own
monitoring groups providing independent evaluations
and recommendations. It is regrettable that the use of
unilateral restrictions, often on top of Security Council
decisions, is becoming the norm today. That frequently
implies unfair economic competition. Such policies
8/18

Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank the
Egyptian presidency for organizing today’s meeting
and Assistant Secretary- General Zerihoun for his
thorough briefing.
For more than 50 years now, the prohibitions and
restrictions imposed by the Security Council have been
recognized as the most powerful non-military response
to threats to global peace and security that we have.
We share the view that sanctions continue to be an
important tool for countering terrorism, preventing
conflicts, consolidating peace agreements, protecting
civilians and curbing the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. Furthermore, the current practice
of introducing more precise and targeted sanctions is
aimed at striking a balance between the desired result
and any possible unintended or adverse socioeconomic
and humanitarian consequences in specific States or
third States. Significant progress has also been made
in designing and monitoring the implementation of
sanctions regimes since April 2000, when the Council’s
Informal Working Group on General Issues of Sanctions
was first established. Another successful step has been
the establishment of expert panels to assist the relevant
Security Council Committees, while the introduction
of an entirely new institution — the Office of the
Ombudsperson of the Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities — is a
notable leap forward in ensuring that sanctions meet
human rights standards.
The processes of designing, implementing,
evaluating and following up sanctions, as well as of the
relevant Committees’ working methods, monitoring
17-24261

03/08/2017

Enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions

and enforcement, are closely interlinked and mutually
reinforcing. At the same time, we have to recognize
that the Council’s sustained attention is needed not
only for developments in the design of sanctions and
calibration of their nature and scope, but also for the
issue of enhancing their effectiveness and efficiency.
That clearly depends largely on Member States’ prompt,
comprehensive implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
We see two major challenges in making United
Nations sanctions more efficient. The first — and
here we echo the comments of the delegation of the
United Kingdom — is a lack of political will, which
prevents the Council from responding promptly and
decisively to grave violations of international law. The
second is outright obstruction or evasion of existing
sanctions. While the lack of political will and abuses
of the right to the veto should be the subject of a
separate debate, I would like to recall that paragraph
5 of Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations
states, among other things, that Member States shall
refrain from giving assistance to any State against
which the United Nations is taking preventive or
enforcement action. In that respect, Security Council
should explore ways to further strengthen the roles of
the respective Committees in identifying possible cases
of non-compliance and determining the appropriate
course of action with regard to those who violate the
relevant international obligations.
Outreach activities, including awareness-raising
and dialogue with the relevant international and
regional organizations, as well as the effective means of
enforcing sanctions, are seen as important elements in
curbing, eliminating and further preventing sanctions’
evasion. At the same time, assistance to States in
implementing United Nations sanctions is an area in
which, in our view, more can and should be done to
increase the effect of decisions made by the Council.
Let me also stress in that connection the important
role played by various international organizations in
implementing sanction regimes to respond to breaches
of peace and other grave violations of international
law. The use of additional measures and their own
specific instruments for better targeting international
wrongdoing is an essential part of the international
toolbox in that area. The efforts of the European Union
should be seen as an example of a consistent and coherent
sanctions policy firmly rooted in international law.

S/PV. 8018

Ukraine is among those countries that fully
recognize the importance of undertaking continuous
efforts, including periodic reviews, to further improve
the proper design, implementation, evaluation and
follow-up of sanctions regimes and to increase the
effectiveness of targeted sanctions. To that end,
we are in favour of further endeavours, including
relevant reports of the Secretary-General, aimed at the
independent review of cross-cutting issues and trends
in the application of sanctions and the best practices
and challenges relating to their implementation, as well
as preparing recommendations, including with regard
to practical options to better support Member States’
capacities in that area.
I should like to conclude by citing Jan Eliasson:
“[S]anctions can work — when they are designed
and implemented well and when they enjoy the
support of Member States on and outside the
Security Council.” (DSG/SM/777)
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
Bolivia expresses its appreciation for the briefing given
by Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs. My delegation also
welcomes the initiative of Egypt in organizing today’s
informative meeting, highlighting a very important
and sensitive issue that affects the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Our Organization is based on the values of
​​
multilateralism, and it is precisely through those values
that the United Nations, as a multilateral system,
depends on the legitimacy and international legality that
allow it to address global problems and conflicts and,
at the same time, to respond to threats to international
peace and security through, inter alia, the imposition
of sanctions. Under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, sanctions must be considered only
when all other means of peacefully settling disputes set
forth in Chapter VI of the Charter have been exhausted
and only after their short-term and long-term effects
have been evaluated in detail. In that vein, sanctions
must not be an end in themselves. They must be used
as a measure of last resort in the event of a breach of
the provisional measures established under the Charter,
and must be imposed only when there is a clear threat
to international peace and security, the breach thereof
or an impending act of aggression.
Currently, we are witnessing a dangerous trend
towards the proliferation of the application and

17-242619/18

S/PV.8018

Enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions

imposition of unilateral sanctions. The Plurinational
State of Bolivia categorically rejects the implementation
of such measures because they represent a flagrant
violation of multilateralism and a serious threat to the
international order, and constitute illegal measures that
impose the jurisdiction and internal legislation of one
State over another, thereby violating the principles of
equality, sovereignty and the territorial integrity of the
States. Such actions are not only illegal — constituting,
as I said, an imposition of one State’s domestic law on
another’s and upon the international order — but also
constitute actions that usurp the functions of legal
bodies, such as the Security Council, which is the only
international legal body that can impose sanctions on
States and non-State actors within the framework of
the Charter. Accordingly, we reiterate that any measure
adopted unilaterally by one State to the detriment of
another through the use of force or any other coercive
measures is outside the framework of the Security
Council and therefore illegal and contrary to the
principles and purposes of the Charter.
We believe that, when the imposition of sanctions
is to be considered, the right to due process and
respect for international law must be taken into
account, which, through official and reliable sources of
information, helps to clearly establish the situation in
a given national context that might represent a threat
to international peace and security, while at all times
observing the principle of the non-use of force and
the peaceful settlement of disputes before resorting to
measures that warrant the application of Chapter VII of
the Charter. The design and development of sanctions
must be governed by fair and transparent procedures
that help to clearly identify the conditions demanded
of States or parties upon which sanctions have been
imposed, with a periodic review of those measures to
assess their effects and modify them as needed with
respect to developments.
We believe that the imposition of sanctions must
not affect the development of States subject to such
measures, and in all cases must be implemented with
a view to minimizing the impact on and possible
humanitarian cost for the civilian population affected
by the implementation of such measures.
Those issues were addressed at the World Summit
held during the sixtieth session of the General
Assembly, on 24 October 2005, at which it was
reiterated that sanctions must be selective and have
clear goals, thereby ensuring that their implementation
10/18

03/08/2017

strikes a balance between their effectiveness in
achieving the desired outcomes and their potentially
negative consequences, including socioeconomic and
humanitarian consequences involving the population
and third States. That was in line with the final
document of the seventeenth Summit of Heads of State
and Government of the Non-Aligned Movement held in
Isla Margarita in 2016, which states:
(spoke in English)
“The objectives of sanctions are not to punish or
otherwise exact retribution on the populace. In this
regard, the objectives of sanctions regimes should
be clearly defined, and that its imposition should be
for a specified time frame and be based on tenable
legal grounds, and that it should be lifted as soon
as the objectives are achieved. The conditions
demanded of the State or party on which sanctions
are imposed should be clearly defined and subject
to periodic review. Sanctions should be imposed
only when there exists a threat to international
peace and security or an act of aggression, in
accordance with the Charter, and that it is not
applicable “preventively” in instances of mere
violation of international law, norms or standards.
Targeted sanctions may be a better alternative so
long as the population of targeted State concerned
is not victimised whether directly or indirectly”.
(spoke in Spanish)
Lastly, we believe that it is necessary to
develop a process for evaluating the methodology,
implementation, impact and modification of sanctions
imposed by the Security Council, which must carry
out that task so as to improve the desired results
with the ultimate goal being, at all times, to ensure
that international peace and security prevail. Bolivia
supports the preparation by the Secretary-General of
a report on the impact of sanctions, which should also
cover the impact of unilateral sanctions on international
law and international peace and security. We recall that
the sanctions that the Security Council imposes are
under no circumstances the foundation on which more
sanctions can be added. Rather they constitute the
ceiling or limit that is legally and legitimately agreed
within the framework of the Charter.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
should also like to thank the Egyptian delegation for
convening today’s meeting, as well as the Assistant
17-24261

03/08/2017

Enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions

Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. TayéBrook Zerihoun, for his briefing today.
For Uruguay, it is important that the Security
Council work to improve the effectiveness of United
Nations sanctions. In that regard, the ongoing analysis
of sanctions regimes is a necessary exercise of systemic
importance aimed at reviewing the efficiency and the
effectiveness of any tool that the Security Council has
at its disposal for the maintenance of international
peace and security. In that regard, we also recognize
the value of the contributions that Member States
often make, including the high-level review that was
undertaken several years ago under the auspices of
Germany, Australia, Finland, Greece and Sweden
(see S/2015/432). That review was an important task
that could be continued in order improve the design of
Security Council sanctions regimes.
I would like to focus my statement on one
fundamental area: the need for sanctions regimes to
be effective, with effectiveness meaning the complete
achievement of the goal of the sanctions. Each of the
sanctions regimes should be conceived as a tool that
allows the Security Council to achieve a goal. In order
to be effective, that tool must complement other tools,
such as mediation and dialogue. At the same time, I
would like, on that point, to mention the importance
of naming specific objectives when designing sanctions
regimes, objectives that, once achieved, will serve as the
basis for lifting those sanctions. Generally, the Council
imposes sanctions without establishing the conditions
under which they may be lifted. No specific goals are
set out, and there is a lack of guarantees for those who
are the object of the sanctions. In turn, individuals,
entities or States subject to sanctions do not know if at
any given time they can be absolved and, if that were
to happen, under what conditions. Moreover, sanctions
should be designed in such a way as to minimize
the adverse effects on the civilian population. The
periodic review and improvement of the initial design
of sanctions regimes, for which specific commitments
have been set out, are therefore crucial.
Secondly, Uruguay recognizes the suitability of
a comprehensive sanctions review, similar to those
conducted on the peacebuilding architecture, on
peacekeeping operations, and on women and peace
and security.
I wish to mention the importance of cooperation
for the effective implementation of all sanctions-regime

S/PV. 8018

provisions. It would be useful for the information
collected by a group of experts to be made available
to other groups of experts, if they are considered to be
of relevance. We would also point out the necessity of
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and other institutions, such as INTERPOL or the
regional or international financial institutions.
It is also appropriate to highlight the importance
of cooperation between States for the effective
implementation of sanctions regimes. For that level
of cooperation to be viable, two variables come into
play: the capacities of States and their political will.
Frequently, the effective implementation of sanctions
regimes requires an infrastructure and logistical
capacities that are often lacking in developing
countries. That may include software, intelligence,
data cross-referencing, cutting-edge technology, etc.
That sort of lack directly affects the implementation
of the provisions of the various sanctions regimes and
undermines their legitimacy.
In conclusion, I wish to recall the importance
of systematic political commitment to the correct
implementation and design of sanctions regimes, which
are always understood as a means or tool of the Security
Council aimed at achieving an ultimate goal.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I should like to thank the Egyptian presidency
of the Security Council for organizing this important
meeting, as well as the Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, for his
very informative briefing.
With 13 active sanctions regimes, sanctions
have become a crucial tool available to the Security
Council. Although they are never an end in themselves,
sanctions can be an essential instrument for preserving
international peace and security in two ways.
The first is by targeting terrorist groups or
individuals. Collectively, the sanctions regime against
Al-Qaida and Da’esh represents more than half of the
entities and individuals sanctioned by the Security
Council today.
The second way is by intervening in support of
States weakened by insecurity, the presence of armed
groups in their territory, deficiencies in the political
process, the prevalence of weapons, or human rights
violations, factors that have triggered the majority of
the Security Council sanctions regimes.

17-2426111/18

S/PV.8018

Enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions

Sanctions regimes can make a significant
contribution to advancing a political process. The
adoption of targeted measures against individuals or
entities impeding the peace process is an important
lever for stopping such behaviour or for weakening
those who do so. That was particularly the case in Côte
d’Ivoire at the height of the post-election crisis there.
In Somalia, the embargo on charcoal undermines one
of Al-Shabaab’s sources of funding. These are just a
few examples.
Implemented
in
the
1990s,
sometimes
indiscriminately, sanctions regimes have since
undergone considerable change, taking into account both
the humanitarian needs and the rights of individuals. In
its practice, the Council has ensured that such schemes
have been targeted as precisely as possible to reach
the persons, entities or sectors that directly affect
the stability of States, and that such schemes have no
negative consequences for the population. No one can
say in good faith that, in a context of active armed
conflict and large-scale violence against civilians, an
arms embargo is a measure that would negatively affect
the population.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
example, it was possible to adapt the sanctions regime
to changing circumstances. Introduced in 2003, the
arms embargo there has been continually adjusted.
Since 2008, it has only targeted non-State entities.
Individual sanctions against armed groups have also
had to be adapted to developments in the situation.
France also attaches great importance to
strengthening respect for the rules for a fair hearing
with regard to sanctions decided by the Council.
Considerable progress has been made in that area, with
the creation of a focal-point mechanism and, above all,
the Office of the Ombudsperson in 2009. In that respect,
France wishes to recall the importance of ensuring a
rapid and effective transition following the departure of
Ms. Marchi-Uhel, who is to take on other functions. It
is essential that we continue to improve the functioning
and transparency of sanctions regimes.
It is also essential that sanctions and embargoes,
whether targeting arms or other products, be fully
respected and implemented by all actors present in the
territory to which they apply. There are often exemption
mechanisms that provide flexibility for specific cases. It
is necessary to remind and educate everyone of the need
to respect the procedures laid down for that purpose.
12/18

03/08/2017

France will, of course, continue to fully play its
part in such efforts.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank the Egyptian presidency
for the opportunity to discuss a particularly important
issue in the context of the maintenance of international
peace and security.
The interest of the subject that brings us together
today, namely, sanctions as measures decided on by the
Security Council that do not involve the use of force,
is that it highlights a central element of our collective
action aimed at achieving our common goal of peace and
security for all, as set out in the Charter of the United
Nations, namely, the maintenance of international
peace and security.
As highlighted by the High-level Review of United
Nations Sanctions and the subsequent Compendium
issued in June 2015 (S/2015/432), sanctions form an
important tool for maintaining collective security and,
as such, have been used with increasing regularity in
order to deal with various increasingly complex threats
to international peace and security, such as terrorism, the
proliferation of nuclear weapons, violations of human
rights and the illegal exploitation of natural resources.
It is, therefore, understandable that the design,
implementation and scope of such measures should
be the subject of a common understanding, mutual
reinforcement and equal commitment by all the parties
concerned, in particular all of the entities of the United
Nations system. It is in that spirit that the 2005 World
Summit Outcome recalls that we must
“ensure that sanctions are implemented in ways
that balance effectiveness to achieve the desired
results against the possible adverse consequences,
including socioeconomic and humanitarian
consequences, for populations and third States.”
(General Assembly resolution 60/1, para.106)
It is now recognized that United Nations sanctions
have evolved significantly over the years. They tend
to be more clever, more intelligent and more adapted
to the situations to which they apply. Experience has
shown, however, that their effectiveness and positive
contribution to the improvement of given situations
depend to a large extent on the transparency and clarity
of their purpose and the objectives that the sanctions
hope to achieve, as well as on the adherence of the
different parties. Additionally, the effectiveness of
17-24261

03/08/2017

Enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions

sanctions depends especially on the consistency of the
sanctions concerned with other measures or actions
carried out by the United Nations with their partners,
in particular regional and national partners, in response
to the given problem or situation.
The issue of the effectiveness of sanctions can
be approached from various angles — notably angles
related to their legitimacy and their timeliness, the
political will of the actors in charge of their application
and their adaptation to specific situations and to the
various methods of the Council or its various sanctions
committees used to monitor the development and
implementation of the regimes established. However,
my delegation would like to highlight some aspects that
we consider to be essential for the effectiveness and
efficiency of sanctions regimes.
The challenge is, first and foremost, to address
the challenge of consistency with other United
Nations responses and actions, as advocated by the
aforementioned High-level Review, which indicates
that the integration of sanctions in other United Nations
interventions is essential for identifying synergies,
preventing incompatible actions and enhancing the
overall effectiveness of the collective security system.
Given the increasing importance of the regional
dimension in the system of collective peace and
security, we believe that the second challenge is to
place greater emphasis on the synergy of the efforts of
regional, sub-regional and international actors with the
policies and actions of the United Nations. Indeed, in
most of the regimes in effect, cooperation between the
sanctions committees and the countries in the region has
proved to be an essential element of the effectiveness of
the measures adopted.
Finally, we believe that in a context characterized
by the growth of the Internet and digital technologies,
coupled with the growing complexity of the financial
environment — a context in which the free movement
of people and goods is developing — capacity-building
is a crucial dimension of international cooperation. The
level of the capacities of the countries and institutions
involved in the implementation of sanctions is decisive,
if one bears in mind that most sanctions regimes relate
to developing countries.
It is therefore important to pay particular attention
to those developing countries that fully understand that
in an international environment where emerging threats
are transnational challenges, those countries cannot

S/PV. 8018

be the weak links in the collective security system. It
should be noted, for example, that the same national
systems for combating illegal financial transactions or
the financing of terrorism can also detect assets from
individuals or entities subject to sanctions and can
allow countries to act accordingly. In most developing
countries, therefore, such technical assistance is
necessary in order to ensure an adequate flow of
information, harmonize actions between the competent
services of the State and integrate aspects relating to
sanctions into the domestic judicial systems of States.
I cannot end my remarks without raising the
issue of natural resources, which are increasingly
being addressed by sanctions regimes, particularly
in the context of African countries. The challenge
for sanctions regimes in the area of natural resources
is to thwart the exploitation of natural resources by
the entities or individuals targeted so as to prevent
them from benefiting from such resources without
impinging on legal activities and the rights that the
countries and regions concerned have over their own
natural resources.
Once again, it is through the strengthening
of dialogue and cooperation between the Security
Council and its sanctions committees, on the one
hand, and the countries and regions concerned, on the
other, that sanctions on natural resources can become
more effective and legitimate. That takes place by
strengthening the national economies of the countries
in question and ensuring that those natural resources
are preserved for development and not used as a source
of conflict and instability.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun for
his briefing.
We welcome the opportunity to highlight the
importance and potential of sanctions, which comprise
one of the few non-violent tools that the Council has to
protect international peace and security. Someone once
said that patience is the art of concealing impatience.
There are times when I think that the saying can be
very appropriately applied to the United States. We
feel strongly about our principles and our sovereignty
because they come from us, the people. When we see a
threat to our national security or when we see violations
of human dignity, we want to act sooner rather than
later. Most often we stifle that urge and show patience.
However, beneath our patience is a fundamental

17-2426113/18

S/PV.8018

Enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions

03/08/2017

unwillingness to passively accept insecurity and
injustice. Sanctions require us to be patient, but
imposing sanctions is one of the most important things
that the United Nations can do.

follow up, nothing changes. The United States prefers
to impose sanctions through the Security Council.
Security Council-imposed sanctions have or should
have universal reach. They represent our political unity.

When they are formulated with wide participation
and implemented swiftly and consistently, multilateral
sanctions are effective. An excellent example is the
sanctions that the Council recently strengthened against
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida and
their affiliated groups. The United States and Russia
worked together in formulating these sanctions and in
making sure that they are adapted to the latest terrorist
threat. To ensure that these sanctions are implemented
fully and fairly, the resolution reaffirmed our support
for the Monitoring Team. The vote approving them was
unanimous, and, because the Security Council spoke
with one voice, these sanctions are showing results.
The flow of funds and other support to these terrorist
groups has been reduced.

But when the Council fails to act, the United States
is not going to wait. When the Council closes its eyes
to repeated violations of its sanctions resolutions, the
United States begins to lose patience. The United States
will act to address threats to our security. We will act to
defend universal human rights.

By the same token, when sanctions lack wide
support and when they lack enforcement, they are
meaningless. Worse than meaningless, they degrade
the credibility and effectiveness of the Council. Not
only do they fail to stop the threat they are supposed to
address, they make the next threat to peace and security
more likely. What could be the argument against seeing
that sanctions, once imposed, are enforced?

Mr. Lambertini (Italy): At the outset, I wish to thank
the Egyptian presidency for having convened today’s
meeting and Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun for
his very considered and illuminating briefing.

And yet the Council has been unable to come
together to agree on routine reporting on sanctions. Even
agreeing on a format to discuss cross-cutting sanctions
issues seems to be beyond our capability. When it does
this, the Council shoots itself in the foot. It takes away
from itself one of the best tools to achieve what we are
all supposed to be here to achieve: peace, security and
respect for human rights. If widespread support and
strict enforcement is the way to do sanctions right, the
way to do them wrong is unfolding right in front of us.
When a State Member of the United Nations is
subject to multiple Security Council resolutions and we
allow it to violate these resolutions with impunity, it
will not change its behaviour. When States Members
of the United Nations do not comply with the sanctions
levelled against an aggressor, the Council’s threats
become hollow. When States Members of the United
Nations violate human rights and crack down on their
own people for exercising their God-given freedoms
and the Council says nothing, it loses credibility. When
the Council threatens again and again but refuses to
14/18

From Venezuela to Zimbabwe and from the situation
in Crimea to the war crimes in Syria, we will do what
we have to do to defend ourselves, our allies and our
values. That is the inevitable choice of a nation facing a
dire threat. It is the promise of a people no longer able
to conceal their impatience. And it is my great hope
that my country and the Council will continue to work
together so that we never reach this point.

As the Council and the whole of the United Nations
are reviewing the tools at their disposal to maintain or
restore international peace and security, my delegation
believes that it is important to also assess and review
all measures that do not involve the use of force, such
as sanctions, and work on actions that can be taken to
further improve their elaboration and implementation.
It is also important that we do so with an open and
balanced view so as to actually improve the use of these
important tools by the Council.
Over the years the Security Council has shifted
from comprehensive and stand-alone measures to
combining smart and targeted measures aimed at
the decision-making elites and targeted individuals
while avoiding harm to the general population. These
represent an improvement of the measures decided by
the Council and key aspects to build upon.
The evolution of Security Council measures have
included the establishment of panels of experts and
monitoring teams to ensure improved implementation
of our decisions. In addition, peacekeeping or mission
mandates have been looked at so as to ensure that
they take into account the effective implementation of
Security Council sanctions.
17-24261

03/08/2017

Enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions

But more needs to be done in this area. For instance, it
will be important to further advance with respect to due
process, guaranteeing listing and delisting procedures
for targeted measures. At the same time, it will be
important to also include in the reporting a gender and
women’s rights analysis, including with respect to the
impact of sanctions and a counterterrorism strategy.
If we agree that further progress is needed, then
an ongoing assessment and review of Security Council
measures becomes essential. Such periodic assessment
needs to determine whether the implementation of
sanctions regimes continues to be coherent with the
objectives set by the Council. Sanctions are not an end
in themselves and should be integrated into a wider
political strategy. Furthermore, despite the name,
they must be intended not as punitive, but rather as a
useful tool to support the political process and lead the
targeted entities and persons to the path of dialogue
and negotiation. We have clear examples of sanction
regimes contributing to this end.
The need to ensure coherence between the end
and the means and verification on an ongoing basis are
important. Establishing or strengthening a mechanism
for periodic review could help the Council to adjust its
course of action. Such a review process should have a
twofold impact: first, on sanctions design, and secondly,
on their implementation.
Inputs from Member States, including targeted
entities and persons, should help the Council to adjust
both current and future restrictive measures for the
sake of improving their effectiveness and averting
unintended consequences, in particular for the
civilian population.
On the implementation side, sanctions committees
play an essential role. Also building on our experience
as Chair of a Committee, we are convinced that there
is a need for constant, sustained and effective dialogue
with Member States. The Committee must provide
clarity as to the overall framework for the measures
and offer guidance both through general guidelines
and on a case-by-case basis. In this regard, the role
of the Secretariat may prove crucial, as the process of
maintaining strict coordination with the Committee
Chair could be strengthened.
The Committees should consider greater
engagement in outreach activities to illustrate
Council measures, thus fostering proper and better
implementation, and to provide Member States with

S/PV. 8018

a platform to exchange views and receive feedback on
these measures.
The same should apply to monitoring teams, expert
groups and panels of experts. They should be encouraged
to have more genuine and transparent interactions
with Member States, more informal opportunities for
dialogue and open doors vis-à-vis the Member States.
To sum up, from our point of view what is needed
is: first, clarity as to what Member States are asked
to do; secondly, guidance and assistance with respect
to any issues Member States may raise on sanction
implementation; and, thirdly, constant outreach to
and dialogue with the membership to improve both
the design and the implementation of sanctions. Any
review and potential reform of the sanctions system
should ensure an appropriate balance between greater
coherence and uniformity and the need to take into
account the specificities of each situation in which the
Council intervenes.
To conclude, I would like to touch on a more
general point: cross-cutting issues, including sanctions,
justice and accountability, the protection of civilians,
and women and children, call for coherence in
Security Council action. If the Council is perceived
as lacking coherence in its proceedings, there will be
issues in terms of legitimacy and acceptance of the
measures adopted, the spillover consequences of the
implementation of such measures.
As the Council is aware, we have been awaiting the
broadening of the work of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals so as to make it become an
informal working group on justice and accountability
in situations of conflict. Were we to follow a similar
approach with the issue of sanctions, Italy would focus
its attention on issues of implementation, on including all
relevant actors and on the overarching goal of providing
constructive contributions to sanctions design.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I, too, would like to
thank Egypt for having organized today’s briefing on
this important topic and Assistant Secretary-General
Zerihoun for his valuable presentation this morning.
In the mid-1980s, Sweden introduced economic
sanctions against the apartheid regime of South Africa.
Those sanctions were essentially unilateral in nature
but had strong political symbolism. Since then, Sweden
has been engaged in processes aimed at making
sanctions more effective and transparent, including,

17-2426115/18

S/PV.8018

Enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions

most recently, the High-level Review of United Nations
Sanctions (see S/2015/432). Existing efforts, such as
the High-level Review with its 150 recommendations,
remain relevant and should be followed up on so as
to improve the implementation and effectiveness of
United Nations sanctions.
Sanctions can be described as an effective measure
between words and war. We believe that United
Nations sanctions, when properly applied and well
calibrated within a broader political strategy, can
serve as a versatile tool for responding to security
challenges. That is why we have supported the effective
implementation of current sanctions on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and support swift additional
measures in view of the recent violations, while at the
same time underlining that creative diplomatic efforts
and dialogue are urgently needed, in parallel, so as to
find a peaceful, diplomatic and comprehensive solution.
The legal basis for United Nations sanctions
derives from the Charter of the United Nations. The
sanctions instrument has evolved over time. Over the
past quarter of a century, the Security Council has
deployed sanctions with increasing regularity and
with increasingly broad aims. We must build on that
experience and learn from less effective measures, as
well as draw lessons from the successes.
The evolution from comprehensive to targeted
sanctions has largely addressed many concerns about
unintended consequences and adverse effects. Over
time, assessments and pre-assessments have been
conducted, and there has been a steady move towards
standardizing humanitarian exemptions. The Security
Council could, nevertheless, put even more emphasis
on the assessment of the impact of its measures, both
ex ante and ex post. Additionally, sanctions regimes
and measures should be periodically reviewed by
the Council to ensure that their objectives are being
properly met. The Council should also conduct periodic
reviews of listed individuals and entities in all sanctions
regimes so as to ensure that information is up-to-date
and that the listings remain appropriate.
As we have heard from many colleagues here today,
sanctions can never be successful in isolation. They
must always be part of a broader political strategy,
featuring elements of peacekeeping, peacemaking and
peacebuilding. Sanctions must also be evaluated within
an overall approach to support peace and security.
When evaluating sanctions, one must remember that
16/18

03/08/2017

every sanctions regime is unique and that targeted
sanctions have multiple purposes.
It is important to safeguard and build upon the
achievements made so far in the areas of the rule of law
and due process, in particular through the establishment
of the Office of the Ombudsperson. Our common
obligation to implement decisions by the Council
coexists with obligations to respect fundamental
human rights. By further improving fair and clear
procedures, the Council would render the sanctions tool
more effective and legitimate, thereby enhancing the
authority of the Council and that of the United Nations,
as a whole.
We would also like to see greater attention being
paid to women, peace and security and children in
armed conflict in both thematic and country-specific
actions on sanctions, for example, by adding sexual and
gender-based violence as criteria for designation and
inviting the Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict and Children
and Armed Conflict to brief sanctions committees.
Furthermore, we would like to see gender analysis
in the reporting of experts, including on the impacts
of sanctions and counter-terrorism strategies and the
gender dimensions of the flow of arms and the illicit
trafficking in humans, drugs and natural resources.
In conclusion, let me, once again, underline that
sanctions are a key instrument in the limited tool box
that the Council has at its disposal to prevent conflicts
and promote peace. We hope that today’s discussion,
as well as efforts to implement the recommendations
of the High-level Review, and, not least, the ongoing
hard work in the sanctions committees will help to
further enhance the effectiveness and credibility of this
important tool.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I also thank Mr. Zerihoun for
his presentation.
At the outset, Japan thanks Egypt for its initiative
to hold today’s briefing. United Nations sanctions are
one of the measures provided for by the Charter of the
United Nations to maintain or restore international
peace and security. Where used properly, they can
be effective, and they should be well integrated into
broader strategies.
Sanctions are tools for the achievement of specific
political objectives. Those objectives are wide-ranging,
including the restoration of peace after civil war, the
17-24261

03/08/2017

Enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions

prohibition of support for terrorists, the disarmament
of armed groups and denuclearization. Each sanctions
regime should be tailor-made to its specific context.
Sanctions are not imposed for their own sake, and
they are certainly not tools for punishment. They should
have clear goals and exit strategies. Each sanctions
regime generally has its own internal exemption clauses
or mechanisms to minimize unwanted adverse effects.
To that end, the evolution in the way the Security
Council uses smart sanctions, including financial
sanctions, is a welcome one. The periodic review of
sanctions in each sanctions committee could be useful.
Once the Security Council decides to take certain
sanctions measures, they need to be fully implemented
in order to be effective. That can be challenging and
complex, and may require both time and capacitybuilding on the part of Member States. Neighbouring
countries have a particularly vital role to play in
ensuring that the sanctions measures are effective.
We must all work together to address the problem of
sanctions evasion and loopholes.
I would also like to emphasize that where
sanctions have been agreed upon and adopted by the
Council, we should first work for their full and faithful
implementation by each Member State before we
discuss their effectiveness. Member States’ awareness
and capacity-building are key.
Japan has long been a supporter of capacitybuilding efforts aimed at strengthening implementation
and will continue to provide support to that end. We
believe that where sanctions are selected among the
various tools available, the Council must ensure that
they are as effective as possible in achieving their
desired aim.

S/PV. 8018

widely used in Security Council resolutions that impose
such measures. The Council has a great responsibility
to clarify that concept, which is a commonly used term,
and its punitive connotations. The measures stipulated
in the Charter seek to maintain or restore international
peace and security, not to punish any party.
The Council has made considerable progress in
developing the concept of sanctions, moving from
comprehensive to smarter and more effective measures,
while benefiting from the knowledge accumulated from
previous experiences. Because of that, we have been
able to mitigate the unintended negative repercussions
of the sanctions, especially on civilians and States that
are not party to conflicts. We have also been able to limit
the measures to parties that are a threat to international
peace and security. These improvements have helped
to make the measures more effective and improve the
likelihood that they will achieve the desired result.
While this progress is commendable, it is not
enough. The uniqueness of every new threat to
international peace and stability means that we have to
adopt sanctions regimes that are tailored to particular
situations and suited to a threat’s particular nature,
treating each on a case-by-case basis. That does
not mean, however, that we should not make use of
previous experiences of sanctions regimes and lessons
learned from their implementation. Maintaining an
identical approach and a narrow perspective while
considering sanctions on a case-by-case basis will
not help us improve them unless we also make them
complementary with other, more comprehensive and
inclusive mechanisms that seek to study all the means
that can potentially improve this important tool in both
style and substance.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. TayéBrook Zerihoun, for his important briefing on this vital
aspect of the work of the Security Council.

Finding appropriate mechanisms for dialogue;
monitoring, assessing and incorporating lessons
learned from previous sanctions regimes; and taking
the views of every involved party into consideration
are therefore elements that the Council should not
undermine, underestimate or ignore, considering all the
means to achieve it.

As stipulated in Article 41, Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations grants the Security
Council the mandate to take various measures to
confront threats to international peace and security
without the use of force. Despite the use of the word
“sanctions” to describe such measures, the Charter does
not make any reference to that term. The term has been

The Arria-Formula meeting organized by Egypt
last month, entitled “Enhancing the design process of
United Nations sanctions regimes: perspectives from
all stakeholders”, presented a genuine opportunity to
listen to the views of three African countries on the
impact of sanctions on efforts aimed at stabilization.
Wide participation by Council members and the broader

The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of Egypt.

17-2426117/18

S/PV.8018

Enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions

United Nations membership showed the depth of the
interest in this issue and the importance of studying
and analysing previous experience, which can help us
improve the design of our sanctions regimes. Ensuring
that this tool is just and fair will help to guarantee its
effectiveness, while any abuse of it could undermine its
credibility with the international community and lead
to repercussions that could aggravate crises rather than
help to settle them.
We should also help Member States understand
the diverse nature of sanctions regimes and build their
technical capacity to implement sanctions measures
properly. Egypt is ready to contribute to that important
effort. In that regard, I would like to thank the
Secretariat for taking part in the first round table held
to raise awareness of the sanctions regimes, which we
hosted in Cairo on 12 and 13 July with the participation
of Egypt’s national coordinating committee on United
Nations sanctions. We believe that such cooperation
is a model that deserves support and look forward to
expanding it, including at the regional level.
I have listened carefully to members’ statements
today and noted their differences of opinion and
position. However, I also noted their agreement on the
importance of developing United Nations sanctions
regimes. The Council has a collective responsibility to
translate those positions into action that demonstrates
our seriousness and good intentions, sending a clear
message to all members of the United Nations and the

18/18

03/08/2017

international community that the Council is present on
this issue and aware of the importance of this vital tool
and the need to develop it properly. The Council’s role
is not complete if it is not accompanied by a genuine
partnership with all Member States and stakeholders,
creating the channels and mechanisms that will enable
it to listen to stakeholders’ views, which constitute an
important tool for helping it achieve its goal of improving
current and future sanctions regimes. This would also
enable the Council to hold periodic dialogues on the
issue and take any measures that might be necessary.
In that regard, Egypt looks forward to cooperating
with Member States during its presidency of the Council
and to pursuing our collective efforts to translate our
positions and the positive statements we have heard
today into political will and practical measures. Those
positions, and our collective will, will help us to agree
on practical procedures and effective mechanisms that
will enable the Council to further develop its sanctions
regimes so as to achieve their objective as a tool for
restoring peace and security while avoiding any negative
repercussions or deviations from its desired objectives,
rectifying them according to each individual case.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

17-24261
