S/2023/298

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 April 2023
Original: English

Letter dated 27 April 2023 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the letter from the President of the Security Council
of 21 April 2022 (S/2022/343), responding to my letter to the President of the Security
Council of 7 April 2022 (S/2022/300), concerning the situation of the Safer, an oil
storage and offloading vessel moored off the west coast of Yemen.
I take this opportunity to update the Security Council on recent developments
and the steps to be taken by the United Nations with a view to avoiding a major
humanitarian, environmental and economic catastrophe in the Red Sea and beyond.
Under the overall coordination of the United Nations Resident and
Humanitarian Coordinator for Yemen, and under the programmatic leadership of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), UNDP has signed contracts with
an international salvage operation company for the development of a detailed
operational plan for the emergency phase of the project and for the ship -to-ship
transfer of the crude oil from the Safer to a very large crude carrier vessel. In this
regard, UNDP has also entered into a contract with a global shipping company for
initial modifications to be made to the carrier vessel. An additional contract is
expected to be concluded by UNDP for the purchase of the carrier vessel. The early
conclusion of that contract is of paramount importance and a necessary major step
towards implementing the salvage operation in the Red Sea in May 2023. In addition,
the Yemeni authorities have recently signed the necessary additional agreements on
the ownership of the carrier vessel and continue to engage with the United Nations
on the operational plan for the emergency operation, the oil spill contingency plans,
the disposal or recycling of the Safer and the potential sale of the crude oil. In this
regard, UNDP has confirmed to the Government of Yemen that the project is being
implemented by UNDP pursuant to the agreement between the Government of Yemen
and UNDP dated 8 November 1976, which regulates the assistance to be provided by
UNDP to the Government of Yemen.
To help mitigate the significant humanitarian, environmental and economic
risks associated with this operation, including the potential loss of life, loss of income
and an environmental disaster of catastrophic proportions, UNDP has also engaged
with expert industry professionals, a leading international insurance broker, a ship
broker and oil spill experts, as well as United Nations expertise – including the
International Maritime Organization and the World Food Programme, as the lead
agencies of the logistics cluster – to inform the development and implementation of
the project. UNDP will endeavour to obtain the maximum types of insurance coverage
available on the market. The clean-up costs alone would be extremely high. However,
pollution insurance will not cover the entire estimated damage in the event of a

23-08102 (E)

020523

*2308102*

S/2023/298

catastrophe, and the insurance coverage currently sought is only for the emergency
salvage phase of the operation. Insurance coverage for the next phase of the operation,
including for the towing of the Safer to a scrap yard, will be sought at a later stage.
Although UNDP is doing everything it can both to mitigate the inherent risks in
the execution of the project and to acquire insurance to cover losses that may arise in
the event of a catastrophe, certain losses cannot be insured, either in part or in full.
Execution of the project could thus give rise to significant claims against the United
Nations. However, the cost of inaction in this case is too high.
I wish to reaffirm that the United Nations remains resolved to ensuring the
arrival of the carrier vessel to the site of the Safer in May 2023, to initiate emergency
operations, including the ship-to-ship transfer of the crude oil. However, I must
emphasize that this is dependent on meeting the remaining funding gap for the
emergency phase of the operation. In that regard, while the United Nations, with the
generous contribution of many donors, including the private sector, has to date
mobilized $99.6 million of the $129 million required for the emergency phase of the
project, there still remains a funding gap of $ 29.4 million that needs to be urgently
met in order for the operation to proceed.
The second phase of the operation, which comprises recycling the Safer at a
green salvage yard and the installation of a catenary anchor legged mooring buoy to
safely tether the replacement vessel, is also critical to the plan’s success and is
estimated to cost an additional $19 million. A donor conference for both phases of the
UNDP project is expected to be held on 4 May 2023, but funding for the first phase
should be secured ahead of the event.
The ongoing support and commitment of Member States to this critical initiative
remains essential, in particular, with a view to ensuring that arrangements with local
and international authorities are in place to guarantee a safe and secure environment
for the operation, including free access and safe navigation to, from and in the area
by relevant actors.
I will keep the Security Council apprised of ongoing developments regarding
the implementation of the project.
I would be grateful if the present letter could be circulated to the members of
the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

2/2

23-08102
