UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/73
24 January 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 22 JANUARY 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to refer to the oral briefings concerning the situation
in the Great Lakes region of Central Africa which I gave to the Security Council
during its informal consultations on 8 and 21 January 1997.
As I advised the Security Council on those occasions, I have come to the
conclusion that the gravity and complexity of the situation in the region
requires the earliest possible appointment of a resident Special Representative
rather than further exploratory visits by a Special Envoy as had previously been
contemplated. On the latter occasion, I also informed the Council of my
decision, after consulting the Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), Mr. Salim A. Salim, and leaders of the countries concerned, to
propose the appointment of a joint United Nations/OAU Special Representative.
Such an appointment will be in conformity with the request of the Security
Council that the Secretary-General cooperate closely with OAU in addressing the
problems of the Great Lakes region, including preparations for an international
conference. I envisage that the Special Representative will report to both
Secretaries-General and will take guidance from both of them. This, of course,
presupposes close coordination between the two organizations at headquarters
level and Mr. Salim and I are discussing how this can be strengthened. We are
also discussing the administrative and financial modalities for this joint
appointment.
The essential tasks of the Special Representative can be summarized as
follows:
(a) To use his good offices to promote peaceful settlements of the various
conflicts in the region, with special reference initially to the situations in
eastern Zaire and Burundi;
(b) To prepare an international conference on peace, security and
development in the region, as endorsed by the Security Council;
(c) To use his good offices to help preserve the unity and territorial
integrity of Zaire and to help restore that country's national institutions,
including through support for the electoral process.
97-02155 (E)

240197

/...

S/1997/73
English
Page 2

In carrying out these tasks the Special Representative will work closely with
the Governments in the region and other parties concerned and will cooperate
with special envoys and other mediators appointed by international organizations
and Member States in an endeavour to provide guidance and leadership to a
properly coordinated international effort to address the region's problems.
In his United Nations capacity, the Special Representative will also direct
other political activities of the United Nations system in the region and will
provide guidance to, and ensure coordination of, all other United Nations
activities, working at the regional level through the existing Regional
Humanitarian Coordinator and at the country level through the
Humanitarian/Resident Coordinators.
The Special Representative will establish his office in Nairobi, but will
travel frequently and extensively throughout the region. For this purpose, he
will require adequate logistical support including, especially, an aircraft and
communications equipment which will enable him to keep in touch with his office
and with the leaders of the region during his travels. In due course, he will,
with the agreement of the Governments concerned, establish sub-offices headed by
senior officials in various capitals of the region, including Bujumbura, Kigali,
Kinshasa and possibly others, depending on his assessment of the support he
needs.
The official heading the sub-office in Kinshasa will have an important role
to play in supporting the Special Representative's exercise of his good offices
with regard to the situation in eastern Zaire, but he or she will also be
responsible, under the overall guidance of the Special Representative, for
directing the United Nations electoral activities in that country. The official
heading the sub-office in Bujumbura will assume the functions discharged with
great distinction since December 1995 by Mr. Marc Faguy (Canada), who has
informed me of his wish to leave his post when his current contract expires at
the end of February 1997.
The efforts of the Special Representative will succeed only if he, and the
two Secretaries-General who will have appointed him, are assured of the full and
continuing support of the members of the Security Council, collectively and
individually. This support will need to be of various kinds. Perhaps the most
important support will be political: maintenance of consensus in the Security
Council on how the problems of the region should be tackled and the
manifestation of that consensus through decisions and statements of the Council,
accompanied by supportive initiatives by its members bilaterally.
There will be an equal need for material support. This will include
support for the Special Representative's mission itself, both through the prompt
payment of assessed contributions to its budget and through voluntary
contributions in kind, especially in the fields of aviation and communications
which I have already mentioned. It will also include continuing financial
contributions to the international community's variegated activities in the
humanitarian and economic and social fields, without which it will not be
possible to restore lasting peace and security in the region. Particularly
important in this context will be the provision of funds for rehabilitation and
reconstruction in Rwanda, especially the resettlement of returning refugees; for
/...

S/1997/73
English
Page 3

similar programmes in Burundi after peace has been restored there; for the
relief and resettlement of the many refugees that remain in the United Republic
of Tanzania and Zaire; and for the support of the many Zaireans who have been
displaced or otherwise affected by the events that have taken place since 1994.
The Secretary-General of OAU and I have agreed that Ambassador
Mohammed Sahnoun (Algeria) would be an excellent candidate for the post of
Special Representative. He has held a number of senior government positions,
including that of Ambassador to the United States of America. In 1992, he
served as a Special Representative of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to Somalia and had earlier served for several years as an Assistant
Secretary-General of OAU. He has already advised me of his availability should
the Security Council decide to authorize the appointment of a joint United
Nations/OAU Special Representative for the Great Lakes region. I have already
established that the choice of Ambassador Sahnoun for this post would be
welcomed by the leaders in the region.
I accordingly seek the Security Council's agreement to this proposal. I
shall submit as soon as possible outline estimates of the cost of the resources
required to enable the Special Representative to perform the functions described
in the present letter.
I should be grateful if you would bring these matters to the attention of
the members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

-----

Kofi A. ANNAN
