S/PV.8853

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8853rd meeting

Thursday, 9 September 2021, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Coveney . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ireland)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Lipand
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Tirumurti
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2021/759)

In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the Security Council
addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May 2020
(S/2020/372), which was agreed in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, this official record of the Security Council will be supplemented by a
compilation of annexes (S/2021/785) containing the statements submitted by interested nonmembers of the Council.

21-24676 (E)
*2124676*

S/PV.8853

The situation in Afghanistan

the Security Council are not comfortable. They present
real dilemmas and will require united leadership from
the Security Council, the Member States that make up
the Council, neighbouring countries and, more broadly,
the international community.

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2021/759)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Kazakhstan, Pakistan and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Deborah
Lyons, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan; Ms. Wazhma Frogh, Founder
of the Women and Peace Studies Organization; and
Ms. Malala Yousafzai, co-Founder and Board Chair of
the Malala Fund.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/759, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Ms. Lyons.
Ms. Lyons: With the fall of Kabul, on 15 August,
the city’s population and the people of Afghanistan
were confronted with a new and, for many, worrisome
reality. The Taliban moved into the capital and
proclaimed victory, defeating the Afghan republic that
had been in place for the past 20 years. That, however,
was followed by scenes of panic and chaos at Kabul
airport, as tens of thousands sought to flee Afghanistan
by any means available. Those scenes, watched around
the world, have now been replaced by scenes of protest
around the country. They show that the Taliban has won
power, but not yet the confidence of all Afghan people.
The new reality is that the lives of millions of
Afghans will depend on how the Taliban will choose to
govern. However, we must also ask ourselves: what can
we do, and what must we do? The answers I have for
2/26

09/09/2021

As of two days ago, we are faced with a de facto
Administration announced by the Taliban. Those who
hoped for and urged inclusivity will be disappointed.
There are no women in the names listed. There are
no non-Taliban members, no figures from the past
Government and no leaders of minority groups. Instead,
it contains many of the same figures who were part of
the Taliban leadership from 1996 to 2001.
What is of immediate and practical importance to
those around the table is that, of the 33 names presented,
many are on the United Nations sanctions list, including
the Prime Minister, the two Deputy Prime Ministers and
the Foreign Minister. All Council members will need to
decide which steps to take regarding the sanctions list
and the impact on future engagement.
First, however, we must focus on the pre-existing
humanitarian crisis, mostly in rural areas, that is
worsening as we speak. Addressing this crisis cannot
wait for political decisions regarding the removal of
sanctions. Millions of ordinary Afghans are in desperate
need of help. That means that needed humanitarian
aid must be provided through the United Nations or
non-governmental organizations (NGOs). Additionally,
there are countries that have their own sanctions that
apply to certain members or groups that are now part
of the de facto authority. Relevant mechanisms must
be found quickly to allow for the United Nations
organizations and NGOs to provide the necessary
humanitarian relief. In the meantime, we look forward
to the high-level conference in Geneva on 13 September,
which the Secretary-General will convene, that seeks
pledges to meet the requirements of the humanitarian
appeal on which Afghan lives now depend.
In the current environment, the United Nations
role must be clear and must build on our humanitarian
imperative. There is an immediate and pressing need
to deliver, on a huge scale, essential humanitarian aid
in areas such health, food security, non-food items
and sanitation.
Secondly, there is an additional, looming crisis to
which I must draw the Council’s attention. Billions of
assets and donor funds have been frozen by members
of the international community. The understandable
21-24676

09/09/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

purpose is to deny these funds to the de facto Taliban
Administration. The inevitable effect, however, will
be a severe economic downturn that could throw
many more millions into poverty and hunger, may
generate a massive wave of refugees from Afghanistan
and set Afghanistan back for generations. As the
Afghan currency plummeted, prices of fuel and
food skyrocketed. Private banks no longer have
cash to distribute, meaning that even Afghans with
assets cannot access them. Salaries cannot be paid.
Afghanistan is heavily import-dependent and will be
unable to finance its imports of food and medicine, as
well as fuel, electricity and other essential items.
A modus vivendi must be found quickly — one
that allows money to flow to Afghanistan in order to
prevent a total breakdown of the economy and social
order. Safeguards must be found to ensure that this
money is spent where it needs to be spent and not
misused by the de facto authorities. The economy
must be allowed to breathe for a few more months
in order to give the Taliban a chance to demonstrate
flexibility and a genuine will to do things differently
this time, notably from a human rights, gender and
counter-terrorism perspective.
As I mentioned, we are disappointed in the lack of
inclusivity of the so-called caretaker cabinet, but the new
reality in Afghanistan is, in fact, still being shaped. A
mixed picture has formed in the weeks since the Taliban
took power. For the most part, with some exceptions,
the premises of the United Nations in Afghanistan have
been respected. We are, however, increasingly worried
by the growing number of incidents of harassment and
intimidation against our national staff. We will continue
to do everything possible to support our staff and keep
them out of harm’s way. The United Nations cannot
conduct its work — which is so essential for the Afghan
people — if its personnel are subjected to intimidation,
fear for their lives and cannot move freely.
We are also concerned that despite the many
statements granting general amnesties to Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces personnel and
those who have worked as civil servants, there have
been credible allegations of reprisal killings of Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces personnel and
the detention of officials who worked for previous
Administrations. We have received reports of members
of the Taliban carrying out house-to-house searches
and seizing property, particularly in Kabul.

S/PV. 8853

And while the Taliban have provided many
assurances that they will respect the rights of women
within Islam, we are receiving increasing reports that
the Taliban have prohibited women from appearing
in public places without male chaperones and have
prevented women from working. They have limited
girls’ access to education in some regions and have
dismantled departments of women’s affairs across
Afghanistan and targeted women’s NGOs.
We are also extremely disturbed about the increasing
violence used against Afghans who are protesting
Taliban rule. That violence includes shooting above the
crowds, persistent beatings, intimidation of media and
other repressive measures. Instead, the Taliban should
seek to understand the legitimate grievances of these
many Afghans who fear for their futures.
Despite these concerns, perhaps we can still help
to shape this new reality into a more positive direction.
In our initial engagements with Taliban leaders over
this past year and in recent weeks, we have received a
clear message — that they need and want international
assistance. Some have asked for patience and even
advice as they attempt to transition from a military
insurgency to a Government. They have complained
that the widespread corruption of previous Government
officials left many parts of the country without assistance
and squandered the generosity of the international
community. But they themselves risk squandering the
potential generosity of the international community if
they govern against the explicit interests and rights of
their own people.
The impact of these recent developments is also
being felt beyond the Afghan borders. Many countries
around Afghanistan are apprehensive about how
Taliban rule will affect their own security. They fear
the effect of an expanded Islamic State that the Taliban
cannot contain. They fear a wave of refugees coming
across their borders. They fear the consequences of the
large number of arms left behind in Afghanistan. They
fear that the Taliban will be unable to thwart the illegal
economy and the flow of drugs from Afghanistan. It
is most important now that the region use its available
mechanisms to not just speak with one voice but to
act in concert for the benefit of the entire region. We
therefore look forward to the upcoming meeting of
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization in Dushanbe.
Other mechanisms include the extended troika format
created by Moscow, which last met in Qatar in August,
as well as ad hoc mechanisms, such as the regional

21-246763/26

S/PV.8853

The situation in Afghanistan

foreign ministers meeting hosted by Pakistan that
took place this week. But it is also important that the
wider international community not become irrevocably
divided. There is now a more urgent agenda for regional
and international cooperation around Afghanistan.
Without it, the negative repercussions will be felt near
and far, and will be much more difficult to address
later on.
Certainly, a key part of this agenda is counterterrorism. Al-Qaida members remain in Afghanistan,
visibly welcomed and sheltered by the de facto Taliban
authorities. The Islamic State-Khorasan Province
remains active and could gain strength. Concerns on
these essential matters of international terrorism will
not be allayed simply by Taliban promises. On this
issue, the region and the wider international community
share clear, common and critical interests.
Of course, the United Nations family remains in
Afghanistan, committed to doing what we have done
for the past 75 years — delivering to the people of
Afghanistan. What is essential for this effort, and for
Afghanistan in general, is a functioning airport in
Kabul. We are grateful, therefore, for the prompt and
generous actions taken by Qatar and Turkey to begin
restoring the airport, in cooperation with the Taliban,
so that it is fully functional and regular commercial
flights can resume. Thanks to these efforts, the United
Nations Humanitarian Air Service is already in a
position to begin making regular flights to Kabul, and
the UNAMA air fleet of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) will soon be able to
do so as well.
I take this opportunity to thank the Government
of Kazakhstan for agreeing on short notice to host a
United Nations satellite office to support our efforts
in Afghanistan.

09/09/2021

ongoing commitment to delivering to the people
of Afghanistan.
I would also like to make a final comment on the
subject of UNAMA’s mandate, which is due for renewal
in about a week. Members of the Security Council
are, like us, still evaluating the new situation. I look
forward to our ongoing discussions regarding the
United Nations role in Afghanistan at this critical time
and as we move forward.
The best and still possible outcome would be
for the Taliban to demonstrate that it seeks to create
an Afghanistan where people do not live in fear,
where those with talents are invited to participate
in the rebuilding of their country, and where boys
and girls, young women and men, can receive the
sort of education that will allow this development to
continue. Now is the moment for the Taliban to visibly
demonstrate to the people of Afghanistan — to all the
people of Afghanistan — that it is committed to each
and every one of them, in guaranteeing their safety,
their freedoms, their health, their education and their
future prosperity.
The Afghan people are the least responsible for this
unfolding crisis and yet the most affected by it. It is
clear that they will still need the Security Council and
the international community.
I thank the President and Council members
for their consideration of Afghanistan at this very
important time.
The President: I thank Ms. Lyons for her work
and her briefing. I would ask her to pass on the thanks
of the Security Council to all the United Nations
staff who continue to work in very challenging and
uncertain conditions across Afghanistan and in Kabul
in particular.

Our commitment to delivering for the people of
Afghanistan means that we must engage with the Taliban
on operational and security issues. The recent visit,
therefore, of Emergency Relief Coordinator Martin
Griffiths to Kabul earlier this week paved the way to
continue discussing the terms of future humanitarian
assistance, as well as to prepare the ground for the
Geneva conference on 13 September.

Ms. Frogh: I thank the Security Council for the
opportunity to share my and my colleagues’ perspectives
with the Security Council. I am grateful to Ireland’s
presidency of the Security Council for inviting me, and
I wish all members a productive meeting.

I cannot express enough my admiration for those
United Nations staff, national and international, who
are in Afghanistan now, facing the daily uncertainties.
Their presence and their persistence are proof of our

I come to the Security Council with a broken
heart. Twenty years ago, I was a young woman who
believed in this institution. I was inspired by resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, which

4/26

I now give the floor to Ms. Frogh.

Where should I begin?

21-24676

09/09/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

spoke to me and millions of women like me who had
witnessed war first-hand and wanted to dedicate our
lives to building peace in our nations.
As I sit here today, scores of villages — countless
men, women and children — are stranded in the valleys
of Panjshir following weeks of shelling and bombing.
They have no food for their children, no medicine for the
ill and no way to communicate to the rest of Afghanistan
and the world about their ordeal. This week, the world
saw brave women and men of Afghanistan coming out
on the streets of Kabul and other cities showing their
anguish about how they are being treated. The right to
protest is now being taken away and the next is access
to the Internet, which is being limited based on one’s
location in Kabul.
Just yesterday, a 25-year-old policy specialist in the
now erased Ministry of Women’s Affairs had to burn her
work and education certificates because the homes of
women activists and Government employees — people
like you and me — had been raided. She found a copy
of resolution 1325 (2000) from a training that she
had attended in New York years ago. She had to burn
that, too. Those certificates, that resolution — they
were meant to give her and millions of women an
opportunity for life, peace, security and dignity. Today,
her best chance of life is by burning those documents
and disappearing.
Why? It is because of what the world has
unleashed on us and because the world did not listen
to us women when we warned about the absence of a
political settlement and a sudden military take over.
The international community side-lined us when we
begged for a chance to sit at the negotiating table;
when we asked that the international community make
the protection of civilians and civil society actors
conditions for negotiations; and when we called for a
conditional withdrawal. We women and girls and our
work have been the biggest achievement of the past
20 years that the United Nations and other members
of the international community could actually claim
credit for.
Let me explain what we did.
I, along with my local women peacebuilders
network — which includes around 100 women in 34
provinces of Afghanistan — have been working for
local peace and conflict resolution for over a decade.
We were the ones who advocated for inclusive and
meaningful peace negotiations. We have always

S/PV. 8853

been practical and realistic. We knew that a political
settlement with the participation of the Taliban would
be necessary. That is why, when I was serving on the
Afghan High Peace Council, the women members were
the ones that actually reached out to communities,
to the mothers of the Taliban fighters on the ground,
and initiated the first national dialogue that brought
all Afghans together. We worked for the ceasefire
and a national peace process. We reached out to the
Taliban leaders and we advocated for ensuring that the
grievances of their youth and families who had suffered
were taken into account.
We wanted the Doha talks to result in an interim
deal and transitional Government that reflected the true
diversity of our nation — the men and women, ethnic
diversity and political ideologies — and a process that
would lead to democratic participation and the people
having a say in who governed. We were stonewalled and
kept away from the talks. In the end, we were betrayed
by all, including the Afghan Government’s leadership.
Where are we now that the Taliban has announced
their caretaker emirate? All but three members are
from one ethnic group. That means just three Cabinet
members represent 60 per cent of the population — some
18 million people. If the voices of 18 million Afghans
are suppressed, how long will such rule be sustained?
We have seen that in other parts of the world already.
Women’s lives have been flipped around since
15 August. Women are being erased from governance
as we speak. Women have been told that they cannot go
to work. Girls over 12 years of age have not yet started
going to school. Female Government workers have
been told to stay home. Thousands of women workers
in non-governmental organizations are in hiding.
My nation is young, with over 62 per cent of our
population being under the age of 25. Our modern State
was just 20 years old, but we had 500 women judges
and prosecutors working throughout the country. We
had some 12,000 women in the police and the army.
Today, they are all in hiding, fearful for their lives and
for their families. On 4 September, Nigar Banu, a police
officer in Ghor province, eight months pregnant, was
tortured and killed in front of her own children.
Right now, I have in my phone at least 500 unread
messages from women in the security sector. What do I
say to them? I am trying to find words, because what I
am fearing is that tomorrow or the next day I might not
be able to find them alive.

21-246765/26

S/PV.8853

The situation in Afghanistan

So much damage has been done — so much
avoidable, unnecessary damage. If we together do not
act now — urgently — the repercussions will be felt
across the region and globally.
I have therefore come to the Security Council
because I still believe that it has the power, the ability,
and the responsibility to mitigate this damage.
I have the following four immediate requests.
First, as each of member of the Council is engaging
with the Taliban caretaker Government, no matter
what the strategic focus of his or her Government, I
would ask that they remember that there are some
16 or 17 million women and girls in Afghanistan who
do not know what tomorrow holds for them. These
women can be included in Council members’ own
mediation teams. Council members can also facilitate
meetings of delegations of women across different
professions — peacebuilders, judges, security officers,
educators, doctors, businesswomen — with the Taliban.
Please do not stonewall us anymore.
Secondly, thousands of women and men from civil
society, media, former Government employees, judges
and prosecutors, artists, musicians are at risk of reprisal.
They are stranded inside Afghanistan and are in hiding.
They need immediate protection and evacuation until
and unless their security and ability to live peacefully
is evident. Please welcome them, grant them visas, give
them a chance for a productive life. If Council members
do this, their countries will be receiving some of the
Afghanistan’s greatest natural resources.
Thirdly, the humanitarian crisis is looming. Some
18 million Afghans are in need of humanitarian aid.
Women and children constitute the majority of this
population. To reach them, especially given the
gender-segregated ideology of the Taliban regime,
it is imperative that the United Nations ensures the
protection of Afghan female aid workers and other
civic professionals and community organizers, who
are critical to the distribution and delivery of aid to
the needy. It is entirely within the Council’s control.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and chart and other agencies must put in place a
practical and clear gender-responsive aid plan. Without
it, they and the Council are at the risk of increasing
the harm.
Finally, Mr. Griffiths and others say that the
Taliban has asked for the world to be patient as they
take charge. Well, why not ask them to demonstrate
6/26

09/09/2021

their commitment to peace through their actions? Ask
them to stop beating women on the streets or shooting
at them. Ask them to stop torturing journalists. Ask
them to stop searching people’s homes and threatening
them. Ask them to fulfil their responsibility to protect
and respect all Afghans regardless of their age or sex
or ethnicity. If they care for Afghanistan as much as
we do, let them show it by preserving our culture and
respecting our people.
I would like to express my gratitude to the
countries that have actually gone out of their way to
evacuate and protect women activists and journalists
at risk, notably, Canada, Germany, Norway and many
other Asian and European Union countries, whose
efforts are worth mentioning. Also, I would like
to thank international civil society partners in the
region and internationally — organizations such as
the International Civil Society Action Network and
others — which have shown sisterhood and solidarity.
We will never forget that in the difficult times.
In 1994, United Nations predecessors sat in this
Chamber and played politics while Rwanda’s genocide
unfolded. Today, it is the Afghans who are at risk.
We are told that some members of the Council do
not like each other. We are told that they are competing
with each other and that a resolution to enable action
will not be adopted. But my plea to the Security Council
is that its members put aside their political differences
and act as one voice in support of the people and the
women of Afghanistan.
I pray that no Council member experiences losing
his or her country overnight, as we did in Afghanistan.
As a civil society leader in exile, I am doing all I can to
save the lives of women in my country so that I can face
my daughters in the years to come.
Please ask yourself, Mr. President, given your power
and position and privilege, can you face your daughters?
The President: I thank Ms. Frogh for her
powerful briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Malala Yousafzai.
Ms. Yousafzai: Mr. President, I thank you for
the opportunity to address the Security Council as it
considers the urgent situation in Afghanistan. I am
grateful to the presidency for prioritizing education in
this critical moment for Afghan girls.
21-24676

09/09/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

I do not speak on behalf of Afghan girls and women
today. As Council members have heard from Ms. Frogh,
women and girls in Afghanistan are speaking out
for themselves. But I do want to remind the Council
what life is like for a girl living under extremism
and terrorism.
I heard bombs, gunfire and explosions. My brothers
and I ran into our parents’ arms for protection. I was
10 years old.
I saw banners on shopping malls announcing that
women were not allowed. I saw notices on school gates
declaring girls were prohibited. I saw women flogged
in the streets. I was 11 years old.
I saw my home transformed from a place of peace
to a place of fear in just three years. I saw thousands of
displaced people. I saw homes and schools destroyed. I
was 12 years old.
I saw injustice, and I raised my voice for every
girl’s right to go to school. I saw a gunman stop my
school bus, call my name and fire a bullet at me. I was
15 years old.
Now I am 24. I carry the scars of six surgeries to
repair the damage of that one bullet.
That is a story that many Afghan girls may share
if we do not act. Here are some of the stories that we
are already hearing. Roshan, a female teacher and the
sole breadwinner for her family, has been told not to
come to work anymore. She is now without an income
and no longer able to do the job that she loves. Aaria,
an 11-year-old student, is worried she may not be able
to return to school or pursue her dream of becoming a
lawyer. Her thoughts have turned to how she can help
her father provide for the family. Afghan women are
demanding the right to choose their own future. In
Kabul, their protests are met with tear gas, rifle butts
and metal clubs.
I have had the privilege of working with many
Afghan educators and advocates who have spent
the last two decades rebuilding an education system
from scratch. Because of their efforts, 39 per cent of
children attending school in Afghanistan last year were
girls. Today, that progress and those girls’ future are
under threat.
Our partners tell us that the doors to secondary
schools in Afghanistan have been shut. Teachers and
students have been told to wait at home. Many female

S/PV. 8853

teachers have been told that they no longer have jobs
because they are barred from teaching boys.
International human rights law guarantees girls
the right to an education. But it is not only an issue of
individual rights. The education of girls is a powerful
tool for building peace and security, and I urge the
Security Council to recognize it as such. When girls
go to school, countries are able to recover from conflict
more quickly once peace is established. Educating girls
helps create stability and binds communities. People
with a greater number of years of education tend to
coexist in harmony and peace. But we also know that
when girls receive an equitable and inclusive education,
it also helps prevent conflict. In some countries, where
the percentage of students finishing secondary school
has doubled, the risk of conflict has been halved.
The United Nations and its members must remember
their commitment to the protection of the dignity and
worth of the human person. We must support education
for Afghan girls because it is their human right and
because it is vital to a peaceful and stable Afghanistan.
I am therefore here today to call on the Security Council
to protect Afghan girls and women and the future of the
nation in four ways.
First, the Council must send a clear and unequivocal
message to the Taliban that a fundamental condition of
any working relationship is upholding girls’ right to
education, in accordance with international treaties and
conventions. Statements are not sufficient. The Taliban
Government must guarantee and protect the rights of
women and girls.
Secondly, the Security Council must build on
resolution 2593 (2021) by supporting a robust monitoring
mechanism to track and monitor abuses of human rights
in Afghanistan, including a specific focus on girls’
education. I echo the call made by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights for Muslimmajority countries to share how they successfully have
implemented international human rights norms in their
cultural and religious contexts.
Thirdly, the international community needs to put
resolution 2593 (2021) into action, with a significant
increase in humanitarian and development assistance to
the United Nations and international organizations so as
to ensure that all schools can operate safely. Right now,
the people of Afghanistan are facing a political crisis,
a months-long drought and the coronavirus disease.
The Council must support additional assistance to

21-246767/26

S/PV.8853

The situation in Afghanistan

neighbouring countries and help provide education for
refugee children. I urge leaders to agree to a generous
financing package at Monday’s emergency aid
conference in order to ensure that all Afghan children
can return to school as soon as possible.
Lastly, the United Nations presence is needed in
every region of Afghanistan more than ever before.
In order to do that, a strengthened mandate and
resources for the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan and other United Nations agencies in
Afghanistan are essential.
A united Security Council, speaking with one
voice on girls’ education, can compel the Taliban to
make real concessions. That is vital not only for Afghan
women and girls themselves, but for long-term security
in the region and our world. I hope and trust that the
Security Council will stand with the girls and women
of Afghanistan.
The President: I thank Ms. Yousafzai for
her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Defence
of Ireland.
First, I would like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Deborah Lyons, and the
exceptional United Nations country and United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) teams
for their essential work and commitment to the Afghan
people. I also thank Wazhma Frogh for powerfully
detailing how violence and intimidation are impacting
the people of her country, destroying lives, inciting fear
and exacerbating existing challenges, especially for
women and girls. I thank Malala Yousafzai for clearly
reminding us of what is at stake for future generations
of Afghan children, particularly girls. I am sure that
she never thought that she would see that country
take the backward step like the one we have seen in
recent weeks.
We meet today at a pivotal point for Afghanistan — a
country facing a serious humanitarian and human rights
crisis. The world has watched in horror the violence and
chaos in recent weeks. Millions of Afghans urgently
require support, including those recently displaced by
conflict, violence and intimidation — and they are in
the millions. Collectively, we can avert a humanitarian
tragedy in Afghanistan, but it will take an enormous
effort. I urge the Taliban to facilitate full, safe and
8/26

09/09/2021

unimpeded access to humanitarian organizations and
all of their personnel, regardless of gender. They should
be able to carry out their life-saving and life-sustaining
work without interference. In order to ensure such
access and the right of Afghans and foreign citizens
to safely leave Afghanistan, it is vital that the Kabul
airport and Afghanistan’s land borders be fully open
and operational.
The international community has a responsibility
to continue to support humanitarian relief efforts.
Ireland will play its part, including by participating at
the high-level meeting on the humanitarian situation
in Afghanistan on 13 September, as we build on our
announcement last month of emergency funding to
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, in recognition of our responsibility to
Afghan refugees and host countries.
Afghanistan also faces a governance crisis.
Participation in political and civic life is the right of
all Afghans — women, men, young people, minorities
and civil society. A Government that does not harness
the full strength, talent and diversity of the Afghan
people and that does not allow for the right to peaceful
protest and free and independent media cannot lay the
groundwork for a peaceful and secure Afghanistan
into the future. We know from our own experience in
Ireland that the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women is a prerequisite for sustainable peace and
political stability.
Ireland urges the Council to place clear priority on
women’s involvement in the processes that shape their
future. We owe that much to the women peacebuilders,
many of whom have given everything and are risking
their lives for peace. The rights of women and girls
to full and equal access to education, health care and
freedom of movement in their own country and to
participate fully in public life are universal rights.
They are not rights that are reserved only for women
and girls from certain countries, ethnicities or religious
traditions. They are rights that belong equally to all
7 billion people of the world’s population. Quite simply,
women and girls in Afghanistan must be treated as
equal citizens.
It has been said time and again around this table that
only an inclusive negotiated political settlement offers
a sustainable future for all Afghan people. Frankly, we
have seen no evidence of that in the approach of the
Taliban so far. What they have said and what they have
21-24676

09/09/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8853

done seem to mean two very different things. Those who
have seized power now bear the ultimate responsibility
to ensure the safety, security and human rights of the
Afghan people. Any new Administration must adhere
to Afghanistan’s obligations under international law,
including international humanitarian law, refugee law
and human rights law.

In the Chamber today, we heard from Ms. Lyons,
Ms. Frogh and Ms. Yousafzai about the reality of what
the Afghan people face. Their testimonies will stay
with every person in the Chamber and serve, I hope, as
a reminder of the Council’s responsibilities. We all have
an obligation to act together and not to fail the people
of Afghanistan.

I call on the members of the Council to send
an unequivocal message that those who violate
international laws and perpetrate human rights
violations must and will be held accountable by the
international community. The events of 26 August left
us in no doubt that terrorism remains a present danger
in Afghanistan. I want to express, from this chair, the
deep sympathies of the Irish people to the families
of those killed and injured in the horrifying attack at
Kabul airport. Afghanistan must never again become a
haven for international terrorism.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I repeat the demand of the Council that Afghan
territory not be used to threaten or attack any country,
shelter or train terrorists or plan and finance a terrorist
attack. The Taliban must unequivocally break ties with
all international terrorist organizations or continue
to face censure and isolation. The fundamental
responsibility of the Council is to the maintenance
of international peace and security and to uphold the
Charter of the United Nations. If we are not attempting
to do that, we need to ask ourselves a serious question
in terms of what the role of the Council really is.
The adoption of resolution 2593 (2021) last week
was a positive first step, clearly demonstrating the
expectations of the international community and a
statement of unity and intent of the Council, but the
Council can and must do more. It is essential that
we act with clarity, determination and, perhaps most
importantly, unity.
At this time of uncertainty, United Nations
operations in Afghanistan are more essential than
they have ever been. UNAMA’s mandate expires on
17 September. Ireland is actively engaging with fellow
Council members to ensure that UNAMA’s vital
activities continue and to allow them to work on next
steps. This is surely a moment for the Council to stand
united. That unity will be vital to achieve consensus on
a mandate that supports a peaceful, equal and inclusive
future for all Afghans. That unity will be vital if we are
to influence the decisions of Taliban leaders currently
deciding on the future of their own country.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I wish to thank Special
Representative Lyons, Ms. Frogh and Ms. Yousafzai for
their briefings and for sharing their experiences.
It has been less than two weeks since we last
met to discuss Afghanistan (see S/PV.8848). One of
the welcome developments in the meantime has been
the flash appeal for aid to address the increasingly
precarious humanitarian situation in Afghanistan. Even
before the recent surge in hostilities, the humanitarian
situation in Afghanistan was one of the worst in the
world. Together with the ministerial meeting to be
hosted by Secretary-General Guterres next Monday, we
hope the appeal will provide for the necessary increase
in aid for the people of Afghanistan.
We understand that the first humanitarian aid flights
and shipments have already arrived. However, the
delivery of aid still faces obstacles inside the country,
notably in the delivery of essential health services for
women and girls, who have been particularly impacted
by the changes over the past three weeks. Estonia
reiterates its call on all parties to allow immediate, safe
and unhindered humanitarian access for United Nations
humanitarian agencies and other actors providing
assistance, including for female aid workers to deliver
assistance to those in need.
In Estonia, the start of September means the
start of a new school year for our children. This year,
especially today, on the International Day to Protect
Education from Attack, the eyes of the world are on
Afghanistan and whether all girls in the country will
be able to continue with their schooling safely, as well
as whether their mothers, and all other Afghan women,
will be allowed to continue moving about freely and
participating in employment.
Estonia’s commitment to the people of Afghanistan
continues. However, our cooperation with any

21-246769/26

S/PV.8853

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghanistan leadership will be based upon its
willingness to uphold the positive achievements of
recent decades and act by the norms and standards
of international law, including international human
rights law.
Violations and abuses of human rights must stop,
and the perpetrators must be brought to justice. In
particular, we condemn the recent use of violence
against peaceful protesters and journalists, for whom
Afghanistan continues to be one of the most dangerous
places in the world in which to work.
The Taliban, having declared control over
Afghanistan, bears great responsibility for, and
accountability to, the Afghan people. The makeup of the
caretaker Government has been noted here with great
disappointment. Ignoring the diversity of the people of
Afghanistan and excluding women are clear decisions
that go against the expectations of the international
community. Not only does that undermine women’s
right to full and equal participation in decision-making,
but it also fuels concerns over continued future
instability in the country. Moreover, those steps do not
match earlier public statements made by the Taliban,
thereby undermining confidence in its other claims.
Estonia again emphasizes that sustainable peace in
Afghanistan can be ensured only through an inclusive
political settlement that upholds constitutional
protections for the rights of all the people of
Afghanistan, particularly women, children and persons
belonging to minorities.
I end with special thanks to the staff of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the
broader United Nations in Afghanistan, whose efforts
for the benefit of the people of Afghanistan have been
vital during this time of crisis.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Allow me to thank Special
Representative Lyons for her important briefing amid
unprecedented challenges for the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the
whole of Afghanistan. We also thank Ms. Frogh and
Ms. Yousafzai for their powerful interventions. It is
very important for the Security Council to hear their
voices and perspectives, especially on the future of
women and girls in Afghanistan.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/759)
rightfully points out that Afghans have experienced
generations of war and hardship. We fully agree that
10/26

09/09/2021

they must not be abandoned. We therefore welcome
the decision to convene a ministerial meeting on the
humanitarian situation to ensure that support to the
people of Afghanistan is scaled up.
A sustainable peace in Afghanistan can be
achieved only through an inclusive political settlement.
We take note that an interim Government has now
been announced in Kabul. The composition of that
Government gives cause for considerable concern. In
contrast to previous indications from the Taliban, that
Government is neither inclusive nor representative.
A new Government must be inclusive and
representative, with the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women. In Afghanistan, like
everywhere else, there can be no trade-off between
security, stability and progress and the rights of women.
On the contrary, gender equality and the inclusion of
women in public life leads to security and stability and
serves as a path towards progress.
The conduct and composition of the Afghan
Government will determine the scope and magnitude
of cooperation and support from the international
community. We also emphasize that Afghan territory
must not be used to threaten or attack any country,
shelter or train terrorists or plan or finance terrorist
acts. We will hold the new Government accountable in
that regard.
We have noted assurances by the Taliban that
Government workers, both military and civilian, will
not face retribution of any kind. Taliban representatives
have also stated that women and girls will have access
to work and education. We will closely follow how that
is translated into action. Afghanistan must continue
to adhere to its international obligations, including
full respect for international human rights law and
international humanitarian law.
We urge all parties to ensure that humanitarian
workers and civil society organizations get full, safe
and unhindered access to people in need in accordance
with international humanitarian law. We also call on
all parties to ensure that Afghans and foreign nationals
who wish to leave the country can do so in a safe and
orderly way.
Prolonged conflict, drought and the pandemic have
caused substantial humanitarian suffering. In addition,
Afghanistan is one of the world’s most vulnerable
21-24676

09/09/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

countries to climate change and climate-related
security risks.
In this critical time, it is vital to preserve the capacity
of the United Nations to stay and deliver. The choices
we make in the coming days on the UNAMA mandate
will be decisive. As a co-penholder on Afghanistan,
we encourage our fellow Council members to secure
consensus on that indispensable mandate.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank Special Representative Lyons for her briefing. As
she said, these have been extraordinary and challenging
times, and I should like to thank her and, through her,
her team for the courage and dedication with which the
United Nations family in Afghanistan has responded.
We are in a new situation. We all remember the
Taliban’s previous period in power, so we approach it
clear-eyed. But we have also heard that some in the
Taliban may now want a different approach. So we are
also open-minded. Our approach will be shaped by
what the Taliban now do. Resolution 2593 (2021) sets
out the Council’s minimum expectations. We call on
the Taliban to distance themselves from terrorism and
to live up to the commitments they made during the
Doha talks. It is in the shared interests of all countries
that Afghanistan never again becomes a safe haven for
Al-Qaida, the Islamic State and other terrorist groups
and does not undermine regional stability. We must all
hold the Taliban to that.
We welcome the Taliban’s commitments to allow
safe passage for foreign nationals and Afghan citizens
with documentation for travel. Again, we call on the
Taliban to ensure that their actions reflect that.
We, too, are deeply concerned by the impact of recent
events on the Afghan people. The United Kingdom is
doubling its aid to Afghanistan to £286 million this
year. We warmly welcome the United Nations flash
appeal. We encourage the Taliban to create the safe
environment needed in order to deliver humanitarian
support, including by ensuring unimpeded access for
aid workers and no interference in the work of United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations.
We call for the protection of human rights and of the
gains of the last two decades, especially the education
of girls, the employment of women and the rights
of minorities. And I thank Ms. Wazhma Frogh and
Ms. Malala Yousafzai for their briefings today.

S/PV. 8853

We have today seen disturbing images in the press
of journalists who have been beaten. We are clear that
the Taliban’s actions must be consistent with their
words, and we will calibrate our approach accordingly.
The caretaker appointments announced by the Taliban
on 7 September did not reflect the diversity of the
country’s regions and communities or women, and we
call on the Taliban to pursue inclusive politics and an
inclusive society.
Finally, the members of the Security Council share
a common interest in making sure that Afghanistan does
not return to the chaos of the past. We must now work
together, and we will need the United Nations family to
continue its brave work. I commend the efforts of the
United Nations Mission in Afghanistan as we enter this
new phase. The United Kingdom stands ready to work
with it.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I thank the Special
Representative, Ms. Deborah Lyons, for her briefing. I
join the others in extending our unflinching support for
the work done by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in these challenging times.
India has consistently called for a central role of the
United Nations in Afghanistan. I also thank the other
briefers for their remarks and insights.
We have witnessed dramatic changes in the
situation in Afghanistan over the course of the last
month. The Security Council met thrice in August and
has collectively pronounced on the prevailing situation.
In particular, resolution 2593 (2021), on Afghanistan,
clearly sets out the Council’s expectations on a range of
critical and immediate issues.
As Afghanistan’s neighbour, we were privileged to
preside over the adoption of a substantial and forwardlooking product of the Council on Afghanistan. It
took into account some of our collective concerns, in
particular on terrorism, where it noted the commitment
of the Taliban not to allow the use of Afghan soil
for terrorism, including by terrorists and terrorist
groups designated under resolution 1267 (1999). It
has underlined that Afghan territory should not be
used to threaten or attack any country or to shelter or
train terrorists, or to plan or to finance terrorist acts.
As witnessed from the deplorable terrorist attack at
Kabul Airport last month, terrorism continues to pose a
serious threat to Afghanistan. It is therefore important
that the commitments made in that regard are respected
and adhered to.

21-2467611/26

S/PV.8853

The situation in Afghanistan

Resolution 2593 (2021) also took note of the Taliban
statement that Afghans will be able to travel abroad in an
unhindered manner. We hope that those commitments
will be adhered to, including regarding the safe, secure
and orderly departure from Afghanistan of Afghans
and all foreign nationals.
The situation in Afghanistan continues to be very
fragile. The current situation is of direct concern to us
as its immediate neighbour and a friend to its people.
Uncertainties abound about the future of the Afghan
people as well as about sustaining and building on the
gains achieved over the past two decades. In that context,
we reiterate the need for the voices of Afghan women
to be heard, the aspirations of Afghan children to be
realized and the rights of minorities to be protected. We
call for humanitarian assistance to be provided urgently
and underline the need to provide unhindered access to
United Nations and other agencies in that regard.
India calls for an inclusive dispensation in
Afghanistan that represents all sections of Afghan
society. A broad-based, inclusive and representative
formation attained through an inclusive, negotiated
political settlement would gain greater international
acceptability and legitimacy.
Afghanistan has already seen enough bloodshed
and violence in recent years. We call on the
international community to come together, rising above
any partisan interests, to stand together with the people
of Afghanistan in their desire for peace, stability and
security in the country. We need to enable all Afghans,
including women, children and minorities, to live in
peace and dignity.
During the Council’s most recent discussion on
Afghanistan (see S/PV.8834), when the SecretaryGeneral contributed his valuable insights, he stressed
the need for the international community to speak in
one voice on the evolving developments in Afghanistan.
Perhaps it is more important for us to adhere to the
Secretary-General’s call, both in letter and spirit, for
the benefit of the people of Afghanistan. We therefore
call upon all members of the Council to ensure that
when we decide on the future of the UNAMA mandate,
we keep our focus centred on the Afghan people and
their expectations that the international community
will stand by them in this hour of crisis.
India has contributed significantly over the past
decade to the development of Afghanistan. In that
context, Indian development projects have been
12/26

09/09/2021

undertaken in critical areas of power, water supply,
road connectivity, health care, education, agriculture
and capacity-building. India’s emphasis has been on the
welfare and well-being of the people of Afghanistan.
India has undertaken more than 500 development
projects in each of the 34 provinces of Afghanistan.
We also extended humanitarian assistance through the
delivery of 75,000 tons of wheat last year to Afghanistan.
We hope that those developments projects and the
education and human-resource development imparted
by India over the years will help in contributing to the
development of an inclusive and progressive polity.
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to make this statement on behalf of the
A3+1, namely, Kenya, Tunisia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines and the Niger.
We would like to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Lyons for her briefing on the
most recent developments in Afghanistan. The A3+1
reiterates its support for the Special Representative and
the dedicated staff of the United Nations and thanks
them for their efforts in assisting the valiant Afghan
people at this challenging time in their country. We
would also like to thank Ms. Wazhma Frogh, Founder
of the Women and Peace Studies Organization,
and Ms. Malala Yousafzai, co-Founder and Board
Chair of the Malala Fund, for their contributions to
today’s debate.
The A3+1 remains deeply concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan. Given the
urgency and lack of clarity about how the coming days,
months and years will unfold, in particular with regard
to the political and security situation, priority should
be given to humanitarian access. It is important that
the Taliban guarantee the safety and security of United
Nations personnel and humanitarian staff, as well as
the freedom of movement of those workers, men and
women alike, to reach people in need. We note the
Taliban’s stated intention to cooperate to ensure the
continuation of humanitarian assistance.
The A3+1 welcomes the high-level ministerial
meeting on the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan
to be held on 13 September in Geneva and hopes that the
meeting will mobilize the necessary resources to assist
the people of Afghanistan. The A3+1 acknowledges the
efforts of neighbouring countries to host a large number
of Afghan refugees. We underscore the need for the
international community to support those countries.
21-24676

09/09/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

The A3+1 notes the announcement by the Taliban,
on 7 September, of an interim Government. However,
we deplore the Taliban’s lack of inclusivity. We believe
that the Council must reiterate its calls for the Taliban
to make sustained efforts to embrace peace, cut ties
with terrorist groups and their affiliates and engage in
meaningful dialogue with all segments of society, so
that Afghanistan can become a haven for peace.
To ensure lasting peace and successful post-conflict
reconstruction, the participation of women, young
people and ethnic minorities is crucial. It is important to
underscore the fact that the quest for peace must include
respect for the human rights of Afghans, in particular
those of the groups just mentioned. Moreover, access to
education, employment, health care and other services
must be guaranteed.
The Taliban’s assumption of power has broad
implications, extending beyond the borders of
Afghanistan. In the light of the current situation,
neighbouring countries and regional stakeholders
fear instability and the attendant risk of the possible
exportation of terrorism. The Council should give due
consideration to those legitimate concerns. The A3+1
encourages the countries of the region to enhance
their cooperation to create more stable conditions that
would bring about a peaceful solution to the situation in
Afghanistan and improve regional security.
Turning now to the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
the A3+1 remains committed to supporting lasting
peace, development and human rights in Afghanistan.
We stand ready to engage constructively during
upcoming negotiations.
In conclusion, Kenya, Tunisia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines and the Niger reaffirm their unwavering
solidarity with the people of Afghanistan during this
uncertain time. We reiterate our support for their vision
of a peaceful and progressive country.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome your personal participation,
Mr. President, in today’s meeting.
On 11 September, exactly 20 years will have elapsed
since the tragic events in New York, when nearly
3,000 innocent lives were lost. We thank Permanent
Representative Linda Thomas-Greenfield and other
colleagues from the Permanent Mission of the United
States of America for the opportunity to attend the

S/PV. 8853

memorial on 11 September today to pay tribute to the
innocent victims of that monstrous act. We extend our
condolences to the Government and the people of the
United States of America and to the families of those
who lost loved ones.
Terrorism is a basic evil and can be vanquished
only through joint efforts, which should not hinge on
political situations. The tragic events of 11 September
have a direct impact on the topic of today’s meeting,
as they marked the start of the 20-year campaign
in Afghanistan.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, Ms. Deborah
Lyons, for her insights and assessment of the situation in
Afghanistan. We also listened carefully to civil society
representatives Ms. Wazhma Frogh and Ms. Malala
Yousafzai. We welcome the fact that representatives of
countries in the region have the opportunity today to
speak about an issue of particular relevance to them.
We have all been closely following the rapidly
changing situation in Afghanistan. Today’s meeting
is being held against the backdrop of the Taliban’s
announcement on 7 September of its caretaker
Government. New structures of authority are now being
created. We continue to trust that those structures will
be inclusive and reflect the interests of all Afghans and
ethnopolitical forces, as that is the only way to achieve
peace. We have continued to underscore our interest in
maintaining stability in Afghanistan. That is our main
aim, and one we all share. We cannot allow ourselves
to ignore the situation on the ground or the new reality.
Nonetheless, the root causes of the new situation
did not appear overnight. Recent events clearly show
that Afghans will not accept external management of
their development. Only Afghans themselves can decide
the fate of their country. At the same time, decisions
should be taken on an inclusive basis, while bearing
in mind the interests of all segments of society — all
ethnic groups — while, of course, ensuring the rights of
women and respect for basic human rights.
We have followed the steps of the new Government,
which has announced that it will end the fighting
and bring order to the country. It has announced an
amnesty for Government workers and plans to address
the narcotics trade. We have heard about guarantees
of security for diplomats. We trust that, in the current
situation, the safety of United Nations staff, as well as

21-2467613/26

S/PV.8853

The situation in Afghanistan

the inviolability of its facilities in Afghanistan, will
also be guaranteed.
At this stage, it is most important to focus on the
most pressing issues, in particular those linked to the
timely provision of humanitarian assistance to all in
need. According to our information, humanitarian
workers themselves have not faced serious problems
in providing assistance. Efforts are under way to build
rapport with new authorities across the whole country
to broaden humanitarian access. First and foremost,
financial support should be provided to bolster the
efforts of humanitarian workers. We trust that key
donors will provide the necessary assistance for the
socioeconomic recovery of Afghanistan, not just in
word but also in deed.
As the situation shows, despite the endless streams
of funding and the foreign military presence over the
past 20 years, poverty, the lack of food in Afghanistan
and other pressing issues have not yet been solved.
Addressing those problems in the current circumstances
is more challenging, given the basic lack of funding.
The country is on the brink of economic collapse.
The deteriorating socioeconomic and humanitarian
situation does not bode well for the future. On the
contrary, it will inevitably lead to destabilization and
an even greater humanitarian crisis, which, in turn,
will exacerbate the migration crisis in the region and
around the world. We trust that access will be granted
to Afghanistan’s frozen assets in the interests of the
Afghan people.
Over the years, the threat posed by terrorism and
narcotics has continued unabated. As in the past, we are
concerned about the ongoing presence in the country
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)Khorasan, whose terrorist activities could spread across
the borders of Afghanistan and jeopardize the security
of neighbouring States in Central Asia and beyond.
ISIL is not interested in establishing peace and stability
in Afghanistan and still pursues the ultimate goal of
building a global caliphate. It is in our vital interests
that Afghanistan never again be a hotbed of terrorism.
The risk of militants infiltrating the region,
including disguised as refugees, is of great concern to
our Central Asian partners. We are in regular contact
with all five countries of Central Asia. Cooperation
among regional organizations — the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), including
14/26

09/09/2021

the CSTO Working Group on Afghanistan and the
updated mechanism of the SCO-Afghanistan Contact
Group — is more important than ever.
The problem of the production and smuggling
of Afghan drugs is inextricably linked to terrorism.
Afghanistan continues to be the largest supplier of
opiates. More than two thirds of the country’s provinces
produce drugs. We have mentioned this issue many
times, but nobody wants to hear about it. The usually
rather narrow coverage of this topic in the SecretaryGeneral’s reports is dispiriting. It is also clear that the
efforts of the previous Government to fight this scourge
were insufficient. Moreover, the scale of cultivation
has increased significantly. We hope that the new
authorities will be able to solve this problem, as they
have stated, in order to spare the region from the drug
threats coming from Afghanistan.
We see that the situation in Afghanistan is now being
discussed in practically all international platforms, and
proposals to create new platforms are mushrooming.
Many States, including those far from the region, are
trying to hastily find a solution to the Afghan problem
by using standard responses and applying their own
spin. Many mistakes have already been made, for which
the Afghan people have had to pay. We call for patience
and for a balanced and thoughtful approach that takes
into account the lessons learned. Repeating past errors
will be much more costly.
For its part, the Russian Federation remains
interested in the expeditious stabilization of Afghanistan
and its post-conflict recovery. We would like to ensure
that this country never poses a threat to the region and
the world.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank and commend the briefers
for their presentations and their commitment. The
presence of three women in particular — Ms. Wazhma
Frogh, Ms. Malala Yousafzai and Special Representative
Lyons — before the Security Council today reminds us
that women must not be forgotten in the Afghan crisis,
Instead, they must be at the heart of any solution.
I would like to express our full support to Deborah
Lyons. I also salute the courage and determination of
the teams of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and, beyond that, of all the
United Nations staff in Afghanistan. Those who are
still there are working in a very deteriorated security
and humanitarian context. Their safety must be a
21-24676

09/09/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8853

constant concern for us all. The Secretary-General’s
report (S/2021/759) reminds us of this as we negotiate
the renewal of UNAMA’s mandate.

determination of Afghan women, and we will support
them in their future struggles as we have done in
the past.

The international community’s demands on the
Taliban are extremely clear. They were set out explicitly
in resolution 2593 (2021) and have been repeated by
France and its European partners on many occasions.

Afghanistan must not become a sanctuary for
terrorist groups again. We demand that the Taliban
break all direct and indirect links, including financial
ones, with terrorist groups, in particular Al-Qaida.

The first is the safe and unhindered departure of
Afghans and foreign nationals who wish to leave the
country. That is central to resolution 2593 (2021), which
was supported by France, the United Kingdom and the
United States. The Taliban made concrete commitments
in that regard in their 27 August 2021 statement, and
they must uphold those commitments. We are working
with all partners concerned, including Afghanistan’s
neighbours, to ensure that they do so. One of the
priorities is that those who wish to leave Afghanistan
should be able to do so via Kabul airport, where access
must be free, safe and secure.

France has constantly reiterated that it would
support the establishment of a transitional Government
that represents the Afghan people as a whole and
attends to the needs of the population. It is evident
that the composition of the new interim Government
announced by the Taliban yesterday does not meet that
requirement at all.

The second priority is to guarantee humanitarian
access throughout Afghanistan. The situation on the
ground continues to worsen. Almost half of the Afghan
population is now dependent on external humanitarian
aid. France will take part in the 13 September
ministerial meeting in Geneva and will contribute to
the international effort to help the Afghan people. But
aid is nothing if it does not reach all those who need
it most. The protection of humanitarian and medical
personnel must be guaranteed. The Taliban made
commitments in that connection. However, words do
not suffice; we expect concrete actions and assurances.
Female humanitarian workers must be able to complete
their missions.
All parties must meet their obligations under
international law, including international humanitarian
law. We will also not budge on respect for human
rights, in particular the rights of women and girls.
We heard two poignant testimonies from Ms. Frogh
and Ms. Yousafzai. They reminded us — each in her
own way and with her own story — of the courage of
Afghan women and girls who have fought hard for their
rights over the past 20 years. Protecting those gains is
a top priority, and the violation of those rights will not
go unpunished.
Girls must be able to continue to go to school and
aspire to leadership positions. Their elders must be
able to continue to work and enjoy their fundamental
rights and freedoms without hindrance. We know the

In conclusion, France will continue to lend its
full support to the Afghan people and will be vigilant
to ensure that the commitments made by the Taliban
are respected and translated into concrete action on
the ground.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Representative Deborah Lyons,
Ms. Malala Yousafzai and Ms. Wazhma Frogh for their
briefings. My country highly values their testimony,
and I am sure the same is true for other countries.
The Security Council has before it today the
important task of considering the role of the United
Nations, particularly the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, in supporting Afghanistan in
overcoming the complex humanitarian, political and
security situation. I express my country’s appreciation
for the work of the Mission. Its efforts to protect
human rights, promote gender equality and facilitate
humanitarian assistance is now more important
than ever.
The testimony of the briefers makes it clear that the
Afghan people need the support of the United Nations
and the international community more than ever.
Mexico stands in solidarity with the Afghan people
and reiterates its willingness to provide assistance
for humanitarian reasons to those whose lives are in
imminent danger or are at risk of physical harm. An
example of this was the humanitarian protection and
asylum granted to media workers and their families,
as well as to women from the Afghan Dreamers Team.
We commend all States that have hosted refugees and
reiterate the importance of respecting international
refugee law.

21-2467615/26

S/PV.8853

The situation in Afghanistan

As outlined by Special Representative Lyons,
the humanitarian situation is deplorable. Between
January and August, 550,000 people were displaced.
Moreover, it is estimated that one in three people
experience food insecurity, exacerbated by drought.
It is also estimated that half of children under 5 years
of age suffer some degree of malnutrition. It is clear
that humanitarian assistance is urgently needed,
yet attacks on humanitarian personnel continue
unabated. Furthermore, there are reports that female
humanitarian workers are being restricted if they are
not accompanied by a man. Mexico echoes calls to
guarantee unrestricted humanitarian access. We will
closely follow the 13 September ministerial meeting
to be convened by the Secretary-General to assess the
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan.
The repression of popular protests — especially of
women — and the violent arrests, the executions, the
persecution of media workers and the impact on civilians
make inclusive governance that meets all the aspirations
of the Afghan people an urgent matter. It is important
that those who govern in Afghanistan guarantee
civilians’ rights and respect international obligations.
Mexico and Ireland, as co-Chairs of the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security, once
called for the future Government of Afghanistan to
include the full and effective participation of women.
We regret that that call was not been heeded in the
formation of the interim Government.
In line with resolution 2593 (2021), we make
the following appeals: first, to ensure full, safe and
unconditional humanitarian access and the safety
of all humanitarian workers in accordance with
international humanitarian law; secondly, to ensure
that anyone wishing to leave Afghanistan can do so
safely and without restriction; thirdly, for respect and
protection for the human rights of all Afghans and to
ensure the full and effective participation of women in
all decision-making processes; and fourthly, to ensure
that Afghanistan never again becomes a platform or
safe haven for terrorists or threats to the security of
other countries.
In conclusion, this morning’s visit by Council
members to the memorial to the victims of the
11 September attacks serves as a reminder of the
importance of combating terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations in accordance with international law.
We must stand united in this fight in memory not only
16/26

09/09/2021

of those who died that day but also in memory of all the
victims who have fallen from that scourge, including
the victims of the heinous attack at Kabul airport.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank Ireland for convening
this important meeting, and I thank the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Defence of Ireland for presiding
over it. I thank Special Representative Lyons for her
comprehensive briefing. We commend the efforts of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and other United Nations personnel on the
ground in these very challenging times. We also thank
Ms. Frogh and Ms. Yousafzai for sharing their stories
and their thoughts. I welcome the representatives of
Afghanistan, Turkey, Kazakhstan, Pakistan and Iran to
this meeting.
We have been following closely the situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for the country and
the people on the ground — Afghans, foreign nationals
and United Nations personnel.
We strongly condemn the recent terrorist attacks
in Kabul and express our deepest condolences to the
relevant countries and families of the victims. It is
our sincere hope that the situation in the country can
soon stabilize for the benefit of the Afghan people
and for peace and stability in the region, in particular
Afghanistan’s neighbouring countries.
In the light of the current developments, I wish to
highlight the following.
First, the priority now is to ensure order and security
in the country, as well as the safety, security and wellbeing of all people on the ground. We call on all relevant
parties in Afghanistan to refrain from the use of force
and respect their obligations under international law,
including humanitarian and human rights law, and in
line with resolution 2593 (2021). The normal operations
of indispensable infrastructure and essential services
for the civilian population, particularly vulnerable
groups, such as women, children and persons with
disabilities, must be ensured.
We note the statements from relevant parties on
continuing to ensure the safe passage of Afghans and
foreign nationals who wish to leave the country. We are
gravely concerned about the security incidents related
to United Nations personnel in Afghanistan in recent
days, as is indicated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2021/759). The safety and security of United
Nations personnel, humanitarian workers, foreign
21-24676

09/09/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

nationals, international organizations and diplomatic
missions must be guaranteed.
Secondly, it is imperative to promote an inclusive
political settlement for the stability and development
of the country. We call on all relevant parties in
Afghanistan to continue to engage in dialogue, resolve
their differences and promote national reconciliation
and harmony. It is equally important to ensure the
active and meaningful participation of women and
youth in political and all other aspects of society.
Thirdly, further efforts are needed to tackle the
increasing challenges related to the humanitarian
situation, food insecurity, terrorism, migrants and
refugees, the coronavirus disease pandemic and drug
trafficking. The humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan is
currently affecting over 18 million people, half of the
country’s population. Immediate, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access must be ensured to reach the
Afghan people in need. We hope that the United Nations
and regional and international partners will redouble
their efforts in supporting peace and the reconstruction
of Afghanistan, particularly in addressing the current
humanitarian challenges.
Fourthly, we would like to commend the efforts
of UNAMA and stress the importance of ensuring
the security and safety of the Mission and all its
personnel — international and national alike. In the
upcoming period, the mandate of the Mission will
need to be carefully considered given the current
situation. We will engage closely with other Council
members in that regard. At the same time, we call on
all relevant parties in Afghanistan to fully cooperate
and create favourable conditions for the United Nations
and UNAMA to carry out their mandate for the benefit
of the people of Afghanistan and the development of
the country.

S/PV. 8853

for sharing her views and her critical work to foster
women’s inclusion and meaningful participation in
Afghan civil life.
On 31 August, a new chapter for our engagement
with Afghanistan began. In this difficult and changing
environment, Afghanistan needs the United Nations
and UNAMA more than ever. Ambassador ThomasGreenfield had the great privilege of meeting
individually with Malala just last week. Her advocacy
is a poignant reminder of what is at stake for women
and girls going forward. Millions of Afghan children,
particularly girls, are out of school. Some 300,000
children have been forced out of their homes. UNICEF
predicts that 1 million children under the age of five
may soon face severe acute malnutrition. They may die
from hunger.
The United States remains committed to the
people of Afghanistan. As the single largest donor of
humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan, we are helping
our partners on the ground provide food, protection,
shelter, essential health care, water, sanitation, hygiene
services and so much more vital humanitarian aid
to Afghans.

Before concluding, Viet Nam would like to reiterate
its full support for the pursuit of peace, stability and
development in Afghanistan for the Afghan people.

But the needs are vast, and at this moment, while
there is a dramatically reduced diplomatic footprint
across the country, the United Nations has a vitally
important role to play. We need the United Nations
to help prevent human rights violations and abuses
and pursue accountability for those that have already
occurred. We need the United Nations to protect
children and civilians. And the United Nations must
help coordinate desperately needed humanitarian
assistance. UNAMA’s work, both in Kabul and through
its field offices, is therefore absolutely necessary. At
the same time, we are deeply concerned about the
safety and security of UNAMA’s field staff, the ability
of women personnel from the United Nations to do the
same work their male counterparts are permitted to do,
and the delivery of humanitarian aid.

Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative Lyons for her briefing.
Through her, I would like to thank the entire team of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for its work and commitment, especially
during these extremely challenging few weeks. I thank
Malala Yousafzai, as always, for her courage and for
addressing the Security Council. Her insights and
experiences are invaluable. I thank also Wazhma Frogh

First, we are outraged at reports that members of
the Taliban have engaged in reprisals against United
Nations staff throughout the country. This is simply
unacceptable. We call on the Taliban leadership to
ensure that Taliban members at all levels comply with
their obligations under international humanitarian
law and take every action to respect the operational
independence and neutrality of the United Nations and
its international and national staff.

21-2467617/26

S/PV.8853

The situation in Afghanistan

We are a strong supporter of the United Nations
Department of Safety and Security and other security and
protective services elements of the United Nations, and
we are exploring additional ways to bolster protections
for UNAMA’s staff and their families, whose safety
and security remain a top and shared priority among
Member States and our United Nations partners.
Secondly, we have also heard reports that some
women, including female United Nations staff members
and female staff of United States implementing partners
are prohibited from coming into the office or being
required to enter into their workplaces with a male
chaperone. To call these reported incidents outrageous
would be an understatement. All United Nations staff
members must be able to conduct their work without
undue burden and without discrimination as to who
they are.
Thirdly, we call on the Taliban to permit
humanitarian organizations to continue their vital work
in Afghanistan. With rising food prices, a national
drought and severe malnutrition threatening so many
of the country’s children, the World Food Programme’s
efforts to establish a humanitarian air bridge are critical
for ensuring uninterrupted food aid.
I would like to end by addressing the Taliban
directly. As stated in resolution 2593 (2021), which we
adopted on 30 August, the Security Council expects
the Taliban to live up to all of its commitments. That
includes facilitating safe passage for Afghans and
foreign nationals who want to leave Afghanistan.
All parties must also respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law in all circumstances,
including those related to the protection of civilians.
If a new Afghan Government upholds its
commitments and obligations, brings greater stability
to the country and region, demonstrates real inclusion
and protects the gains of the past two decades, we will
work with it. But we will not do that on the basis of trust
or faith alone.
The Taliban seeks international legitimacy and
support. Our message is simple. Any legitimacy and
support will have to be earned. The standards the
international community has set are clear. We are
watching closely to see that those standards are met.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I welcome you, Mr. President, as you have
come to New York to preside over today’s meeting,
18/26

09/09/2021

and I welcome the presence of the representatives of
Pakistan and other countries of the region in question.
I thank Special Representative Deborah Lyons and the
two civil society representatives for their briefings.
As an ancient civilization in Central Asia,
Afghanistan has experienced many vicissitudes of
life. Over the past 20 years, Afghanistan’s peaceful
development has been fraught with twists and turns
and challenges, and the Afghan people have suffered
immensely. Twenty years on, the various Afghan
factions have failed to achieve unity, only to see their
internal differences deepen and widen. Again, 20
years on, terrorist forces in Afghanistan have not been
eradicated, and terrorist organizations have become
increasingly bold and rampant. And for 20 years, the
Afghan people have been denied development and
dignity and have been teetering between poverty and
instability. Only history can do justice to what has
happened in Afghanistan over the past 20 years.
However, the recent abrupt changes in Afghanistan
remind us once again that military interventions and
power politics cannot achieve popularity, and foreign
models and democratic transformations are hard pressed
to gain a foothold. What relevant countries have done in
Afghanistan in the past 20 years has ended in failure.
They should seriously reflect on that and correct
their mistakes in a timely manner rather than walk
away from the problems of their own making, leaving
those problems to Afghanistan and other countries in
the region. After all, they bear the inescapable political,
security, economic and humanitarian responsibilities
for Afghanistan and are more obligated than other
countries to help Afghanistan maintain stability,
prevent chaos and embark on the road towards peace
and reconstruction. They should earnestly honour their
commitments to the Afghan people and take concrete
actions to participate in the international community’s
assistance efforts in Afghanistan.
As we speak, Afghanistan finds itself buried in
rubble and in ruins, with myriad reconstruction tasks
ahead. The Taliban in Afghanistan have announced the
formation of an interim Government as a necessary
step towards restoring order and commencing post-war
reconstruction. According to the Afghan Taliban, the
interim Government was set up to restore social and
economic order as soon as possible.
We hope that the Taliban will learn lessons from
history, honour its commitments, unite all ethnic groups
21-24676

09/09/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

and factions, build a broad-based and inclusive political
architecture, pursue moderate and prudent domestic
and foreign policies, protect the rights of women and
children, resolutely combat terrorist forces in all their
forms and manifestations, and develop friendly and
cooperative relations with other countries, not least
their neighbours.
Today Afghanistan stands at a crossroads of
historic import. We sincerely hope that Afghanistan
can make the right choice and find a development path
suited to its national conditions. The international
community should, for its part, play a constructive
role in Afghanistan’s peaceful reconstruction based
on respecting the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Afghanistan, honouring the will
of the Afghan people and adhering to the principle of an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process.
There should be more dialogue with and guidance
to the new Powers in Afghanistan, and we should
guard against conceiving presumptions or, worse,
creating difficulties. The international community
should urge and help the Taliban to take ownership of
its commitments in the areas of politics, development,
counter-terrorism, counter narcotics and human
rights. In particular, it should prevent Afghanistan
from becoming a new cradle of terrorism or a hub
for terrorists. All countries should abandon double
standards, and, in accordance with international law
and Security Council resolutions, they should resolutely
combat all such terrorist forces as the Islamic State,
Al-Qaida and the Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement,
so as to prevent these groups from conglomerating and
stirring up trouble in Afghanistan.
China welcomes Secretary-General Guterres’
proposed meeting on the humanitarian situation in
Afghanistan slated for 13 September in Geneva, in
the hopes that the international community — major
donor countries in particular — will step up assistance
to Afghanistan. At the same time, the international
community should help Afghanistan tap into its
advantages when it comes to natural endowment,
geographical location and human resources, carry
out regional cooperation and collaborative activities,
promote economic and social development and improve
the well-being of its people. One of the major reasons for
the current economic difficulties in Afghanistan is the
freezing of Afghan overseas assets. Those assets belong
to Afghanistan and should be used for Afghanistan, not
as leverage, threats or restraints.

S/PV. 8853

The situation in Afghanistan is closely related to
the peace and development of the entire region. Over
the years, Afghanistan’s immediate and regional
neighbours have actively supported the country’s
peace, reconciliation and reconstruction choices and
have made enormous efforts to promote peace and
development in Afghanistan. Those countries are on
the front lines of the fight against terrorism and its
overflow, cross-border drug smuggling and the refugee
and migrant exodus. The international community
should understand their difficulties, respect their
sacrifices and support their efforts.
A Foreign Ministers meeting was held yesterday
among Afghanistan’s six neighbouring countries, at
which in-depth discussions were held on such topics as the
current situation in Afghanistan, pandemic prevention
and control, port openings, migratory regulations and
controls, humanitarian aid, counter-terrorism, security
and cooperation on drug enforcement, among others.
Consensus was reached on a number of issues, whereby
everyone agreed on addressing common concerns and
strengthening communication and coordination among
one another so as to create an environment that will
enable the restoration of stability and reconstruction
in Afghanistan.
As a close neighbour, China has always respected
the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Afghanistan, adhered to the principle of
non-interference in its internal affairs and pursued
a friendly policy with regard to all the people of
Afghanistan. In order to meet the latter’s immediate
needs, China will donate in 3 million vaccine doses in
a first phase, which will be followed by ¥200 million in
food, supplies, vaccines and medicine on an emergency
basis. When security and other conditions are met, China
will be poised to help Afghanistan create projects that
will improve livelihoods and, to the best of its ability,
support Afghanistan in its peaceful reconstruction and
economic development.
In the current circumstances, China supports
the United Nations in playing a greater role in
alleviating the humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan
and helping Afghanistan achieve a smooth transition
and embark upon the path of peaceful development
as soon as possible. China appreciates the work of
Special Representative Lyons and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. We look forward
to in-depth examination and discussions with other
Council members in order to come up with suitable

21-2467619/26

S/PV.8853

The situation in Afghanistan

09/09/2021

arrangements for the next phase of the United Nations
presence in Afghanistan.

in other areas, such as Spin Boldak, Malistan and other
provinces of Afghanistan.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.

The Taliban has also violently suppressed peaceful
demonstrations in Kabul, Herat, Mazar-e-Sharif
and other cities in Afghanistan, as other speakers
previously mentioned. Members have probably seen the
graphic images of brave Afghan women protesters who
were threatened and beaten by heavily armed Taliban
members on the streets of Kabul. Photos circulating
online also show the tortured and bruised bodies of
two journalists who were detained after covering the
protests in Kabul. Two innocent young lives were
also lost in protests in Herat because of the Taliban’s
violent response.

Mr. Isaczai (Afghanistan): I would like to thank
all the previous briefers for their insightful statements,
in particular my countrywoman Wazhma Frogh for
bringing the voice and cries of Afghan women before
the Security Council.
At the outset, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the start of Ireland’s presidency and
express my deep appreciation to Ireland for its staunch
support for Afghanistan, especially Afghan women and
girls. I would furthermore like to thank all members of
the Council for their continued attention to the situation
in my country and ask them to remain united in their
support for the Afghan people and our rights and
freedom. We are also very thankful for the life-saving
work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the United Nations family
of agencies. We commend the leadership of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons and her
team. Her comprehensive briefing today showed the
need for extending and expanding UNAMA’s mandate.
On the eve of the twentieth anniversary of the
11 September 2001 terrorist attacks against the United
States, I also take this opportunity to pay tribute to all
victims of terrorism around the world.
The situation in Afghanistan continues to
deteriorate, and we are learning more about the true
and unchanged nature of the Taliban every day. Since
the Council’s previous meeting on Afghanistan, on
30 August (see S/PV.8844), the Taliban has continued
to commit human rights violations and possibly war
crimes, which have exacerbated the humanitarian
situation. Despite the Taliban’s total blockade of the
Panjshir Valley, we have eye-witness accounts of the
Taliban’s widespread atrocities, perpetrated with
the support of foreign terrorist fighters and foreign
intelligence and military assets.
They have carried out targeted executions, cut
off communication lines and imposed a humanitarian
blockade that is preventing food supplies from entering
the province. As demanded by us before, we reiterate
our call for accountability and the urgent deployment
of a fact-finding mission to Afghanistan to assess
violations of human rights, not only in Panjshir but also
20/26

I call on the international community to condemn
the Taliban’s suppression of such peaceful protests
and stand with the Afghan women who are defending
their rights. Yesterday the Taliban’s new Ministry of
the Interior banned all public protests. They have also
banned music and women and girls’ sports and have
prevented most female workers from returning to work
until further notice.
Those actions prove that the Taliban’s earlier
promises to allow Afghanistan’s independent media to
operate freely and safely and respect the human rights
of all Afghans, including women, are just empty words
intended to deceive the international community. The
members of the Council rightfully said that they would
not judge the Taliban on their words, but their actions.
They have now acted, and the Council cannot be silent
in its response.
After much waiting and a modicum of optimism,
the Taliban announced their so-called cabinet on
September 7, which includes solely senior Taliban
members predominantly representing one ethnic
group. It fails on all metrics of inclusivity and has been
rejected by the absolute majority of the Afghan people,
including political and civil society groups. Their socalled cabinet, which includes multiple individuals
listed in the sanctions regime established by resolution
1988 (2011), will undermine Afghanistan’s political and
ethnic diversity and is leading to increased tensions and
damaging the prospect for a comprehensive and lasting
peace in the country.
The Council has on multiple occasions committed
itself to not recognizing an exclusionary Government or
supporting the re-establishment of the Islamic emirate,
as stipulated in resolution 2513 (2020). The Afghan
21-24676

09/09/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

people expect the Council to keep that promise and
pressure the Taliban to pave the way for an inclusive
Government that all segments of our society can accept
and feel part of. The people’s protests in the past
few days sends a strong message to the Taliban that
Afghans of all backgrounds and creeds will not accept
a totalitarian system imposed upon them. They demand
their freedom and want to have a say in shaping the
future destiny of their country.
I therefore ask the Council to withhold any
recognition of any Government in Afghanistan unless
it is truly inclusive and formed on the basis of the free
will of the people. I further urge members to draw a
fundamental red line regarding the Taliban’s treatment
of women and girls and respect for the rights of all
Afghans. The Council must use all its diplomatic tools,
including the full implementation of existing multilateral
sanctions, to make the Taliban engage in sincere and
genuine talks for a comprehensive settlement.
The Council should also re-evaluate its approach
to granting travel-ban exemptions to Taliban leaders
on the United Nations sanctions list after they failed
to resolve the conflict through peaceful means. Any
further extension of the mechanism would be misused
for the purpose of gaining international recognition for
their new non-inclusive Government.
While the Taliban is celebrating its victory by
shooting guns in the air on the streets of Kabul, a
humanitarian catastrophe is unfolding. According to
the United Nation’s flash appeal for Afghanistan, aid
organizations are witnessing a dangerous deepening of
humanitarian needs across the country and the situation
is about to get worse.
A perfect storm is brewing. The devastating impact
of Afghanistan’s second major drought in four years is
taking hold; a cold and dangerous winter is approaching;
the pandemic continues to spread; the economy is in a
state of collapse; and there is no Government that can
provide even the most basic services to the people.
The facts from the ground are devastating. People are
running out of cash and selling their meagre belongings
to survive. The 2021 harvest is expected to be below
average, and the next lean season is expected to be more
intense and longer. Severe malnutrition will hit 50 per
cent of Afghan children. Thousands more are likely
to be displaced and leave the country. Therefore, the
Afghan people need the help of the Council to survive.

S/PV. 8853

I extend Afghanistan’s most sincere gratitude to the
entire humanitarian community for its commitment to
stay and deliver and the United Nations for its dedicated
support. We also thank all Member States and other
partners that have already announced increased
humanitarian funding. But it is not enough.
In that respect, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for convening a high-level humanitarian
conference for Afghanistan on 13 September in Geneva.
I urge all members of the Council to commit increased
funding during that conference.
The negotiations on UNAMA’s mandate come
at a time of extreme challenges for Afghanistan. We
ask the members of the Security Council to consider
a comprehensive and strong UNAMA mandate to
empower it to address the humanitarian crisis and
monitor and report on the human rights situation on
the ground. The people of Afghanistan are in desperate
need and the international community cannot afford to
leave them behind.
On the eve of the twentieth anniversary of the
horrendous terrorist attacks on 11 September 2001,
the world cannot turn its back on Afghanistan and
accept the new status quo as normal. We still have an
opportunity to build on the successes of the past 20 years
and work with all parties to establish a political system
that is representative of Afghanistan’s diversity, that
conforms with Islamic values and international norms
and commitments and that prevents Afghanistan from
becoming a safe haven for terrorists. In order to achieve
that, the unity and decisive action of the Security
Council are paramount.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Deborah
Lyons, for her comprehensive briefing. I also thank
Ms. Wazhma Frogh and Ms. Malala Yousafzai for their
insightful statements.
Over the years in this Chamber, we have emphasized
time and again the importance of supporting
Afghanistan on its journey of political, security and
economic transformation. We have highlighted our
collective achievements and responsibilities to reach
lasting peace.
Despite all obstacles, with the help of the
international community, Afghan people made major

21-2467621/26

S/PV.8853

The situation in Afghanistan

gains at important costs over the past two decades in the
field of fundamental rights and freedoms, especially the
rights of women and girls. We believe that the protection
of those achievements will be first and foremost in the
interest of the Afghan nation. The interim Government
of Afghanistan knows very well that it will be held
accountable if it violates human rights, especially the
rights of women and girls. We should we watching
developments in that context very closely.
Afghanistan stands at an important crossroads
today. We note the announcement by the Taliban this
week about the formation of the interim cabinet. We
hope that those efforts will ultimately result in the
creation of an inclusive and representative Government.
That is essential for long-term stability. To that end, we
believe that gradual engagement is the right approach.
We need to engage with the Taliban in order to see
whether its promises will be put into action or not. It
has to earn our trust by translating its words into deeds.
It will, of course, be judged by what it does, not by what
it is saying.
Now more than ever, the Afghan people and
vulnerable groups in particular need our support and
solidarity. One of our urgent tasks should be to ensure the
continued functioning of Kabul International Airport.
In his latest report (S/2021/759), the Secretary-General
underlines the preservation of infrastructure and the
reopening of airports as vital for the continuation of
basic services.
In recent weeks, we have done our best to support
our allies and partners in their evacuation efforts.
Together with Qatar, we have undertaken efforts to
ensure the safe and secure operation of Kabul airport.
It is critical to keep the airport operational in order
to connect Afghan people with the world. It is also
the most rapid and safest route to ensure the transfer
of humanitarian assistance to people in need. In that
regard, we welcome the adoption of resolution 2593
(2021) and call for its swift implementation.
Let me also touch briefly upon the humanitarian
situation, which requires our immediate attention.
We are witnessing the worsening of living conditions
throughout Afghanistan, with half of the population
in need of urgent assistance and one third facing
hunger. We have already stepped up our aid efforts
through the Turkish Red Crescent. However, global
efforts are urgently needed in order to respond to the
deteriorating situation.
22/26

09/09/2021

The high-level ministerial meeting to be hosted by
the Secretary-General next week will definitely provide
an important opportunity to mobilize the international
community in that direction. Our endeavours should
also include neighbouring countries that are already
hosting a large number of Afghan refugees and
struggling with the socioeconomic impact. Unless
we take immediate action now, we will face greater
humanitarian consequences and security repercussions
in the region and beyond.
Turkey and Afghanistan have deep-rooted
historical, cultural and ethnic ties. For many years,
my country has assumed a significant role to support
Afghanistan on every front. While we have actively
contributed to its security, we have also carried out
the most comprehensive development programme in
our history through countless projects, including many
on the empowerment of women and girls. Through
regional initiatives and platforms such as the Heart
of Asia-Istanbul Process and trilateral cooperation
mechanisms, we have strived to find comprehensive
and pragmatic solutions to regional issues.
Our commitment to Afghanistan and the Afghan
people is open-ended. We will never abandon them,
and we will not let them down. Together, we should
strengthen the hopes of the Afghan people for the
future. Lasting peace and stability require political
reconciliation. Afghanistan can overcome the current
challenges only through enhanced unity and solidarity.
We should help them to achieve that.
In conclusion, let me recall that an immediate request
by the Afghan people to the Council is the continued
presence of the United Nations in Afghanistan in all
fields. The Council should uphold its responsibilities
and enable the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan to conduct its activities without any
hindrance. For our part, we are ready to assist in any
way we can to facilitate the central role of the United
Nations at this critical time.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Ilyassov (Kazakhstan): We commend the
Irish presidency for hosting this debate on the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
the efforts of which, under the sterling leadership
of Ms. Deborah Lyons, we acknowledge with
great appreciation.
21-24676

09/09/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

The peace and security of Afghanistan have
always been a priority for Kazakhstan and other
countries in Central Asia. In the spirit of Kazakhstan’s
comprehensive cooperation with the United Nations and
as part of Kazakhstan’s commitments as a full-fledged
member of the Organization, President Kassym-Jomart
Tokayev has taken the decision to fulfil the request of
the United Nations to temporarily relocate UNAMA
to Almaty. That relocation will streamline the work
of the United Nations in the region and primarily for
Afghanistan in these challenging times. That decision
showcases the mature and robust partnership between
the United Nations and Kazakhstan. Our Government
is looking forward to working with the United Nations
and UNAMA to contribute to the peace and safety of
the Afghan people.
UNAMA was relocated to the city of Almaty,
which already hosts 18 United Nations agencies with
multi-country, subregional and regional mandates in
the International Organizations Building. Bonding with
UNAMA could turn that hub into an efficient regional
centre for the Sustainable Development Goals and
contribute to stability in the region and in Afghanistan
in the long term, including in crucial areas such as
education and human capital.
For example, for over a decade, Kazakhstan has
provided educational scholarships for young Afghans
to study at Kazakh universities.
Together with the European Union, in 2017 we
launched a project on the economic empowerment
of Afghan women through secondary education and
training in Central Asia. On January 21, together with
the European Commission, we started the second phase
of the project, which enrolled an additional 100 Afghan
women in the universities of Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan
and Kyrgyzstan. Despite the current situation, my
Government decided to continue that programme
for Afghan students as long as it is feasible and safe
for them.
UNAMA is currently the only effective international
actor on the ground. We must fully support the Mission,
politically, financially and logistically, with a primary
focus on delivering humanitarian aid to those in need.
While my country shares in all the political pleas,
messages and concerns, I would like to focus on the
practical aspects of humanitarian aid, because we
all spoke about how important this is. Our colleague
from France said that humanitarian aid means nothing

S/PV. 8853

so long as it does not reach the people. Our colleague
from Estonia mentioned that even now it is very hard
for humanitarian aid workers to reach some parts
of Afghanistan.
Winter is coming in two months. Most parts of
Afghanistan will be cut off, and even the efficient
functioning of Kabul airport will not mean that all
this humanitarian aid will reach those people. My
Government therefore considers it important that all
the pledges that we make and all the financial resources
that we will allocate for that and all the humanitarian
aid that will be collected should be efficiently and
safely delivered to the provinces and to the people that
are really in need. Delivering such assistance only to
Kabul airport, unfortunately, does not mean that it will
reach the people in need in the provinces.
We consider it necessary, therefore, to establish
an alternative regional hub for storing and distributing
international humanitarian aid to Afghanistan. In that
respect, given that in Almaty we have approximately
250 capable UNAMA officers, it takes less than two
hours to fly from Almaty to Afghanistan. Given the
infrastructure and the logistical possibilities of my
country, we are ready to engage with the United Nations
on establishing an alternative humanitarian hub for
Afghanistan in Almaty to efficiently deliver such aid.
The President: I thank the representative of
Kazakhstan very much for that suggestion in particular.
I am sure that it will be followed up on.
I now give the floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like first to
congratulate Ireland on having assumed the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of September and
to welcome you here, Sir, to preside over this meeting.
It is also the eve of the twentieth anniversary of
the 9/11 terrorist attacks, and I should like to take
this opportunity to express my delegation’s sincere
condolences to the delegation and to the people of the
United States.
I would like to express my gratitude to Ireland for
ensuring the participation of Afghanistan’s neighbours
in this important debate.
Four decades of war and conflict in Afghanistan
have killed more than a million Afghans, injured,
maimed and traumatized many more and devastated
its already fragile economy, society and polity. Today

21-2467623/26

S/PV.8853

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghanistan stands at a critical juncture in its history.
The Afghan people can, with the support of the
international community, restore peace and revive the
prospects of development.
Other than the people of Afghanistan, it is
Pakistan that has been most severely impacted by the
consequences of the conflict in that country. In the
so-called war on terror, 80,000 Pakistanis were killed
in terror attacks and thousands were injured. Our
economy has suffered an estimated damage of more
than $150 billion.
Even as the world fears an outflow of Afghan
refugees, Pakistan continues to host more than
3 million Afghan refugees, with nominal support from
the international community. Thus, for Pakistan, the
restoration of peace and stability in Afghanistan is
an imperative.
Despite the fragility of the situation in Afghanistan,
the fear of widespread bloodshed has been averted. The
acting Government in Kabul was constituted, as we
understand, as a necessary step to establish law and
order and a sense of security in the country, restore
basic services to the people and achieve the purpose of
distributing international humanitarian assistance.
Pakistan, for its part, has so far helped to evacuate
more than 12,000 individuals from 30 countries from
Afghanistan, including diplomatic personnel and staff
of international organizations. We hope that all future
evacuations will be well organized and orderly, in
consultation with the acting Government in Kabul. It is
important that we do not create a sense of fear, which is
likely to generate a flood of refugees from Afghanistan.
Indeed, Afghanistan needs its skilled people to stay and
rebuild the country, not to flee it.
Learning from the past, the international community
must remain engaged in Afghanistan. Instability or
economic collapse will perpetuate conflict and prolong
the suffering of the people of Afghanistan. That will
benefit no one, except those who see continued conflict
in Afghanistan as an opportunity to utilize turmoil to
sponsor terrorism from Afghan territory.
Owing to the coronavirus disease pandemic, to
conflict and to the failure of past Governments and their
corruption, the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan
is dire, with nearly 18 million Afghans in need of urgent
humanitarian assistance. We must prevent the situation
from deteriorating any further, which could trigger a
24/26

09/09/2021

huge outflow of refugees and complicate the prospects
of building peace and security.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s initiative
to convene a high-level ministerial meeting on
13 September. We hope that the international
community will actively participate and generously
contribute towards the Afghanistan flash appeal.
As Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Lyons has advised, Afghanistan’s access to its financial
reserves is essential to prevent any further exacerbation
of the fragile economic situation and the collapse
of the economy. That will be imperative to prevent
runaway inflation, rising prices, growing poverty and,
consequently, a mass refugee outflow.
We take note of the meeting and the efforts of the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Martin Griffiths,
with the de facto authorities in Kabul.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, as well as other agencies, have a crucial
role to play in ensuring the timely and expedited
delivery of humanitarian aid to those in need. All such
activities must be carried out in line with humanitarian
principles while fully respecting Afghan sovereignty.
We urge the acting Government in Kabul to allow
full and unhindered access to United Nations agencies
and personnel for humanitarian operations as well as
to ensure the safety and security of United Nations
personnel and other humanitarian workers.
On its part, Pakistan will continue to play its role in
addressing the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan.
In coordination with United Nations agencies, we have
established a humanitarian air bridge for the provision
of supplies of essential food and medical items
to Afghanistan.
Pakistan is immediately dispatching three
planeloads of humanitarian assistance composed of
food and medicines for the people of Afghanistan. The
first of those humanitarian flights arrived in Kabul
yesterday. We will also dispatch supplies to Afghanistan
through land routes as well, and we are willing to
establish a land corridor to provide humanitarian help
to Afghanistan.
Yesterday Pakistan hosted a virtual meeting of
the Foreign Ministers of Afghanistan’s immediate
neighbours — China Iran, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan
21-24676

09/09/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

and Uzbekistan. At the conclusion of the meeting, a
joint statement was issued. I would like to read out a
few excerpts of it that might be of interest.
The statement expressed support for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Afghanistan
and non-interference in its internal affairs. It noted
that the future of Afghanistan should be determined
by its people. It stressed the necessity of forming an
open, inclusive governmental structure that practices
moderate and sound internal and external policies and
respects fundamental human rights, including those of
ethnic groups, women and children. It cautioned against
the possibility of incitement and the role of spoilers in
Afghanistan. It affirmed the importance of sustained
international engagement on Afghanistan.
The statement condemned the terrorist attacks
on Kabul airport and emphasized that Afghanistan’s
territory should not be allowed to pose a threat to other
countries. It reiterated that terrorist organizations, such
as Da’esh, Al-Qaida, the Eastern Turkistan Islamic
Movement, Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP), the
Balochistan Liberation Army, Jondollah and others,
should not be allowed to maintain a foothold on Afghan
territory. It urged the international community to
provide adequate, predictable, regular and sustainable
financial support, in line with the principle of
responsibility sharing on Afghan refugees. It noted the
fundamental importance of major international energy,
transport, communications, infrastructure and other
projects for Afghanistan.
That meeting and mechanism will continue with
a follow-up meeting in Tehran and the establishment
of a standing mechanism among the six neighbours of
Afghanistan to provide Afghanistan with all possible
support and help in the future. For its part, Pakistan
remains available for consultations, including in
the format of the extended troika, to try to promote
peaceful progress towards an inclusive Government
and the provision of humanitarian help to Afghanistan.
It is obvious that the threat posed by terrorist
groups must be addressed; but it must be addressed
comprehensively and cooperatively, not selectively.
Pakistan has endured hundreds of terrorist attacks by
the TTP, which was sponsored by hostile intelligence
agencies. More than 100 attacks occurred against
Pakistan from Afghan territory in 2020. We will work
with the authorities in Kabul and with the international
community to put a halt to TTP terrorism. We will

S/PV. 8853

also work with our friends in order to put a halt to all
terrorism from Afghanistan.
Peace in Afghanistan is in the interests of the entire
international community. We hope that the international
community, including all of Afghanistan’s neighbours,
will develop an agreed approach to respond to the
new realities in Afghanistan and restore peace and
stability in that country. A fractured and competitive
approach will squander the opportunity to promote
peace, security and prosperity in Afghanistan and the
entire region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let
me congratulate you, Mr. President, on your country’s
presidency of the Security Council this month. I thank
the briefers for their briefings today.
Afghanistan is passing through a critical juncture.
Hundreds of thousands of Afghans have fled their
country; nearly 600,000 others have become internally
displaced; essential food supplies are running short and,
18.4 million people need humanitarian assistance. The
situation is primarily the direct result of the intervention
by the United States and other foreign forces in
Afghanistan and their irresponsible withdrawal. When
they entered Afghanistan, they brought catastrophe
for Afghans; when they withdrew, they left calamity
for Afghans.
From 2001 to 2021, nearly 165,000 Afghans have
been killed, and direct child casualties of the conflict
are estimated at approximately 33,000. Those statistics
alone indicate the gravity and scale of death and
devastation. War crimes committed by foreign forces
in Afghanistan must not go unpunished.
Bearing in mind the very basic needs of the millions
of people in Afghanistan, Iran stands ready to facilitate
the transfer of humanitarian aid to Afghanistan, through
Iran’s seaports, airports, railways, roads and border
crossings. For well over four decades, we have hosted
millions of Afghan refugees. After the recent crisis,
many more refugees have entered Iranian territory.
We expect the international community to shoulder its
responsibility and do much more in providing assistance
to those refugees.
Afghanistan’s people must also be helped to
achieve lasting peace, stability and prosperity. The
full realization of that objective must be facilitated and

21-2467625/26

S/PV.8853

The situation in Afghanistan

strongly supported by the international community,
particularly neighbouring countries. The first meeting
of Foreign Ministers of Afghanistan’s neighbouring
countries, held virtually yesterday, was meant to serve
that purpose. Its next round will be held in Tehran in
the near future.
Iran has always made every effort to help all
Afghan parties settle their differences peacefully. Last
July we organized high-level peace talks between the
delegations of the Afghan Government and the Taliban.
They agreed to continue their talks at a later meeting.
Iran is ready to host the next round of such talks.
Iran continues to urge all Afghan leaders from
various religious, linguistic, ethnic and political
backgrounds to place the interests of all the people of
Afghanistan above the interests of certain segments of
the society, as Afghanistan belongs to all Afghans. The
recent unjustifiable attack and condemnable fratricide
in Panjshir is in contradiction with the united position
of the international community that any Government
that comes to power through force in Afghanistan will
not be recognized.
Indeed, the path to stability, durable peace and
sustainable development in Afghanistan passes
through intra-Afghan talks, with the active and equal
participation of the true representatives of all ethnic,
linguistic and religious groups, aimed at finding a
just, peaceful and durable solution to the crisis, while
achieving national reconciliation and establishing a
truly inclusive, broad-based and fully representative
Government. That Government should emerge from free
and fair elections, including with the full participation
of women, both as voters and candidates. It should

26/26

09/09/2021

be committed to combating terrorism and organized
crime, as well as to guaranteeing and protecting, based
on true Islamic teachings and principles, the human
rights of all Afghan people, including ethnic, linguistic
and religious minorities and women. We expect the
Taliban to honour its commitments in that regard. Such
a Government will enjoy Iran’s support.
Like Afghanistan’s other neighbours, we are
gravely concerned about insecurity and instability,
as well as threats of terrorist networks and organized
criminals active in trafficking in drugs and persons. We
also strongly believe that Afghanistan’s territory must
not be used, under any circumstances, to threaten or
attack any country, shelter or train terrorists or plan or
finance terrorist acts. Terrorist groups such as Da’esh,
which represent a grave threat to Afghanistan and the
region, must not be allowed to operate in that country.
Afghanistan needs to be supported to overcome its
current economic difficulties. We have established the
link from Afghanistan, as a landlocked country, to the
high seas, through Iran’s Chabahar Port and to Europe
through the Khaf-Herat railway. We stand ready to
further develop and deepen our cooperation with
Afghanistan in all fields and to contribute to a more
secure and prosperous Afghanistan.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I thank everyone for their contributions. I suspect
that the Council has much more work to do in the
context of Afghanistan.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

21-24676
