A/RES/73/292

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
14 May 2019

Seventy-third session
Agenda items 20 and 78 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 9 May 2019
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/73/L.82 and A/73/L.82/Add.1)]

73/292.

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development
The General Assembly,
Recalling the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012,
entitled “The future we want”, 1
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming
our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a
comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and transformative
Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for
the full implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating
poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest
global challenge and an indispensable requireme nt for sustainable development, its
commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions –
economic, social and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to
building upon the achievements of the Millennium Development Goal s and seeking
to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Developmen t,
which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, supports
and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with
concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to
address the challenge of financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels
for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming further that the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals will depend upon a revitalized and enhanced Global Partnership for Sustainable
Development, bringing together Governments, civil society, the private sector, the

__________________
1

19-07696 (E)

Resolution 66/288, annex.

210519

*1907696*

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

A/RES/73/292

United Nations system and other actors, and noting in this regard the interest
expressed in holding future conferences or events at a high level that would
complement but not duplicate existing efforts and activities to support the
implementation of and to maintain political momentum to achieve Sustainable
Development Goal 14,
Recognizing the central role of the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council, and the high-level political forum on sustainable development held
under their auspices, as well as the significant role of the United Nations Open -ended
Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea and the important
contribution of all relevant specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the United
Nations in the implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14,
Recalling that, pursuant to its resolutions 70/226 of 22 December 2015 and
70/303 of 9 September 2016, the United Nations Conference to Support the
Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development was convened at
United Nations Headquarters from 5 to 9 June 2017, coinciding with World Oceans
Day, to support the implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14,
Recalling also its resolution 71/312 of 6 July 2017, in which it endorsed the
declaration entitled “Our ocean, our future: call for action” adopted by the United
Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of Sustainab le Development
Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for
sustainable development, and in this regard affirming the important role of the
declaration in demonstrating the collective will to take action to conserve and
sustainably use our oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development,
Recalling further that the Sustainable Development Goals and targets are
integrated and indivisible and balance the three dimensions of sustainable
development: the economic, social and environmental,
Recognizing the important contributions of the partnership dialogues and
voluntary commitments made in the context of the United Nations Conference to
Support the Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and
sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development to
the effective and timely implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14,
Recalling its call upon all stakeholders to urgently undertake, inter alia, the
actions highlighted in the declaration entitled “Our ocean, our future: call for action”
and implement the respective voluntary commitments pledged by individual Member
States and other stakeholders during the United Nations Conference to Support the
Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development,
Recalling also that the high-level political forum on sustainable development
convened under the auspices of the Economic and Social Council, held from 10 to
19 July 2017, reviewed in depth Sustainable Development Goals 1, 2, 3, 5, 9 and 14,
as well as Goal 17, which is reviewed annually, and that the outcome of the United
Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of Sustainable Development
Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for
sustainable development was welcomed in the ministerial declaration of the 2017
high-level political forum convened under the auspices of the Council on th e theme
“Eradicating poverty and promoting prosperity in a changing world ”, 2
__________________
2

2/23

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/72/3),
chap. VI, sect. E.
19-07696

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

A/RES/73/292

Recognizing synergies between the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing
for Development, the Paris Agreement adopted under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change 3 and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015–2030, 4
Acknowledging the importance of the conservation and sustainable use of the
oceans, seas and marine resources for delivering on the Sustainable Development
Goals and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as a whole,
1.
Decides to convene the high-level 2020 United Nations Conference to
Support the Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and
sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development in
Lisbon, from 2 to 6 June 2020, to support the implementation of Sustainable
Development Goal 14;
2.
Also decides that all costs relating to the Conference and its preparation
shall be financed through extrabudgetary resources;
3.
Welcomes the generous offer by the Governments of Kenya and Portugal
to co-host and assume the costs of the Conference;
4.
Reiterates the call made in the declaration entitled “Our ocean, our future:
call for action” 5 for action to be taken on an urgent basis to conserve and sustainably
use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development;
5.

Decides that the Conference shall:

(a) Build on existing successful partnerships and stimulate innovative and
concrete new partnerships to advance the implementation of Goal 14;
(b) Support further action to conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and
marine resources for sustainable development, giving due consider ation to the call
made in the declaration entitled “Our ocean, our future: call for action”;
(c)

Identify further ways and means to support the implementation of Goal 14;

(d) Involve all relevant stakeholders, bringing together Governments, the
United Nations system, intergovernmental organizations, international financial
institutions, other interested international bodies, non-governmental organizations,
civil society organizations, academic institutions, the scientific community, the
private sector, philanthropic organizations and other actors to assess challenges and
opportunities relating to, as well as actions taken towards, the implementation of
Goal 14;
(e) Share the experiences gained at the national, regional and international
levels in the implementation of Goal 14;
(f) Identify possible challenges and obstacles relating to the achievement of
all the targets under Goal 14, as well as opportunities and innovative ways and means
to support their implementation;
(g) Invite Member States and other relevant stakeholders to provide an update
on the implementation of the voluntary commitments made in the context of the
United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of Sustainable
Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine
resources for sustainable development, and invite new voluntary commitments in
__________________

See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
5
Resolution 71/312, annex.
3
4

19-07696

3/23

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

A/RES/73/292

support of Goal 14, as well as support the sharing of experiences and lessons learned
on their implementation;
(h) Share ongoing efforts, successes and challenges between relevant oceanrelated initiatives and processes with a view to promoting collaboration, cooperation
and coordination, as well as preventing the unnecessary duplication of efforts, to
ensure further efficiency and effectiveness in support of Goal 14;
(i) Contribute to the follow-up and review process of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development 6 by providing an input to the high-level political forum on
sustainable development, in accordance with resolutions 67/290 of 9 July 2013, 70/1,
and 70/299 of 29 July 2016, unless otherwise agreed in line with the aforementioned
resolutions, on the implementation of Goal 14, including on opportunities to
strengthen progress in the future;
6.
Also decides that the overarching theme of the Conference shall be
“Scaling up ocean action based on science and innovation for the implementation of
Goal 14: stocktaking, partnerships and solutions”;
7.

Encourages participation in the Conference at the highest possible level;

8.
Decides that the Conference shall elect from among the representatives of
participating States the following officers: two Presidents, one from Kenya and one
from Portugal, and 13 Vice-Presidents, 7 one of whom shall be designated as
Rapporteur-General;
9.
Also decides that the Conference shall comprise eight plenary meetings
and eight interactive dialogues, to be held from 2 to 6 June 2020 ;
10. Further decides that the first plenary meeting of the Conference will
commence at 9 a.m. on 2 June and will resume at 10 a.m. on 3 June to continue with
the opening of the Conference and that the plenary meetings will be held as follows:
Tuesday, 2 June: from 9 to 10 a.m.
Wednesday, 3 June: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Thursday, 4 June: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Friday, 5 June: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Saturday, 6 June: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.;
11. Decides that the interactive dialogues will be held in parallel with the
plenary meetings, as follows:
Tuesday, 2 June: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Wednesday, 3 June: from 3 to 6 p.m.
Thursday, 4 June: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Friday, 5 June: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Saturday 6 June: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m.;
12. Also decides that the interactive dialogues shall be collaborative and
multi-stakeholder in nature and will focus on recommendations to support the
implementation of Goal 14, including through strengthened cooperation, building on
__________________
6
7

4/23

Resolution 70/1.
Three from each of the following groups: African States; Asia-Pacific States; Eastern European
States; Latin American and Caribbean States; and Western European and other States. The
election of the Presidents will, however, have the effect of reducing by one the number of
Vice-Presidents allocated to the regions from which each of the Presidents is elected.
19-07696

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

A/RES/73/292

existing successful partnerships and stimulating innovative and concrete new ones,
taking into account the theme of the Conference;
13. Further decides that the organizational arrangements for the interactive
dialogues will be as follows:
(a) Each interactive dialogue will be presided over by two co-chairs, one from
a developing country and one from a developed country, to be appoi nted by the
Presidents of the Conference;
(b) The Secretary-General of the Conference will select a moderator and up
to four panellists for each of the interactive dialogues. The panel discussions,
facilitated by the moderator, will be followed by an int eractive debate among States
and other relevant stakeholders;
14. Recommends the provisional agenda set forth in annex I to the present
resolution for adoption by the Conference;
15. Decides that the Conference shall be organized in accordance with the
organization of work set forth in annex II to the present resolution;
16. Recommends the provisional rules of procedure set forth in annex III to
the present resolution for adoption by the Conference;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to appoint a Secretary-General of the
Conference to serve as focal point within the Secretariat for providing support to the
organization of the Conference;
18. Also requests the Secretary-General to appoint a Special Adviser to the
Presidents of the Conference on oceans and legal matters;
19. Decides that the Conference shall adopt, by consensus, a brief, concise,
action-oriented and intergovernmentally agreed declaration focusing on, and
highlighting, the science-based and innovative areas of action to support the
implementation of Goal 14 and a report containing the co-chairs’ summaries of the
interactive dialogues, as well as a list of voluntary commitments for the implementation
of Goal 14 registered after 9 June 2017 and announced at the Conference;
20. Requests the President of the General Assembly to appoint two
co-facilitators, one from a developing country and one from a developed country, to
oversee the preparatory process and to conclude the intergovernmental consultations
on the declaration by May 2020;
21. Also requests the President of the General Assembly to convene a two -day
preparatory meeting, in February 2020, at United Nations Headquarters in New York,
to be chaired by the two co-facilitators, with interpretation services on an as-available
basis, with a view to considering the themes for the interactive dialogues and elements
for the declaration, taking into consideration paragraph 19 above, in particular the
call for a brief, concise, action-oriented and intergovernmentally agreed declaration;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a background note by the end
of January 2020, including a proposal for themes of the interactive dialogues, for the
preparatory meeting;
23. Requests the Secretary-General of the Conference to prepare concept
papers on each of the themes of the interactive dialogues, taking into account the
relevant ocean-related processes of the General Assembly and other possible
contributions, and in that regard invites the stakeholders referred to in paragraph 5 (d)
above to submit inputs;
24. Requests the co-facilitators to present a brief, concise and action-oriented
draft declaration no later than March 2020, taking into account the deliberations of
the preparatory meeting and other inputs, without prejudice to the in tergovernmental
19-07696

5/23

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

A/RES/73/292

conference, under the auspices of the United Nations, to consider the
recommendations of the Preparatory Committee established by General Assembly
resolution 69/292 of 19 June 2015 on the elements and to elaborate the text of an
international legally binding instrument under the United Nations Convention on the
Law of Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction, with a view to developing the instrument as soon
as possible, which was convened by the Assembly in its resolution 72/249 of
24 December 2017;
25. Requests the President of the General Assembly to finalize the
organizational arrangements for the Conference no later than April 2020;
26. Decides that the Conference and its preparatory process shall be open to
all States Members of the United Nations, members of the specialized agencies and
parties to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 8 recognizing that
neither participation in the preparatory process and the Conference nor its outcome
may affect the legal status of non-parties to the Convention or any other related
agreements with regard to those instruments, or the legal status of parties to the
Convention or any other related agreements with regard to those instruments;
27. Invites other relevant stakeholders, including organizations and bodies of
the United Nations, intergovernmental organizations, international financial
institutions, other interested international bodies and non-governmental
organizations, civil society organizations, academic institutions, the scientific
community, the private sector and philanthropic organizations, whose work is
relevant to the Conference, accredited in accordance with the provisions set forth in
annex II to the present resolution, to participate as observers in the Conference and
its preparatory meeting;
28. Invites associate members of the regional commissions 9 to participate in
the Conference and the preparatory meeting, in the same capacity specified for their
participation in the global conferences on the sustainable development of small island
developing States held in 1994, 2005 and 2014;
29. Decides that accreditation to the Conference and the preparatory meeting
shall be in accordance with the provisions set forth in annex II to the present resolution;
30. Requests the Secretary-General to provide appropriate support from all
relevant parts of the Secretariat, and in cooperation with other relevant parts of the
United Nations system, to the work of the Conference and to facilitate inter -agency
cooperation to that end, as well as to ensure the efficient use of resources, so that the
objectives of the Conference can be achieved;
31. Encourages States and international donors, as well as the private sector,
financial institutions, foundations and other donors in a position to do so, to support
the preparations for the Conference through voluntary contrib utions to a trust fund in
support of preparations for the Conference and to support the participation of
representatives of developing countries, priority being given to representatives of the
least developed countries and small island developing States, i ncluding coverage of
economy-class air tickets, daily subsistence allowances and terminal expenses, in the
meetings of the Conference and its preparatory meeting.
80th plenary meeting
__________________
8
9

6/23

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1833, No. 31363.
American Samoa, Anguilla, Aruba, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, the
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Curaçao, French Polynesia, Guam, Montserrat,
New Caledonia, Puerto Rico, Sint Maarten, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States
Virgin Islands.
19-07696

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

A/RES/73/292

9 May 2019

Annex I
Provisional agenda of the 2020 United Nations Conference to
Support the Implementation of Sustainable Development
Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas
and marine resources for sustainable development
Lisbon, 2 to 6 June 2020
1.

Opening of the Conference.

2.

Election of the two Presidents.

3.

Adoption of the rules of procedure.

4.

Adoption of the agenda of the Conference.

5.

Election of officers other than the Presidents.

6.

Organization of work, including the establishment of subsidiary organs, and
other organizational matters.

7.

Credentials of representatives to the Conference:
(a)

Appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee;

(b)

Report of the Credentials Committee.

8.

General debate.

9.

Interactive dialogues.

10.

Outcome of the Conference.

11.

Adoption of the report of the Conference.

12.

Closure of the Conference.

Annex II
Proposed organization of work of the 2020 United Nations
Conference to Support the Implementation of Sustainable
Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the
oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable
development
Lisbon, 2 to 6 June 2020
1.
The 2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas
and marine resources for sustainable development will be held in Lisbon, from 2 to
6 June 2020.
I.

Organization of work

A.

Plenary meetings
2.
The Conference will consist of a total of eight plenary meetings, to be held as
follows:
Tuesday, 2 June: from 9 to 10 a.m.

19-07696

7/23

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

A/RES/73/292

Wednesday, 3 June: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Thursday, 4 June: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Friday, 5 June: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Saturday, 6 June: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
3.

The plenary meetings will be devoted to statements.

4.
The list of speakers for the plenary meetings will be established on a first -come
first-served basis, with the customary protocol that ensures that Heads of State or
Government speak first, followed by other heads o f delegation. The European Union
will be included in the list of speakers. Detailed arrangements will be communicated
in a timely manner through a note by the Secretariat.
5.
At the opening of the Conference, to take place during the first plenary meeting ,
to be held on the morning of Tuesday, 2 June, consideration will be given to all
procedural and organizational matters, including the adoption of the rules of
procedure and the agenda, the election of the two Presidents of the Conference, the
election of officers, the establishment of subsidiary organs, as appropriate, the
appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee, arrangements for the
preparation of the report of the Conference and other matters. At the resumed first
plenary meeting, to be held on the morning of Wednesday, 3 June, statements will be
made by the Presidents of the Conference, the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, the President of the General Assembly, the President of the Economic and
Social Council and the Secretary-General of the Conference.
6.
The plenary meetings will also hear statements from representatives of other
intergovernmental organizations, international financial institutions, international
bodies, the United Nations specialized agencies, funds and progra mmes, as well as
major groups and other stakeholders listed in paragraph 27 in accordance with the
practices of the General Assembly.
7.
The final plenary meeting, to be held on the afternoon of Saturday, 6 June, is
expected to conclude with, inter alia, reporting on the interactive dialogues, to be
followed by the adoption of the brief, concise, action-oriented and
intergovernmentally agreed declaration and of the report of the Conference.
8.
The plenary meetings will run in parallel with the interactive dialogues, unless
otherwise specified in the present resolution.
B.

Interactive dialogues
9.
The Conference will include eight interactive dialogues, to be held in parallel
with the plenary meetings, as follows:
Tuesday, 2 June: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Wednesday, 3 June: from 3 to 6 p.m.
Thursday, 4 June: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Friday, 5 June: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Saturday, 6 June: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m.
10. Summaries of the interactive dialogues should be submitted to the Conference
at its closing plenary meeting and included in the final report of the Conference.

C.

Main Committee
11. The Main Committee, established in accordance with the rules of procedure of
the Conference, will meet, if necessary, in parallel with plenary meetings, except

8/23

19-07696

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

A/RES/73/292

during the opening and closing of the Conference, and will be responsible for
finalizing any outstanding matters.
II.

Credentials of representatives to the Conference: appointment of the members
of the Credentials Committee
12. The Credentials Committee will be appointed according to the rules of
procedure of the Conference.

III.

Accreditation: institutional stakeholders
13. Relevant intergovernmental organizations, international finan cial institutions
and international bodies that were accredited to the World Summit on Sustainable
Development, the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, the high level United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of Sustainable
Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine
resources for sustainable development, the intergovernmental conference on an
international legally binding instrument under the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity
of areas beyond national jurisdiction and to previous United Nations conferences on
the sustainable development of small island developing States, held in Barbados,
Mauritius and Samoa, including associate members of the regional commissions, 10
may participate in the deliberations of the Conference and its preparatory meeting, as
appropriate, in accordance with the rules of procedure of the Conference.
14. Interested intergovernmental organizations that were not accredited to the
conferences and summits listed in paragraph 13 above may apply to the General
Assembly for accreditation following the established accreditation procedure.

IV.

Accreditation: non-governmental organizations and other stakeholders
15. The non-governmental organizations and major groups as identified in
Agenda 21, 11 in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, as well as
those that were accredited to the conferences and summits listed in paragraph 13
above, shall register in order to participate.
16. The President of the General Assembly shall also draw up lists of representatives
of other relevant non-governmental organizations, civil society organizations,
academic institutions, the scientific community, the private sector and philanthropic
organizations whose work is relevant to the Conference, who may participate in the
Conference and the preparatory meeting as observers, taking into account the
principles of transparency and of equitable geographical representation, and shall
submit the proposed lists to Member States for their consideration on a non -objection
basis. The President of the General Assembly shall bring a list to the attention of the
General Assembly before the preparatory meeting and, in any case, no later than
December 2019, and, where applicable, shall bring another list to the attention of the
Assembly before the Conference and, in any case, no later than April 2020. 12

__________________

American Samoa, Anguilla, Aruba, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, the
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Curaçao, French Polynesia, Guam, Montserrat,
New Caledonia, Puerto Rico, Sint Maarten, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States
Virgin Islands.
11
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex II.
12
The lists will include proposed as well as final names. The general basis of any objections, if
requested by one or more States Members of the United Nations or States members of the
specialized agencies, will be made known to the Office of the President of the General Assembly
and the requester.
10

19-07696

9/23

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

A/RES/73/292

17. The provisions of paragraph 15 of General Assembly resolution 67/290 of 9 July
2013 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the Conference and its preparatory process.
V.

Secretariat
18. The Secretary-General of the Conference will serve as focal point within the
Secretariat for providing support to the organization of the Conference, in cooperation
with the representatives of the two Presidents.
19. The Special Adviser to the Presidents of the Conference on oceans and legal
matters will support the achievement of the goals of the Conference by providing both
substantive and procedural advice.

VI.

Documentation
20. In accordance with the practice followed at previous United Nations
conferences, the official documentation of the Conference will include documents
issued before, during and after the Conference.
21. In accordance with the practice followed at previous United Nations
conferences, it is recommended that the Conference adopt a report consisting of the
decisions of the Conference, including the intergovernment ally agreed declaration, a
brief account of the proceedings and a reportorial account of the work of the
Conference and the action taken at the plenary meetings.
22. Summaries of the plenary meetings and interactive dialogues and a list of
voluntary commitments registered after 9 June 2017 and those announced at the
Conference should also be included in the report of the Conference.

VII.

Organization of parallel meetings and other events of the Conference
23. Parallel meetings and other events, including those of major groups and other
stakeholders, will be held during the same hours as the plenary meetings and
interactive dialogues, space permitting. Interpretation services will be provided for
such meetings, as available.

VIII.

Side events
24. Side events, including briefings, seminars, workshops and panel discussions on
issues related to the implementation of Goal 14, will be organized by participants in
the Conference. Guidelines for organizing such events and the calendar of those
events will be made available on the Conference website.

IX.

Media coverage
25. Press materials will be prepared by the Department of Global Communications
of the Secretariat for journalists covering the Conference. In addition, regular press
releases will be issued on the results of plenary meetings, interactive dialogues and
other events. All relevant documentation will be made available on the Conference
website.
26. The plenary meetings, the interactive dialogues and the press conferences will
be broadcast live to the media area. A programme of special media briefings and press
conferences will be announced.

10/23

19-07696

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

A/RES/73/292

Annex III
Provisional rules of procedure of the 2020 United Nations
Conference to Support the Implementation of Sustainable
Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the
oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable
development
I.

Representation and credentials
Rule 1
Composition of delegations
The delegation of each State participating in the Conference and that of the
European Union shall consist of a head of delegation and such other representatives,
alternate representatives and advisers as may be required.
Rule 2
Alternates and advisers
The head of delegation may designate an alternate representative or an adviser
to act as a representative.
Rule 3
Submission of credentials
The credentials of representatives and the names of alternate representatives and
advisers shall be submitted to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, if
possible, not less than one week before the date fixed for the opening of the
Conference. The credentials shall be issued either by the Head of the State or
Government or by the Minister for Foreign Affairs or, in the case of the European
Union, by the President of the European Commission.
Rule 4
Credentials Committee
A Credentials Committee of nine members shall be appointed at the beginning
of the Conference. Its composition shall be based on that of the Credentials
Committee of the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session. It shall examine the
credentials of representatives and report to the Conference without delay.
Rule 5
Provisional participation in the Conference
Pending a decision of the Conference on their credentials, representatives shall
be entitled to participate provisionally in the Conference.

II.

Officers
Rule 6
Elections
The Conference shall elect from among the representatives of participating
States the following officers: two Presidents, one from Kenya and one from Portugal,
each of whom shall preside separately. The Conference shall also elect 13 Vice -

19-07696

11/23

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

A/RES/73/292

Presidents, 13 one of whom shall be designated as Rapporteur-General, as well as a
chair for the Main Committee established in accordance with rule 46. The officers
shall be elected with a view to ensuring the representative character of the General
Committee. The Conference may also elect such other officers as it deems necessary
for the performance of its functions.
Rule 7
General powers of the presiding President
1.
The Presidents shall take turns in presiding at the plenary meetings of the
Conference. In addition to exercising the powers conferred upon her or him elsewhere
by these rules, the presiding President shall declare the opening and closing of each
meeting, put questions to the vote and announce decisions. The presiding President
shall rule on points of order and, subject to those rules, shall have complete control
over the proceedings and the maintenance of order thereat. The presiding President
may propose to the Conference the closure of the list of speakers, a limitation on the
time to be allowed to speakers and on the number of times each representative may
speak on a question, the adjournment or closure of the debate and the suspension or
adjournment of a meeting.
2.
The presiding President remains, in the exercise of her or his functions, under
the authority of the Conference.
Rule 8
Acting President
1.
If both Presidents are to be absent from a meeting or any part thereof, they may
designate one of the Vice-Presidents to preside.
2.
A Vice-President acting as President shall have the same powers and duties as
the President.
Rule 9
Replacement of a President or the Presidents
If either of the Presidents is unable to perform her or his functions, a new
President shall be elected. If both Presidents are unable to perform their functions,
new Presidents shall be elected.
Rule 10
Voting rights of the presiding President
The presiding President, or a Vice-President acting as the presiding President,
shall not vote in the Conference, but may appoint another member of her or his
delegation to vote in her or his place.
III.

General Committee
Rule 11
Composition
The two Presidents, the Vice-Presidents, the Rapporteur-General and the Chair
of the Main Committee shall constitute the General Committee. One of the two
Presidents, as agreed between them, or, in their absence, one of the Vice -Presidents

__________________
13

12/23

Three from each of the following groups: African States; Asia-Pacific States; Eastern European
States; Latin American and Caribbean States; and Western European and other States. The
election of the two Presidents will, however, have the effect of reducing by one the number of
Vice-Presidents allocated to the regions from which each of the Presidents is elected.
19-07696

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

A/RES/73/292

designated by them, shall serve as Chair of the General Committee. The Chair of the
Credentials Committee and other committees established by the Conference in
accordance with rule 48 may participate, without the right to vote, in the General
Committee.
Rule 12
Substitute members
If a President or a Vice-President of the Conference is to be absent during a
meeting of the General Committee, she or he may designate a member of her or his
delegation to sit and vote in the Committee. In case of absence, the Chair of the Main
Committee shall designate the Vice-Chair of that Committee as her or his substitute.
When serving on the General Committee, a Vice-Chair of the Main Committee shall
not have the right to vote if she or he is a member of the same delegation as another
member of the General Committee.
Rule 13
Functions
The General Committee shall assist both Presidents in the general conduct of
the business of the Conference and, subject to the decisions of the Conference, shall
ensure the coordination of the work of the Conference.
IV.

Secretariat of the Conference
Rule 14
Duties of the Secretary-General of the United Nations
1.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations or a designated representative shall
act in that capacity in all meetings of the Conference and its subsidiary organs.
2.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations or a designated representative shall
direct the staff required by the Conference.
Rule 15
Duties of the secretariat of the Conference
The secretariat of the Conference shall, in accordance with the present rules:
(a)

Provide simultaneous interpretation of speeches made at meetings;

(b) Receive, translate, reproduce and circulate the documents of the
Conference;
(c)

Publish and circulate the official documents of the Conference;

(d)

Prepare and circulate records of public meetings;

(e)

Make and arrange for the keeping of sound recordings of meetings;

(f) Arrange for the custody and preservation of the documents of the
Conference in the archives of the United Nations;
(g)

Generally perform all other work that the Conference may require.

Rule 16
Statements by the Secretariat
The Secretary-General of the United Nations, or any member of the Secretariat
designated for that purpose, may, at any time, make either oral or written statements
concerning any question under consideration.
19-07696

13/23

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

A/RES/73/292

V.

Opening of the Conference
Rule 17
Temporary President
The Secretary-General of the United Nations or, in his absence, any member of
the Secretariat designated by him for that purpose, shall open the first meeting of the
Conference and preside until the Conference has elected its Presidents.
Rule 18
Decisions concerning organization
The Conference shall, at its first meeting:
(a)

Adopt its rules of procedure;

(b)

Elect its officers and constitute its subsidiary organs;

(c) Adopt its agenda, the draft of which shall, until such adoption, be the
provisional agenda of the Conference;
(d)
VI.

Decide on the organization of its work.

Conduct of business
Rule 19
Quorum
The presiding President may declare a meeting open and permit the d ebate to
proceed when at least one third of the States participating in the Conference are
present. The presence of a majority of the States so participating shall be required for
any decision to be taken.
Rule 20
Speeches
1.
No representative may address the Conference without having previously
obtained the permission of the presiding President. Subject to rules 21, 22 and 25 to
27, the presiding President shall call upon speakers in the order in which they indicate
their desire to speak. The secretariat shall be in charge of drawing up a list of speakers.
2.
Debate shall be confined to the question before the Conference and the presiding
President may call a speaker to order if her or his remarks are not relevant to the
subject under discussion.
3.
The Conference may limit the time allowed to each speaker and the number of
times each participant may speak on any question. Permission to speak on a motion
to set such limits shall be accorded to only two representatives in favour of and to
two opposing such limits, after which the motion shall be immediately put to the vote.
In any event, with the consent of the Conference, the presiding President shall limit
each intervention on procedural matters to five minutes. When the debate is limited
and a speaker exceeds the allotted time, the presiding President shall call her or him
to order without delay.
Rule 21
Points of order
During the discussion of any matter, a representative may at any time raise a
point of order, which shall be immediately decided by the presiding President in
accordance with the present rules. A representative may appeal against the ruling of
the presiding President. The appeal shall be immediately put to the vote, and the

14/23

19-07696

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

A/RES/73/292

presiding President’s ruling shall stand unless overruled by a majority of the States
present and voting. A representative may not, in raising a point of order, speak on the
substance of the matter under discussion.
Rule 22
Precedence
The Chair or the Rapporteur of the Main Committee, or of other subsi diary
organs, may be accorded precedence for the purpose of explaining the conclusions
arrived at by the body concerned.
Rule 23
Closing of the list of speakers
During the course of a debate, the presiding President may announce the list of
speakers and, with the consent of the Conference, declare the list closed.
Rule 24
Right of reply
1.
Notwithstanding rule 23, the presiding President shall accord the right of reply
to a representative of any State participating in the Conference or of the European
Union who requests it. Any other representative of a State may be granted the
opportunity to make a reply.
2.
The statements made under the present rule shall normally be made at the end
of the last meeting of the day, or at the conclusion of the consideration of the relevant
item if that is sooner.
3.
Representatives of a State or of the European Union may make no more than
two statements under the present rule at a given meeting on any item. The first shall
be limited to five minutes and the second to three minutes. Representatives shall, in
any event, attempt to be as brief as possible.
Rule 25
Adjournment of debate
A representative of any State participating in the Conference may at any time
move the adjournment of the debate on the question under discussion. In addition to
the proposer of the motion, permission to speak on the motion shall be accorded to
only two representatives in favour and to two opposing the adjournment, after which
the motion shall, subject to rule 28, be immediately put to the vote.
Rule 26
Closure of debate
A representative of any State participating in the Conference may at any time
move the closure of the debate on the question under discussion, whether or not any
other representative has signified her or his wish to speak. Permission to speak on the
motion shall be accorded to only two representatives opposing the closure, after
which the motion shall, subject to rule 28, be immediately put to the vote.
Rule 27
Suspension or adjournment of the meeting
Subject to rule 38, a representative of any State participating in the Conference
may at any time move the suspension or the adjournment of the meeting. No
discussion on such motions shall be permitted and they shall, subject to rule 28, be
immediately put to the vote.
19-07696

15/23

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

A/RES/73/292

Rule 28
Order of motions
The motions indicated below shall have precedence in the following order over
all proposals or other motions before the meeting:
(a)

To suspend the meeting;

(b)

To adjourn the meeting;

(c)

To adjourn the debate on the question under discussion;

(d)

To close the debate on the question under discussion.

Rule 29
Submission of proposals and substantive amendments
Proposals and substantive amendments shall normally be submitted in writing
to the Secretary-General or her or his designated representative, who shall circulate
copies to all delegations in the languages of the Conference. Unless the Conference
decides otherwise, substantive proposals shall not be discussed or put to a decision
unless copies have been circulated to all delegations not later than the day preceding
the meeting. The presiding President may, however, permit the discussion and
consideration of amendments, even though those amendments have not been
circulated or have been circulated only the same day.
Rule 30
Withdrawal of proposals and motions
A proposal or a motion may be withdrawn by its sponsor at any time before a
decision on it has been taken, provided that it has not been amended. A proposal or a
motion thus withdrawn may be reintroduced by any representative.
Rule 31
Decisions on competence
Subject to rule 28, any motion calling for a decision on the competence of the
Conference to adopt a proposal submitted to it shall be put to the vote before a
decision is taken on the proposal in question.
Rule 32
Reconsideration of proposals
When a proposal has been adopted or rejected, it may not be reconsidered unless
the Conference, by a two-thirds majority of the States present and voting, so decides.
Permission to speak on a motion to reconsider shall be accorded to only two speakers
opposing reconsideration, after which the motion shall be immediately put to the vote.
VII.

Decision-making
Rule 33
General agreement
The Conference shall adopt, by consensus, a brief, concise, action-oriented and
intergovernmentally agreed declaration focusing on, and highlighting, the science based and innovative areas of action to support the implementation of Goal 14 and
make its best endeavour to ensure that all the other work of the Conference is
accomplished by consensus.

16/23

19-07696

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

A/RES/73/292

Rule 34
Voting rights
Each State participating in the Conference shall have one vote.
Rule 35
Majority required
1.
Subject to rule 33, decisions of the Conference on all matters of substance shall
be taken by a two-thirds majority of the States present and voting.
2.
Except as otherwise provided in the present rules, decisions of the Conference
on all matters of procedure shall be taken by a majority of the States present and
voting.
3.
If the question arises whether a matter is one of procedure or of substance, the
presiding President of the Conference shall rule on the question. An appeal against
that ruling shall be immediately put to the vote, and the presiding President ’s ruling
shall stand unless overruled by a majority of the States present and voting.
4.

If a vote is equally divided, the proposal or motion shall be regarded as rejected.

Rule 36
Meaning of the phrase “States present and voting”
For the purpose of the present rules, the phrase “States present and voting”
means States casting an affirmative or negative vote. States which abstain from voting
shall be regarded as not voting.
Rule 37
Method of voting
1.
Except as provided in rule 44, the Conference may vote by show of hands,
except that a representative may request a roll call, which shall then be taken in the
English alphabetical order of the names of the States participating in the Conference,
beginning with the delegation whose name is drawn by lot by the presiding President.
The name of each State shall be called in all roll calls, and its representative shall
reply “yes”, “no” or “abstention”.
2.
When the Conference votes by mechanical means, a non-recorded vote shall
replace a vote by show of hands and a recorded vote shall replace a roll call. A
representative may request a recorded vote, which shall, unless a representative
requests otherwise, be taken without calling out the names of the States participating
in the Conference.
3.
The vote of each State participating in a roll-call or a recorded vote shall be
inserted in any record of or report on the meeting.
Rule 38
Conduct during voting
After the presiding President has announced the commencement of voting, no
representative shall interrupt the voting, except on a point of order in connection with
the actual conduct of the voting.
Rule 39
Explanation of vote

19-07696

17/23

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

A/RES/73/292

1.
Representatives may make brief statements, consisting solely of explanations of
vote, before the voting has commenced or after the voting has been completed. The
presiding President may limit the time to be allowed for such explanations. The
representative of a State sponsoring a proposal or motion shall not speak in
explanation of vote thereon, except if it has been amended.
2.
When the same matter is considered successively in several organs of the
Conference, a State should, as far as possible, explain its vote only in one such organ,
unless its vote in one organ is different from that in another organ.
Rule 40
Division of proposals
A representative may move that parts of a proposal be decided on separately. If
a representative objects, the motion for division shall be voted upon. Permission to
speak on the motion shall be accorded to only two representatives in favour of and to
two opposing the division. If the motion is carried, those parts of the proposal that
are subsequently approved shall be put to the Conference for decision as a whole. If
all operative parts of the proposal have been rejected, the proposal shall be considered
to have been rejected as a whole.
Rule 41
Amendments
A proposal is considered an amendment to another proposal if it merely adds to,
deletes from or revises part of that proposal. Unless specified otherwise, the word
“proposal” in these rules shall be regarded as including amendments.
Rule 42
Order of voting on amendments
When an amendment is moved to a proposal, the amendment shall be voted on
first. When two or more amendments are moved to a proposal, the Conference sh all
vote first on the amendment furthest removed in substance from the original proposal
and then on the amendment next furthest removed therefrom, and so on, until all the
amendments have been put to the vote. Where, however, the adoption of one
amendment necessarily implies the rejection of another amendment, the latter shall
not be put to the vote. If one or more amendments are adopted, the amended proposal
shall then be voted upon.
Rule 43
Order of voting on proposals
1.
If two or more proposals, other than amendments, relate to the same question,
they shall, unless the Conference decides otherwise, be voted on in the order in which
they were submitted. The Conference may, after each vote on a proposal, decide
whether to vote on the next proposal.
2.
Revised proposals shall be voted on in the order in which the original proposals
were submitted, unless the revision substantially departs from the original proposal.
In that case, the original proposal shall be regarded as withdrawn and the revised
proposal shall be treated as a new proposal.
3.
A motion requiring that no decision be taken on a proposal shall be put to the
vote before a decision is taken on the proposal in question.
Rule 44
Elections
18/23

19-07696

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

A/RES/73/292

All elections shall be held by secret ballot unless, in the absence of any
objection, the Conference decides to proceed without taking a ballot when there is an
agreed candidate or slate of candidates.
Rule 45
Balloting
1.
When one or more elective places are to be filled at one time under th e same
conditions, those candidates, in a number not exceeding the number of such places,
obtaining in the first ballot a majority of the votes cast and the largest number of votes
shall be elected.
2.
If the number of candidates obtaining such majority is less than the number of
places to be filled, additional ballots shall be held to fill the remaining places, the
voting being restricted to the candidates obtaining the largest number of votes in the
previous ballot, to a number not more than twice the pla ces remaining to be filled.
VIII.

Subsidiary organs
Rule 46
Main Committee
The Conference may establish a Main Committee.
Rule 47
Representation on the Main Committee
Each State participating in the Conference and the European Union may b e
represented by one representative on the Main Committee. They may assign to the
Committee such alternate representatives and advisers as may be required.
Rule 48
Other committees and working groups
1.
In addition to the Main Committee referred to above, the Conference may
establish such committees and working groups as it deems necessary for the
performance of its functions.
2.
Subject to the decision of the plenary of the Conference, the committees may
set up subcommittees and working groups.
Rule 49
Members of committees, subcommittees and working groups
1.
The members of the committees and working groups of the Conference, referred
to in rule 48, paragraph 1, shall be appointed by the two Presidents, subject to the
approval of the Conference, unless the Conference decides otherwise.
2.
Members of the subcommittees and working groups of committees shall be
appointed by the Chair of the committee in question, subject to the approval of that
committee, unless the committee decides otherwise.
Rule 50
Officers
Except as otherwise provided in rule 6, each committee, subcommittee and
working group shall elect its own officers.
Rule 51
Quorum

19-07696

19/23

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

A/RES/73/292

1.
The Chair of the Main Committee may declare a meeting open and permit the
debate to proceed when at least one quarter of the States participating in the
Conference are present. The presence of a majority of the States so participating shall
be required for any decision to be taken.
2.
A majority of the members of the General Committee or the Credentials Committee
or of any committee, subcommittee or working group shall constitute a quorum.
Rule 52
Officers, conduct of business and voting
The rules contained in sections II, VI (except rule 19) and VII above shall be
applicable, mutatis mutandis, to the proceedings of committees, subcommittees and
working groups, except that:
(a) The Chairs of the General Committee and the Credentials Committee and
the Chairs of the committees, subcommittees and working groups may exercise the
right to vote, provided that they are representatives of participating States;
(b) Decisions of committees, subcommittees and working groups shall be
taken by a majority of the members present and voting, except that the reconsideration
of a proposal or an amendment shall require the majority established by rule 32.
IX.

Languages and records
Rule 53
Languages of the Conference
Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish shall be the languages
of the Conference.
Rule 54
Interpretation
1.
Speeches made in a language of the Conference shall be interpreted into the
other five languages.
2.
A representative may speak in a language other than a language of the
Conference if the delegation concerned provides for interpretation into one of the
languages of the Conference.
Rule 55
Languages of official documents
Official documents of the Conference shall be made available in the languages
of the Conference.
Rule 56
Sound recordings of meetings
Sound recordings of the plenary meetings of the Conference, the interactive
dialogues and of the meetings of the Main Committee shall be made and kept in
accordance with the practice of the United Nations. Unless otherwise decided by the
Conference or the Main Committee, no such recordings shall b e made of any of the
other meetings held during the Conference.

X.

Public and private meetings
General principles
Rule 57

20/23

19-07696

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

A/RES/73/292

The plenary meetings of the Conference and the meetings of any committee
shall be held in public unless the body concerned decides otherwise. All decisions
taken by the plenary of the Conference at a private meeting shall be announced at an
early public meeting of the plenary.
Rule 58
As a general rule, meetings of the General Committee, the Credentials
Committee, subcommittees or working groups shall be held in private.
Rule 59
Communiqués on private meetings
At the close of a private meeting, the presiding officer of the organ concerned
may issue a communiqué through the Secretary-General of the United Nations or a
designated representative.
XI.

Other participants and observers
Rule 60
Intergovernmental organizations and other entities 14 having received
a standing invitation to participate as observers in the sessions
and work of the General Assembly
Representatives designated by intergovernmental organizations and other
entities having received a standing invitation to participate as observers in the
sessions and work of the General Assembly have the right to participate as observers,
without the right to vote, in the deliberations of the Conference, the Main Committee
and, as appropriate, any other committee or working group.
Rule 61
Associate members of regional commissions 15
Representatives designated by the associate members of regional commissions
listed in the footnote below may participate as observers, without the right to vote, in
the deliberations of the Conference, the Main Committee and, as appropriate, any
other committee or working group.
Rule 62
Representatives of the specialized agencies and related organizations 16
Representatives designated by the specialized agencies and related
organizations may participate as observers, without the right to vote, in the
deliberations of the Conference, the Main Committee and, as appr opriate, any other
committee or working group on questions within the scope of their activities.

__________________

For the purpose of the present rules, the term “other entities” includes the International Committee
of the Red Cross, the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, the
International Olympic Committee, the Inter-Parliamentary Union and the Sovereign Order of Malta.
15
American Samoa, Anguilla, Aruba, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, the
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Curaçao, French Polynesia, Guam, Montserrat,
New Caledonia, Puerto Rico, Sint Maarten, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States
Virgin Islands.
16
For the purpose of the present rules, the term “related organizations” includes the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the International Criminal Court, the International Organization for
Migration, the International Seabed Authority, the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, the
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization and the World Trade Organization.
14

19-07696

21/23

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

A/RES/73/292

Rule 63
Representatives of other intergovernmental organizations and other
international bodies
Save where otherwise specifically provided with respect to the European Union
in these rules of procedure, representatives designated by other intergovernmental
organizations and other international bodies invited to the Conference may participate
as observers, without the right to vote, in the deliberations of the Conference, the
Main Committee and, as appropriate, any other committee or working group on
questions within the scope of their activities.
Rule 64
Representatives of interested United Nations organs
Representatives designated by interested organs of the United Nations may
participate as observers, without the right to vote, in the deliberations of the
Conference, the Main Committee and, as appropriate, any other committee or working
group on questions within the scope of their activities.
Rule 65
Representatives of non-governmental organizations 17
1.
Non-governmental organizations accredited to participate in the Conference
may designate representatives to attend public meetings of the Conference and the
Main Committee as observers.
2.
Upon the invitation of the presiding officer of the Conference and subject to the
approval of the Conference, such observers may make oral statements on questions
in which they have special competence. If the number of requests to speak is too large,
the non-governmental organizations shall be requested to form themselves into
constituencies, such constituencies to speak through spokespersons.
Rule 66
Written statements
Written statements submitted by the designated representatives referred to i n
rules 60 to 65 shall be circulated by the secretariat to all delegations in the quantities
and the languages in which the statements are made available to it at the site of the
Conference, provided that a statement submitted on behalf of a non -governmental
organization must be related to the work of the Conference and be on a subject in
which the organization has a special competence. Written statements shall not be
made available at United Nations expense and shall not be issued as official
documents.
XII.

Suspension and amendment of the rules of procedure
Rule 67
Method of suspension

__________________
17

22/23

Paragraph 23.3 of Agenda 21 provides that “Any policies, definitions or rules affecting access to
and participation by non-governmental organizations in the work of United Nations institutions or
agencies associated with the implementation of Agenda 21 must apply equally to all major groups ”.
Agenda 21 defines major groups as comprising women, children and youth, indigeno us people,
non-governmental organizations, local authorities, workers and their trade unions, business and
industry, the scientific and technological community and farmers. Therefore, based on Agenda 21,
rule 65 shall apply equally to non-governmental organizations and other major groups.
19-07696

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

A/RES/73/292

Any of these rules may be suspended by the Conference provided that 24 hours ’
notice of the proposal for the suspension has been given, which may be waived if n o
representative objects. Any such suspension shall be limited to a specific and stated
purpose and to a period required to achieve that purpose.
Rule 68
Method of amendment
These rules of procedure may be amended by a decision of the Conference t aken
by a two-thirds majority of the States present and voting, after the General Committee
has reported on the proposed amendment.

19-07696

23/23
