UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
FOURTH YEAR

CONSEIl
DE SECURITE
PROCES~ERBAUX

OFTIClliLS

No. 16 QUATRIEME ANNEE

No 16

FOUR HUNDRED AND THffiTEENTH
MEETING

QUATRE CENT TREIZlEME SEANCE

Held at Lake St.ccess, New York,
on Thursday, 3 March 1949, at 3 p.m.

TettllC a Lake Success, New-York,
le jel/di 3 mars 1949, d 15 ]:eures,

President: Mr. A. ALVAREZ (Cuba).

President: M. A, ALVAREZ (Cuba).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Argentil1a, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
'enited Kingdom, United States of America.

Presents: us representants des pays suivants:
Argetltine, Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte, France,
Norvege, Republique socia:iste sovietique d'Ukt<l.i~
ne, Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques,
Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

1. Provisional agenda (S/Agenda 4,13/

1. Ordre du jour provisoire

Rev. 2)

(SjAgenda 413jRev.2)

1, Adoption of the agenda.

L Adoption de ['ordre du jour,

2. Letter dated 24 February 1949 from the
representative of Israel to the SecretaryGeneral concerning the application of Israel
for membership in the United Nations

2. Lettre, en date du 24 fevrier 1949, adl'e~see
au Secretaire general par le representant
d'Israel, relative a h. demande d'admission
d'Israel a l'Organisat:on des Nations Unies
(5/1267 et 5/1093).
3, procedure de mise en application des Articles 87 et 88 de la Chartc concernant les iles
du Pacifique placees sous la tutelle strategique
de3 Etats-Unis d'Al1lerique.
a) Rapport preliminaire du Co:nite d'experts
du Conseil de securite sur les attributions
respectives du Conseil de securite et du
ConseiJ de tutelle en Ct qui concerne I'application du Regime de tttelle dans les
zones strategiques (S/642).
b) Rapport du Comite nornme le 18 juin
1948 par le Conseil de securite et charge
de se concerter avec le Comite du Conseil
de tutelle au sujet de la question des attributions respectives des deux Conseils en
en ce qui concerne la tntelle des zones
strategiques (SjSI6) et declaration bite
par le representant de la Republique soeialiste sOYi6tique d'Ukraine a la deuxiemc
seance du Comite lTIixte du Conseil de
securite et du Conseil de tutelle, le 22 juilI" 1948 (S/916/Add.l).

(5/1207 ,nn 5/1093).

3. Procedl1re in application of Articles 87 and 88
of the 01arter with regard to the Pacific
Islands under tbe strategic trusteeship of the
United States of America.
(a) Preliminary report by the Committee of
Experts to the Security Cour-cil on the
respective functions of the Security
Council and the Trusteeship Council with
regard to the Trusteeship System as
a[:plieu to 5trategic areas (S/642),
(b) Report of the Committee ap?ointed by
the Security Council on 18 June 1948
to confer with the Committee of the
Trusteeship Council on the question of
respectiYe functions of tbe two Councils
in regard to trusteeship of strntegic areas
(S/916) and statement made by the
representative of the Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic at the second meeting
0: the Joint Committee of the Security
Council and the Trusteeship Council on

22 July 1948 (S/916/Add.1).
The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):
Before submitting today's agenda for the Council's adoption, 1 think I express the feelings of

Le PRESIDENT (traduit dt l' ~spagnoJ) :
Avant de soumettre a l'approbation du Conseil
l'ord,e du jour de la seance d'aujo~1fd'hui, je crois

2
all the members of the Security Council in tendering our thanks to His Excellency, the Ambassador
of China, Mr, Ting-fu Tsiang, for the calm and
courteous way in which he presided over our
meetings during the month of February.

interpreter le sentiment de taus les representants
en exprimant notre gratitude a Son Excellence
M. Ting-fu Tsiang, Ambassadeur de Chine, pour
l'amabilite et la serenite avec lesquelles il a
preside les seances dl1 Conseil de securite pendant
le mois de fevrier.

Mr. TSIANG (China): I wish to thank the
President for his kind remarks in referring to my
humble services to the Security Council during
the month of February.

M. TSIANG (Chine) (traduit de l'anglais):
Je remercie le President de ses paroles aimables
a propos des Cjllelques services que j'ai pu rendre
au Conseil de sewrite durant le mois de fevrier.

2. Egyptian.Israeli armistice: State- 2. Armistice entre l'Egypte et Israel:
declarations du President et des
ments by the President and repre·
sentatives

membres

The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):
Before dealing with the adoption of the agenda,
I should like to draw the attention of members
of the Council to documents S/1264, S/1264/
Add.I, and 5/1269, which have already been distributed. These documents contain a cablegram
from the Acting Mediator to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, informing the
Council that, on 24 February 1949, Egypt and
Israel signed a general armistice agrttment, on
the Island of Rhodes, the text of which is before
the Council. There is also a iurther communication from the Acting Mediator, Mr. Bunchc, sent
on the first of this month, iniorming the Council
that the terms of the armistice were being put
into effect by both contracting parties.

Le PR:ESIDENT (trMu.it de I' espagnol) :
Avant de passer a I'adoption de l'ordre du jour,
je desire attirer l'attcntion des nw::mbres du
Consei! sur les documents 5/1264, S/1264/Add.1
et S/1269, qui ant ete distribues en temps youlu;
ces documents reproduisent, d'une part, un teIe·
gramme du rvIediateur par interim au Secretaire
general, telegram me qui informe le Conseil qtle,
le 24 fevrier 1949, l'Egypte et Israel ont signe
a Rhodes un accord general d'armistice confonne
au -texte que les membres du Conseil ont sous les
yeux, et, d'autre part, une autre communication
de M. Bunche, MMiateur par interim, en date
dtl lcr mars, qui annonce au Conscil que les deux
parties contractantes ant commence a mettre it
execution les conditions d'armistice.

I consider that this is no ordinary event in the
development of world affairs. It gives me g-,reat
satisfactiOll to state that this armistice, signed
after lengthy :md involved discussions within the
United Nations and between the contracting
parties, with the object of complying with the
~esolutions .adopted by the Security Council and
Its organs, IS a proof of the value and efficiency
of.thi,s Organization when those who interpret the
pnnclples of the United Nations Charter are inspired by goodwill.

J'estime qu'il ne s'agit pas la d'un fait courant
dans l'evolution des evenements mondiaux, C'est
pourquoi j'eprouve une grande satisfaction a. faire
remarquer que cet armistice, signe apres de
longues et difficiles deliberations, tant au sein
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies qu'entre les
parties contractantes, et dont le but etait de donner effet aux resolutions emanant du Conseil
de securite et de ses Ol-ganes, prouve l'utilite et
l'efficacite de cette Organisation lorsque la bonne
volonte inspire les interpretes des principes de
la Charte des Nations U nies.

I am sure the Security Council will want to
its deep satisfaction at the happy conc1tls10n of the armistice negotiations between
Egypt ~l~d .Israel, ~nd at the lofty outlook, spirit
of conCJhatlOn and Idea of international solidarity
shown by both nations. Both Governments de~
ser;e the congratulations of all peace-loving
nallons for the efforts and sacrifices they have
made in order to reach an agreement.

Le Conseil desire surement exorimer sa vive
satisfaction de l'heureuse conclusion des nego~
ciations d'armistice entl'e I'Egypte et Israel, ainsi
que son approbation pour la largeur de vues, l'esprit de conciliation et le sens de solidarite intcrnationale dont les deux: nations ant fait preuve.
Les deux Gouvernements meritent les felicitations
de taus les pays pacifiqlles pour les efforts et
les sacrifices qu'ils ont faits afin d'arriver a un
accord.

May I further express the Council's deep

Qu'il me soit ell outre permis d'exprimer la
profonde gratitude du Conseil de securite pour
les infatigables efforts de M. Bunche, Mediatcltf
par interim, et pour la collaboration efficace que
lui ont apportee ses adjoints; ils ont su continuer
l'ceuvre commencee par ce grand paladin de la
paix internationale que fut le comie Bernaclotte. NOlls nourrissons J'espoir que cet accord
d'armistice Ol1vrira la voie a une paix dumble et
bienfaisante dans un proche avenir, non seule~
ment dans les pays mentionnes, mais aussi dans
tous les Etats auxquels le Mediateur par intedm
a fait appel, conformement a la resolution du
Consei! de secmite du 16 novembre 1948
[5/1080], et qui ont engage des negociations
analogues dans 1'esprit de ladite resolution.

exp~ess

grati~ude for the untiring efforts of the Acting

Medlator, Mr. Bunche, and for the efficient cooperation of his assistants, who have continued
the work started by that great champion of inter~
national peace, the late Count Bernadotte. We
hope that this armistice ag-reement will lead to
a lasting and beneficial peace in the near future
not only in the countries mentioned but also i~
all the States which the Acting Mediator has
appealed in accordance with the Security Council's
resol';1tion of .16 ~ovember 1948 [S/1080], and
~hat It m,ar gIVe nse to other similar negotiations
1n the spmt of that resolution.

3
I am sure that the brief statement which I have
just made meets with the appron\ of the Council.

J'espere fennement que la breve declaration
que je viens de faire reCevra l'approbation du.
Consei1 de secllrite.

Mr. AUSTIN (United States of America) : The
United States delegation associates itself witl1
tllC stil.tcment of tl1c President in wclcoming the
Egyptian-Israeli Armistice Agreement signed at
Rhodes, and· congratulates both parties on their
conciliatory action. This agreement is not only a
milestone on the road to a settlement of the
Palestine question, bttt it is evidence of the willingness to implement the Security Council's resolution which ~t1gurs well for the future.
The agreement is '1lso an accomplishment from
which the whole United Nations may gain encouragement. It is an added proof that nations
can settle their problems peacefully through the
ag-encv of the United Nations and in accordance
\\:ith ·the great purposes and principles of the
Charter.

M. AUSTIN (Et<lts-Unis c1'Amerique) (traduil
de l'anglai!): La delegation des Etats~Unis 5'associe au President pour saluer la conclusion, a
Rhodes, de l'Accord d'armistice entre l'Egypte
et Israel, et felicite les deux parties de leur geste
de conciliation. Cet accord ne marque pas settlement une etape vers le reglement de la question
palestinienne, il l11anifeste la vo1onte d'app1iqllel'
hl resolution dtl Cons\:il de sew rite, ce qui est
de ban augure pour l'avcnir.
L'accord constitue egalement une realisation
encourageante pour l'ensemble des Nations Voies.
I1 demontre une fois de plus que, grace i l'Organisation des Nations Unies, les Etats peuvent
resondre lelll's c1ifferents d\me malliere pacifique,
canformement allX buts et aux grands principes
de la Charte.
Ma delegation remercie et felicite M. Bunche,
Mediateur par interim, dont la patience, l'habilite et le tact ont considerablement aide les parties dans la negociation de c~t accord. Nons
regrettons qlle le comte Bernadotte, qui donna
sa vie pour la cause d'un reglement pacifiql1e en
Palestine, ne puisse pas constater les progres
realises dans l'accomplissement de son ceuvre.
Nom :;uivolls avec beaucoup d'cspoir les negotiations entreprises actllellement, SOllS la presi~
dence dtl Mediateur par interim, entre la Transjordanie et Israel, d'une part, le Liban et Israel,
d'autre part. Nous esperons que des accords d'armistice seront cOl1dus bient6t. La conclusion
d'ut!, armistice sur chaql1e front aiderait evidemment la Commission de conciliation pour la
Palestine a mettre fin aux souffranc:es, a panser
les b1essures, a fairt regner la bonne entente et
i assurer la paix, L'abondance et la liberte,

My delegation thanks and praises the Acting
Mediator, Mr. Btlllche, whose patience, skill and
tact were so important in assisting the parties to
negotiate this agreement. Vle grieve that Count
Bern<lclotte, who g;l·Je his life in the ca\lse of a
peaceful settlement of Palestine, cannot see the
progress attained in carrying en his labours.
We are hopefully watching the current negotiations, under the chairmanship of the Acting
Mediat"r, between Transjordan and Israel, on
the one lland, and Lebanon and Israel. on tb~
other. We bape that they will soon result in
armistice agreements, Conclusion of an armistice
on each front would naturally assist the Conciliation Commission for Palestine in relieving distress, healing wounds, promoting brotherhood and
developing bases for peace, plenty and freedom.
Mr, SUNDE (Norw:l.Y) : The Norwegian dele-

gation also wishes to associate itself wholeheartedly with the words of the President, and
to express its deep satisfaction at the successful
concIl1siOn of the armistice negotiations between
Egypt <lnd Israel and at the spirit of goodwill and
coneilintion which bas animated those deliberations, We appreciate also the persistent and untiring efforts of the Acting Mediator, Mr. Ralph
Btlnche, and his staff, and we wish to express
the hope that the armistice agreement will lead
to the e>ltablishment in the near futnre of lasting
peace between the parties.

M. SUNDE (Norvege) (trcul:tit de i'anglais) =
La delegation de la Norvege s'associe de tout
ceeur, eUe aussi, aux declarations du President
et exprime sa profonde satisfaction en cOll5tatant
que les negotiations d'annistice entre l'Eg'jpte et
Isr:leJ ant abouti a une conclusion favorable et
que la bonne vo1onte et l'espoir d'entente Re sont
manifestes au cours des deliberations. Nous apprecions egalement les effOrts constants et inla3sables
de M. BUl1che, Mediatettr par interim, et de son
personnel, et nOllS tenons a exprimer l'cspoir que
l'ac:cord d'armistice prepare la voie ~ l'etablissement, dans un praclle avenir, d'nne paix durable
entre les parties.

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypte) (trad1tit de
Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt): I hope and
trust that it will be a happy augury for the l'anglais): Je veux souhaiter que l'atmosphere
work of the new President of the Security agr~able dans laque:Ie ces felicitations viennent
Council this month that he has started with this d'eJre adressees i tOllS les interesses b pl'('p05 de
happy l10te of congratulations to all cnncerned l'accord rec:emment conclu a Rhodes so it de
for the agreement recently re<lched at Rhodes. I bon <ltlgure pour le travail que doit accomplir le
am most thankful to th'; President and to the President du Consei1 de securite ce mois-ci. Je
other representatives who have tittered kind words t:emercie vivement le President et les autres repre~
in connexion with the part my Government played sentants qui ont prononce des paroles aimables
in this reg-a:rd. EgTPt is very glad to have been, au sujet de la part que mon Gouvernement a
able to give yet another proof of its desire for prise dans cette <J.ffain:. L'Eg;'ptc est tr~s he~­
peace, its respect for the Security Council and reuse d'avoir ete en mesure de prol1ver une £OIS
its unfailing complielllce with the Council's reso- , de plus qu'elle desire la paix, qu'elle respecte le
COl1seil de securite, et se conforme scrupuleuselutions.
ment a ses resolutions,
I trust that the new agreem~nt will. be ~nd~r~ " J'ose croire que le nOllvel accord sera jl1ge
stood in its proper light and appraIsed III Its selon son caractere' veritable et en fonction de

4
proper p:oportiolls. I hope that the spirit which
has dictated the signing of tris agreement-of
l:ecesslty, I can speak only for Egypt :n this
respec:t-\vill be valued and w:ll be acted upor..
I do I:ot wish to clD~e without recalling with
gratitttde and great appreciation tie work ·of the
late COU:1t Bernadotte, and without also expressing Ollr apprecia.tion of the great efforts and the
persistence and pat:ence of M:-. Bll:1che and his
assistants at Rhodes and elsewhere.

son importallce. J'espere que I'esprit clans lequel
eet accord a ete signe _ en l'occurrence, je ne
puis cvidcmment parler qu'au nom de l'Egypte
- ser;) apprecie et que l'on agi,a en wnsequeflce.
Je veux, er. achevant ma dcc1araton. ro.ppeler
avec reconnaissance et latter hautement lreuvre
de feu le comte Befnadotte et :l.ussi les efforts
repetes. la perseveran~e, la patience de 1'!. Ettnclle et de ses adjoillts, R.hodes et ailleurs.

a

Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Repuh~
lics) (translated (mm Rtls.tian): The USSR
delegation notes with satisfaction the successful
outcome of the negot~ations between Egypt and
the State of Israel, which it regards as a :nost
favourable development in the Palestine question.
Ever sbel" tr.e Palestine question first <.lrose, the
USSR delegation has maintained that direct
negotiations between the two part:es were the best
way of settling the disp~tes which have arisen
between tr.e State of Israel ar.d the A:ab States,

M. l1.ALIK (Union des Rtpubliques socialistes
sovietiques) (traduit du ntsse): La. delegation
de l'URSS constate avec satisfaction qu'un fait
positif, a savoir l'hcureuse conclusion d~s p:Jurp:l.rlers entre l'Eg}'?te et l'Etn: d'lsrael, est intervenu dans les evenements de Pruestine. Des le
moment oiJ :e prooleme pa,lestinier: s'etait pose,
la delt~gation de l'URSS n'a cesse d'affirmer qee
Ies pourparlers entre les parties inleressees eanstitllaient le n:eilleu~ moyen de regler les di:lerends
qui av,aient surgi entre les deux peuples ~ Pales·
tine, de mp.m~ que ceux qtli opposaiel1t l'Etat
d'Israel aux Etats arabes.
Events have justified this stand. Only direct
Les faits ant enticrement ~onfirme la justesse
conversations have enabled both sides to bring de Cl" point de vue. Senls des Ccnt2ctS d:rects
the negotiations to a successful close, and thus, ant permis aux deux parties en cause de cOl1clure
to n certain ~xtent, to take the first step towards favorableme:1t lellfS pourparler;; e~ de faire, en
the settlement of their disputes.
quelque sorlc, le premier pus vers le reg1cment
d~s differends qui les separaient.
En faisant le bilan rl€S evenements palesti:liens,
In SlImming up the :Jrogn::;s of the Palesttne
question, it would be wrong ior the Security le ConseU de securite aurait tort de ne pas tirer
Conncil not to draw appropriate conclusions les conclusions necessaires" taut de I'evo:ution de
from :he way that qt1estion developed both on In. situation en P:o.lesth,e l]1te des discussions qui
the spot :n Palestine and when it was discussed ont eu lieu au sein Cl" l'Organisation des Nations
ln the United Nations. Vole all know thM some Unies. Nots saV:HlS taus qt.l'il s'est tram'e, au
forces in the United i\ations, the ddegatiol1s of Still de l'Organiso.tion des N atims Unies, des
certain countr:es, nat only failed to co-operate forces, des deU:gati.cns qt.:i, loin de conHbuer au
in reaching a succ::essful settlement 0: t:,e Pales- reglemer.t satisfaisant da probleme p:.lestinien,
:ine question but C"ven obstructed such u settle- ant c:lt~.rche a. l'cmpccher. Au lieu d'enr:ourager
.ment. Instead of prDmo~ing tall<s between the des pourparlers entre les parties interessees et
two parties and consequently the peace~ul settle- de contribuer par hi. meme au reglement de tous
ment of all their differences, they made every les differends, UTI s'est dforcc, par lous lea moyen.'l,
attempt to prevent this by all possible means. d'empecher l'ouverture de ees pOlu:parlers..Ceux
TI-,ese forces which stood in the way of a peace- qui ont cherche a empecher :e reglement paclfique
ful settlement of the Pa~estine cuestion are du probJeme palestillien sont responsables des
tesponsble for the sLtfferings endtlred by the souffranccs endun~es par les peuples arabe et
ATfib ann Jewish pecple in Pnlestine and also juif de Palestine aussi bien q:le de 1a nort
for the :ragic death of the United Nations Medi- tragique dll comte Bernadotte, Mtuialel:r dcs N aator, Count Bemadctte. The Palestine question tions Unies. It y longtemps que le probteme. palescould have !'E-en settled long agu by peaceful tinien aurait :P11 etre resolu par des moyens pacimeans if it had not been for forces which tried fiques s'il n'y avait pas eu j'ac:tion des furce;; qui
to prevent dired negotiations and thus to hinder s'opposaient l'ouvertnt'C'. des pourparlers directs
the se.ttlement cf the qnestion. Fl1:'"thermore, it et done al1ssi au reglement de c.ette question.
is common k'lOwledge tr,at a very active part in ; Chacun sait que les mJieux dirigennts du
preventing direct negoti<itions between the State Royaume-Uni et les representants dc ce pays
of Israel and the Anb cClunfrief:. was played by j'Orgii.nisa~ion des Nationd Un:es ant deploye.
the ruling circles of the U:lited Kingc.om repre- des efforts particulierement energiq:.tes pour emsentatives in the United Nations.
pecher l'ouverture de pourparlers directs entre
Israel et les pays arabes.
Si nous pOllvons eIlregistrer alljourd'hui le sucThe present suc;:es5ful conclusion of armistic.e
'talks hetwe:en the Government of the State .of ces des negociatio~s d'armistice ntenees entre le
Israel and the Egyptian Government shows that Gouvernement d'IsraeI et (dui de ]'Egypte, c'est
the forces of reason and justice, the ferces which pan:e que les partisans de la pa:x et de la collastand for r:t~ace and internztional co·operation boration internati.onales, les partisans cl'..! reglcand the pea~eftll settlement of internaticna! dis- ment pacifique des differends internationau:x:, les
putes, are :nore powerful than the fcrces of partisans de la raison et de la justice sont plus
aggression which an :rrep;uing a new war, in- puissants que les forces d'agress:on qui cherchent
'c.ulging in warmongering and making it impossible a c:l.eclencher une nouvelle guerre, qui ~ :ivrent a.
for nations to live t,'>gether in. friendship on the une propagande belliciste et qui em~chent lea
oasis ot international co-operation, peace ~md the ,peuples de vivre en paix et de collaDorer entre
eux au renforcement de la secur:te.internationale.
strengthening of international security.

a

a

5
That is why this ('.vent merits the attention of
the Secl1rity Council and the United Nations.
)totwitl~standing the attempts of the forces of
aggression to kindle enmity between natioas, to
sow disorder :lnd to provoke :lrmecl clashes,
peoples who are striving for peace, freedom and
independcace arc able te settle the c;onplications
and disputes arising betweell llJelll by means of
direct nqotiations and to reach satisfactory
results. That is why the agreement between th-e
Gcvernment of Egypt and the State of Israel is
of pcsitive significance for the work of the United
Nations and for the strf>ngthenine; of international
peace and sec~rity.

Cl's: i Cl' point de vue que cct eVellement
me rite d'attirer l'Mtention ch: Conse:J de securite
et de l'Organisation ties N<tlions Unics. En clepi1:
des tentatives deploy6es par les fo~ces d'agression
en vue d'attiser la hnlne e:ltre 1es peu)les, de
semer, la confusion et de provoquer des con flits
armes, les nations qui aspirent i la palx, a la'
libcrte et a l'independance sont a meme de reg:ler
d'une fa<;on salisfaisante, par la voie de pOllrp<1r1ers directs, les differends qlli surgissent entre
elIes. L'acco:rd cOIldu tntre les GOllvcmements
de l'Egypte e: d'Israel a dOl"X une grande importance, tant pour la bonne ll1arcbe des travaux
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies que pour
la consolidation de ,la [Qix et de la seCllrite internntionales.

Mr. TSiANG (China): My delegatior. is i1'. complete agreement with the President in regard to
the importance of the armistice agreement between EgYr:t anJ Israel. In the long coUTse of
debate ill this COllnci1, as well as in the General
Assembly, while delegations have l"'.ad important
differences Cl f opinion, it appears to me that we
have all without exception stri','en for a common
objective, namely, peaCe in the Near East and
fJienclly relations among our Ne;tr E;tstern
friends. We must realize that nmch remains to
be done :)e£ore we reach that ultil"'.late goaL At
tl:e same time, we know far cer:ain tlW.l this
arm:stice agreement between Egypt and Isnlel
is an important step towards Ollr ultimate goal.

lvI. TSIANG (C11ine) (trad1ti! de (J(mglais):
Ma delegation est tout i fait d'accord avec le

Thf'. Ne;:.T East is one d thuse <.TeaS where
East rneets West. It is a critical area in this atre
of global peace or global war. For this parti<:ular
reason my delegation is espeei<1IIv gratef1l1 to Mr.
Bnnche and his co-workers,
well as to the
Go,'ernmt'nts of Egypt and Israel, for their
splendid success in concluJing lhis agreement.
We think it augurs well for the future.

as

President en Cl' qd concefl1e l'importance de
raccord d'armistice cOndt1 entre l'Egypte et IsraeL
II me ~el11lJle que, tout all long' des d&bats a~1
~ein de ce Conseil, comme it l'Assen~b1ee genera1e,
alors que d'importante.> divergences de vues sepamient les delegations, DOllS a"ons tous, sans eXCC(Jtion, ponrsuivi un but comml1n : la paix et l'eta~
blis~ement de relations amica1es entre nos amis
du Mayen-Orient. NOllS ::!evolls llOtlS rendre
compte qu'il reste beaucoup a faire avant d'atteincin: eet \luje.ctif, mais nous o.vons l'asHt1"~n(:c quI'
cet accord d'armistice entre l'Egypte et IsrniH
constitue nne etape importal1te vers notre but
final.
Le !I,rovel1-0rient est 1'une de ces regions OU
l'Orient l:~Ilculltre l'Occ::idel1t. C'est tm point n;vralgique en cette epoque de paix ott de guerre
totale. Pour ee motif, ma cclegtltion est sptcial~­
ment reconnaissante a M. Bunche et a scs \.:01111oorateufs" alns: qu'aux Gouve111ements de l'Egypte
et dJIsr~e], ru m~gnifiqt1e S\1cces qu'i1s 011t ol,tenu
en concluant eet accord; nous croyons que c'est
de bon aUg1.1re [!Our l'J.veni~.

General McNAUGUTON (Canada): I should
like to associate the Canadian delegation with the
words of gratification expressed by tie President
and by 'the members of the Security Council in
regard to the ~rmisticf' which has already been
COllcluded at Rlwdes, and also Witl regard to the
otl1er negotiations now pendng, which are all
directtd to-wards the establishment of lasting
pence in Palestine, All those concerned, inleed,
merit the approbatiol1of t1~is Council, and in
particular the Acting Med:ator, wbu has SQ
effectively carried on tlle fine work of the late
ennnt Hernadote and to whom my Government
wishes to pay special tribute.

Le general 1I1cNAUGHTON (Canada) (tradJlit
de l' anqlais) : La de.h~gation du Canada bent
:;'assocl~r aUK fe:lieitaticns c:;:prilnh·s par le Pfe~
sidellt et les rnembres Ju Conseil en ce qui
concerne I'armistice condu Rhodes, et attssi les
autres uegodatlons en COllr:;, accord et pourparlcrs qui tendent
retablissement d'une pnix
,.hml.h1e en Palestine. Le Conseil ne peut que louer
}'attittlde de tons les interesses, notamment celle
du Mediateur par interim, qui a pO:lrsuivi de
n",anicrc si efllcace l'ceJ1vre admirable de feu le
comte Bernadotte, et
qui man GotTvemement
desire rendre un hommage particulier.

r tnlst th2t the President will COll'leV tlle views
of satisfaction expressed here today to'the Acting
Mediator, as well as to the GOvernme:lts con~
cerned,

Je sui" collvaincu que le President fortero a la
cOllnaissance du M6c!ia:ettr par interitcl ainsi que
des Gouvernemellt interesses les sentiments de
satisfaction Qui ant ete exprilr.es ici alljourd'hu:.

3. Adoption of the agenda

3. AdoptioIl de l'ordl'e du jour

The PRESIDEN'! (translated from Spanish):
We now have before us {or considen:tion tile
provisional agenda for this meeting, doet1ment
S/Agenda 4l3jRev.2.
If there are no objections, I ~hall cOl1sider it
adopted.

Le PRESIDENT (tycduit de l'espagnol):
NOlls deyons mSlntenant eXilminer l'ordre ciu jour
provisoire cl!; cette seance [S/Agenaa 413/Rev.2].

Mahmoud FAwa Bey (Egypt): I do not wish
to delay ulldu1y the opening of the Council's work

Mahmono FAWZ! Bey (Egypte) (imduit de
l'anglais) : Je ne vOl.ldrais pas retarder indu:nent

a

a

a

a

S'il n'y a par; rl'obJections, j~ le c02side':erai
comme aJopt€:.

6
On the items of the agenda, but with the President's permission, I should like to make certain
remarks OIl this agenda wfJicll is HOW bdore the
Council in document S/Agenda 413/Rev.2-I
repeat, Rev.2.

My principal remark is in connexion with this
revision and with tile onler in whieh the items
011 the agend<l have been arranged-not that it
matters so much in itself, but because of the spirit
pervading a certain phase of it, especially, the
revision
This agenda, as we all Ca:l see, has a history.
It is one of tile verv rare agend,1." of this Ccuneil
with a history. Ii has gone through a metamorpho~is_ Ttl'lll 7 was previously item 2, and
item 2 was item 3. For unkr.own but, to us, most
ttnacceptable reasons, the order was reversed and
we saw item 3 climbing up to become item 2.
Why? f'or what reason? Is there any special
hurry? Is tlJere anythin~ which particularly
impels tlS to lake up this matter immediately?
I shollld like to know.
In speddnf': abottt a certain spirit pel'vauing
this matter, I think I shotlld be more explicit.
This matler hnppens 10 be connected with t!Je
question of Palestine, and one of the werst
feattlres of this question-and I stlbmit this m()~t
resrectfully-is the way it has been de,,1t with
by certain people. One of the worst featnres in
an this has been artificialit)-,. We do not follow
nature. We instil something which is different,
which is special, which is exceptional. 'Why? It
does not llelp, and it does not aid us in arriving
at a serene and pacific atmosphere. ft is irritating
It is no! irritating to all people, but to many
people, and I ShOllJ.:l like, if at all possible, to
know why item 3 has climbed up and become
item 2 on the agenda.
The PRESIDENT (translated f'rotll Spanish):
With regard to the remarks made by the distinguished representative of Egypt, the Chair does
not consider that there has been ,my metamorphosis in the change i;1 the agenda. The reason
fur the change was Silll]Jly tlmt. sillce I fotlnd it
necessary, for reasons I have already given, to
refer to the case of Palestine and Israel when
dealing wjth the document which I have to submit
in cannex-ion with Dr. Bunche's report, it seemed
advisable, for the sake of orderly conduct of the
meeting, to link the two items together so as to
avoid .de.alin~ separately in the same agenda with
two slmdar Items, Furthennore, 1 have followed
lllt' agenda in atOcordance with rule 7, since the
previous meeting was cancelled and the SecretaryGeneral and I agreed that, on the basis of rllle 7,
that would be the best method of conducting the
mel'ting this ~ ftrmooll_

les traVal1X dL! COl1scil, m2.is, si le President m'y
autorise, je voudrais formuler certaines obscrVatiOn5 UlI suj<::t de ['ordre du jour qui nons est
presente, tel qu'il figure all document SjAgenda
413/Rev.2, - je. repete~ Rev.2.

La plus importante de lUes observations a trait

a edte revision <::t a l'ordre clans lequel les points
de: l'ordre du jour Ont ete range~; ce n'est pas
tant la question en soi qui importe, que l'esprit
d.ans leguel cette revision, notamment, 11 ete
clfectuee,
Cet ordre du jour, nons p0tlvons tons le con5tat~r, a nne his to ire, et il est lres tare qu'un ordre

du jour de ce Conseil ait une histoire. Une metamorphose s'est produite: le point 3 cOllstituait a
l'origine le point 2, et le point 2 ocwpait la place
du point 3; pOtlr des motifs inconnus, mais, ponr
IlOUS, absolumellt ina:ceptnbles, l'ordre a ete inverse et le point 3 a remplace le point 2. Pourqlwi?
Pour queUe rai::>on? Y a-L-il urgcllec partietlicl'e
en la matiel'e? Y a-t-il un motif que1conque qui
nous oblige examiner cette question immediatement? Voila ee que je vOtldrais savoir.
11 me semble llue, en parlant de l'esprit dnns
leql1el cette modification a ete apportee, je d.ols
etre plus cxplicite. T'Jllt eela est lie a la questlol1
palestinienne, et I'un des pires aspects de cette
ql1estion ~ je vcl\ldrais me pe1'111ettre de le direc'cst la methodc employee par certaines pcrsonnes,
c'est surt-out ce caractere artific:iel qu'on donne
a la question. On ne s'en lient pas at1x fai:s; on
introduit un facteut" noUVCatl, quelqtle chose de
special, c1'exceptionnd. PourqllOi? Cela lie conll-iIme pas cn~er l1ne .1tmosphere de sen~nite et de
paix, mais une situation irritante, sinon pour tout
le moncle, du mains pour bien des gens. J'rtimerais
savoir, si c'est poss.ible, pourqllC1i le poir_t 3 a
avance d'un rang pOur devenir le point 2 de
l'ordre du jour.

a

a

Le

PRESIDENT

(traduit

dt

l'espagnol):

J c tiens a dire, a p1'OpOS de 1'intervention tlu repnfsentant de l'EgJpte, que, en tant que President,
je n'estime pas que J'ordre du jour ait subi la
moindre modification; de5irant simplemcnt diriger
au mieux les debats de cette S~::InC'.r, j'ai estime que,
puisque je devais, pour les raisons que fat
fait c:onnaitre, faire allusion a la question de
Palestine et a Israel a propos des documents
relatifs aux communications de M. Bunche dent
j'avais a informer le Conseil, il me pa:'ai~s:lit
opportun de lier les deux questions et de ne
pas traiter deux fois, dans le meme ordre du
jour, de questions similaires. D'autre part, j'{li
suivi l'unlre uu jour, confol'mcmcnt 3. l'artic1e 7,
etant donne que la sellilce primitivement pnfvue
n'a pas eu lieu et que j'estimais que, conformement
aux dispositions de l'<i,rtick 7 et de I.'avis tlu Se~;e­
ta:re general h,i-llH':,me, c'etait la meilleme malllere
de conduire les debats cet apres-midi.

. Sir Terence SI-IONf~ (United Kingdom): I
dId n.ot catch the President's eye in time to make
a . bnef ~tatement on the .arnistice agreement,
With partlcltlar reference to certain remarks made
by the representative of the USSR. With the
President's permission, I should like to make
them now,

Sir Terence SHONE; (Ro)'aume-Uni) (tra-d1,it
de l'anglais): Je n'ai pu tttirer l'attention du
P:'esi<1~llt a temps pOllr faire lme breve dec:aratiCln
au sujet de I'accord d'armislice, notamment pOur
repondre D. cel'ta.ines observations du representant de ,['URSS. Si Le President m'y autorise, je
vondrais prp_ndre la pa.role maintcnant.

I merely wish to say that I do not intend to
follow 11r. Malil, in the polemics which be has
seen fit to. direct ~gajnst my country and its
represent:1tlve on tl1l5 CounCtl. Tl1ey seem to me

Je :iens simplement dire que je r:'ai pas
l'intention de suivre M. Malik StH le terrain de
la poJemique qu'il a cru de.voir entrc:prendre contn:~
man pays et son representant au sein de ce Conseil.

a

7

to be out of place in this debate, and I do not
for one moment believe that his accusations will
carry weight with any f<lir-mindcd person. We
yield to no one, not even the representative of the
USSR, in the sincerity with which wc welcome
the armistice agreenient between Egypt and
Israel.

Ses accusations me semblent deplacees dans cette
discussion, et je ne crois pas qu'elles aient la
moindre chance de convaincre qniconque juge
objectivement. MOll pays ne le cede m rien a
personne, pas melue au representant de l'ORS'S,
pour la sincerite avec laquelIe il salue j'accord
d'armistice qui vient d'etre condu entre l'Egypte
et Israel.

My delegation wishes to be associated with the
tribute paid to the Acting Mediator, Mr. Bl1nche,
and with the expressions of gratifications con~
cerning the conclusion of the armistice and of
hope that further armistice agreements will soon
be reached with Israel's other neighbours.

Ma delegation tient il s'associer it l'hommage
rendu a M. Bunche, Mediateur par interim, aux
declarations de satisfaction qu'a suscitees la conclusion de l'armistice, et a l'espoir exprime par
certains qu'IsraeI ne tardera pas it conclure de
nouveaux accords d'armistice avec ses autres
VOlsms.

Mahmond FAWZ! Bey (Egypt): ]n connexion
with the matter of the agenda, I concede that it
is the rigl1t of the President of the Security
Council, in consultation with the Secretariat and
with others if he so wishes, to arrange the agenda
as he sees fir. This, of course, refers to the
provisional agenda. liVhen the Council is adopting that agenda, however, it is the right of every
member to say whatever he thinks proper in
regard to the adoption of the provisional agenda.

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egyptc) (traduit de
l'anglais): Pour en revenir a j'ordre du jour, je
reconnais que le President du COllseil de securite
a le droit ele disposer a sa guise les points de
I'ordre dn jour, de concert avec le Secretariat
et meme nvec d'anlres p~rsonnes, si ban lui semble.
Cela, bien entendu, s'applique a I'ordre dll jour
provisoire. Mais, quanel il s'agit pour le Conseil
d'adopter cet ordre du jotlr, tollS les membres ont
le droit de faire toutes observations q!I'ils jugent
utilcs an sujet de cettc ndoption.
Tai qualifie de metamorpllOse cc qui est arrive
aujourd'hui a I'ordre du jour; le President du
COllsei.J de secllrite, lui, 1'" qualifie alltrement,
Mais, quelque nom qu'on lu1 donne, il reste que
I'ordre du jour a subi une modification. Je liens a
preciser, avec tonte la deference qtle .ie (bis au
Preside!lt, que les raisol1s qu'il a dOl1nees de cette
modifiC::ltion, si dIes peuvent paraitre plausibles,
ne sont nullement convaincantcs pOllr moi. L'objection que j'ai deja exposee il y a un moment
garde toute sa valeur. Tontefois, je ne m'opposer~i
pas davantage it l'adoption de cet ordre ?tl jour.
Je tiens simp1ement a ce que les observatlOns que
m'ont inspirees les modifications apportees a 1'ordre du jour soient inscrites au prod~s-verba1 de la
seance.
Je voudrais ajouter f]ce1ques mots de remercit;~
ments a l'endroit des autees membres du Consed
qlti, apres ma premiere intervention d'alljourd'hui,
ant bien voulu feIiciter l'Egypte de la part qu'elle
a prise dans la conclusion du recent accord conclu
a Rhodes.
Le PREsIDENT (traduit de l'es{Jagnol):
Je remercie le represe~tant. de 1'Egypt~ de ~es
aimables paroles et de I espnt de cOlllprehe.'1SlOn
dont il fait prellve eUl1lanifestant son desir de voir
le Conseil poursuivre ses debats. Si aucun autre
membre du Conseil ne formule d'ob}ection, i e
'considererai I'ol·dre du jour comme adopte.

I called what happened to the agenda today a
metamorphosis; the President of the Security
Council called it something else. vVhatever it is
called, there 11<IS been a change, I wish to subrr.it
most respectfully that the reasons given for the
change by the President, altilOl1gh they might be
plausible, to m~ are not convincing. The same
objection which I explained a while ago is stiIl
valid. However, I shall not carry my objections
to the adoption of this agenda any further. I
simply want to record my remarks on the changes
that have taken place in it.

I should like to add a word of thanks to the
other members of the Secllt"ity Council who, after
my first intervention today, were good enough to
compliment Egypt for the part it played in the
conclusion of the latest agreement at Rhodes.

The PRr::SIDENT (translated from Spanish);
I should like to thank the representative of Egypt
for his remarks and for the expression of his
willingness to proceed with the matter. If th.ere
are no objections, I shaH consider the agenda
adopted.
The agenda war adopted.

L'ordrc du jour est ado.pte.

4. Application of Israel for membership 4. Demande d'admission d'Israel
I'Organisation des Nations Uniel!l
in the United Nations
LA TOURNELLE (France) (tranrlat~d
from Fn:/lCh); The members of the Secunty
Countil will recall that at the meeting of 17 De~
cember last [385th meeting] the French representative proposed the adjournment of Israel's
request for admission [S/i093J, on the basis of
the fact that the Council's resolutions dated 4 and
16 November [5/1070, 5/1080] had not been
fully curried out, In the course of his statement,
Mr. Parodi explained that it was difficult for him
rvfr.

DE

a

M. DE LA TOURNELLK (France): Les mtm~res
du Conseil de securite se rappellent que, a la
seance dl1 17 decembre dernier [385i!mc sianee],
le representant de la Franct, arguant dl1 fait que
les resolutions du Conseil en d<lte des 4 [S/1070J
et 16 novembre [5/1080] n'avaient pas ele pleinemcnt execlltees, avait propose l'ajournement
de la dem<lllcle d'admission d'Israet [5/1093]. Au
cours de son intervention, M. ParoJi avait precise
qu'illui elait difficile de se prononcer sur le fond

8
to speak with ftlJi kIOwledge of the {<lels UIl the
sr.;bstc.nce of :he matter wd that he therefore considered it would be jetter to pcstpone :::onsiderati<JO cf tile questi<Jn f<Jr a short pNiod, which he
would like to be one mor-th. More than two
months ltave in fact elapsed since tlu.t meeting
of the Council.
The position taken at that time by the French
delegation qualiiies it to affirm, now that the
S:ate of Israel :s in existence, that it feels tfIat
that State ftllfils the obligations uf the Charter
a:ld shows every sign of being: a peace·loving
State. The truce, the maintenance of which has
been uncertain at certlli, periods, has been transformed intu an armistice between Israel and
Egypt, while negotiations are bei:tg :arried on
betw'een the Government ')f Israel on the one
hand, and the Governmenti'. or Tnms:ordan and
the LelJanon on the Jtb.~r. That fortunate develop~
ment is due, above all, to the political wisdom
of the Government' rDncemecl. to ~he sacrifice of
Count Bemadote, and tQ the perseverance and
skill shown by the Acting MerF<lto~, Mr, Bunche,
whose ;;:ction the Frer:ch Government has continuously praised ,md whost: ef[on~ it ll<ls continuously supported to t1:e full extent of its
capabilities.

en touti' c<JnnaiS3allCC de. caUse et qu'illui parnissait, en consequence, desirable de reprendre l'cxamen de la questioll dans un brei delai, cu'il
a\'<l.it sOt.:haite etre d'u!1 mois. En fait, plus de
del1x mois se sont e::oules depuis cette sea.nce du
Conseil.

La positio:1 qt'avait 'lIars adoptee la delegation
fran<;aise la qualifie pOnr affinner aujourd'hui
que l'Etat d'Israet exis:e, qu'il lui parait remplir
les obligations c'c lu ChuTte et presenter tom l~s
caracteres d'un Etat pacifique. Er. c{fet, :a treve,
dont le maintien, a certaines epoqlles, avait He
aIeatcire, a ete t~an~formee en un armistice elltre
Israel et l'Egypte, t'lndis que des negociations
sont en tours entre le Goun:rnement d'IsraeI.
d'une part, et les Gouvernements de la Transjorclanlc et du Libnll, d'olltre p.:<rt. Cette hellreU''lt'
evolution est due, avant tout, it :a sagesse poli-'
tique des Gouverntments interesses, all sacrifice
dll comre Bemadotte, la tenacite et l'habilite
depJcyees pt! le Meuiateur par intel"im, .\1, Bunc;le, a I'a<:tion duqne1 le Gouverne1l1ent fran~<tis
11'a cesse de rendre hommage et dOnt i1 :l'a cesse
d'appuyer It:s efforts dans tol.t[C la. lnesure de ses
moyens.

a

a

My delegation is particularly pleased at the
ch3.r_ge which hs taken plate in a sit11ation that
at time;; ,vas criti:a1. In accordance with the
spir:t of tl:e Charter, ;t~ one wi!'ih is for the
estahlislunent of peac~ft11 relatiOl:s between the
nations, each nation respecting its obFgatiolls
tow]rds t..1~ otter.
My delegation will vote in favollf of the admis5ion of the S:ate of Israel to the United
Nations.

La d61r:gation haniiai~e se :61icitf' particulirement du changemen: imervC'nu dl1.lls une situation qui, par Clorr:ents, a ete critique. Conformemellt a l'esprit ce la Cllarte, e~le It'as)ire qu'a
l'instauration roe relations paci£ques entre les
nations, dans le respect de leurs obligations
t:1utnelles.
La delegatio:'! fran~aise votera en faveur de
l'admission de 1'£tat d'Isracl l'Organisation des
Nations Unies.

Mt. AUSTIN (United States of America) : The
United States fully supports and w]l vote
aCnrma:ively on the appli:ation of be State of
Israel for men:bership in the Uni:ed Natiuns.

ct? l'angil1is;: La delegatio1 cles Etats·Unis appuie
sans reserve la dema:tde c1'admissioll de l'Et01t
d'Isrtlcl a l'Organisation des Natiolls TJnies f't vo-

a

M. AUSl':N (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit

tera en sa favetr.
On frequent occasions, United States ::>fficials,

incllldillg 1l1e Pn~iJellt and the Secretary of
Sta:e, have affirmed tl:at the United States looks

forward to the admission of the Sta~e of Israel
to the United Nation;;. The United States extenued immed:ate and full recognition to the.
State of Israel and recognized the Provisional
Goverment of Israel as the de facto a11thority of
the .nev; S~ate. imuedialely following the proclamafton of ".ts mdepencence or. 14 May 1948. On
31 January 19C9. the United States e;<tended full
de jure recognition t') the Government of the
State c·f Iml.el, bllS fllrther strengthening the
relations between our Governments.
'

Des membres du Gouvernement des Etats-Unis,
y compris le President et le Sf'c:n~taire d'Etat, ant

frequernmcnt afllrme que les Etats-Unis con:ptent
l'Organibien que l'Etat c1'Israel sera admis
sation des Natiol'lS Unies. Des la proclamation de
l'indepe:tdance de cet Etat, :e 14 mai 1940, les
Etats-Unis ont reconnu sans reserve l'Etat
d'Israel, reconnais;;ant en meme temps le Gouvcrecmcnt provis<Jire d'Isr<tel COllllUe autor:te de
facto d<:ns :e nauve! Etat. Le 31 jal1'lier 1949, les
2tats-Unis ont reconnu le Gouvernement de l'Etat
d'Israel de j1tre, conso1idanr ainsi les rarports
entre les deux GOt:ver:lerr.ent8.

a

let the opinion ')f my delegation, as we have
stated previously, Israel is duly qualified for
membersllip ,meler the provisions laid down in
Article 4 of tne Char,er ')f the United Nations
whi,J1 ,pt:cifit:~:
'

De I'avis de ma deJ,~gation. Israel, je le repete,
est diiment qualifie pOur entrer a J'Organ1~atioll
des Na:ions Unies, aux terrr.es de l'Article 4 de
la Charte des Nations Ur.ies, qui stipule:

"Me:nbership in the l:"nitecl Nations is open
to all other peace-loving States whic'l accep' the
?bligati~ns coctair:ed in the present Charter 'and,
111 t11e. J.l1dgment of the Organization, are able
and wllhng to carry cut these obligations."
'There i~ no c1011bt thM hr<lel cQnstitllte~ ~
State within t:1e meaning of tha: term in -inter.
natiom.ll law. Th~ p.eoplt of Israel have given
the world a cOnVlllcmg derr.onstration of their

"Peuvent deven:r Membre3 dts Kntions Unies
tous au:res Etats pacifiques qui acceptent les obligntions de I~ rresente Charte et. an jngement de
I'Org.anlsation, sO:tt cap<:bles de les remflir et
disposes a le faire."
.
.Ti ut': fait p<..s de doute qu'Israel constitue un
Etat .at: sens que le droit ir.terllationa1 doune a.
ce mot. Le peuple d'Israel a net:ement demontn~
atl monde qu'i: etait cap::.ble d'instituer un Gou-

9
ability to organize their Government and to estab- verncment, ainsi que de creer,dans descirc'onslish under most difficult conditions, a system of t~nces. extrel~e:nen! diHiciles, des organes adil1i~
administration and law-making. They have held mstratlfs et leglslatJ Is. Ce peuple a procede a des
a free and democr<1.tic election for a Constituent elections libres et democratiques pour rellnir une
Assembly, which is even now engaged in drawing assemblee constieuante, laque1le d:dige en cc moup a constitution for that State.
ment meme une constitution pour ledit Eta!.
The fact that Israel is a peace-loving State has
Le -fait qu'Israel est un Etat pacifique a ete
been demonstrated by the conclusion at Rhodes (Je~ontre par la sign<1tnre, a Rhodes, ~ en appli~
of an armistice agreement between Egypt and catl0n des resolutions dlt Conseil de securite en
Israel in pursuance of the Security Council's date dll 16 novembre [5/1080] et dn 29 ur.cembre
resolution of 16 November (5/1080J and 29 De- [S/1169] 1948, d'lm accord d'amllstice avec
'cember [5/1169J 1948. Negotiations which are l'Egypte. Les migociatiol1s qd sont en coUt's actuel·
currently being held with the assistance of the leme.nt, avec le concours de M. Bunche, Ylediateur
Acting Mediator, Mr. Bunche, between Israel and par interim, entre Israel et la Transjordanie, d'une
Transjordan and Isr.ael and Lebanon give further part, et, d'autre part, entre Israel et le Liban,
promise of peace and stability for Palestine. It sont, eUes aussi, de ban at.lgure poor la paix et
may be expected that, in the near future, armis- la stabilite de la Palestine. It est permi, d'esperer
tice agreements will be conclnded between Israel qlll' <"les ;lJ'mf(L~ ,j'armist-ic(' ~l'rrlnt condlls a breve
and other Arab States. Such agreements create echeance entre Israel et d'autres Etats arabes. De
a favoll1'able atmosphere for carrying out tasks teJs accords creent une atmosphere favorable
laid down by the General Assembly for the Con- l'accomplissement des taches assignees par I'AsCiliation Commission for Palestine. The conc:1u- semblee genemle a. la Commission de conciliation
sion of· the armistice agreement last week is evi~ pour la Palestine. Le fait que, la semaine derni(he,
dence that the State of Israel is able and willing 11ll accord d'armistice a ete concln prouve' que
to accept and carry O!lt the obligations contained ['Eta, est capable d'accepter et de remplir les
in the Charter.
obligations de la Charte des Nations Unies et
dispose a. le faire.

a

In the light of recent developments, it is appro~
priate that the Security Council should now take
favourable action on Israel's application. Such
action would be an enccmragcment to the newly
established Government of Israel to continue to
meet its responsibilities.
For these reasons, my delegation reiterates its
view 1hat the State of !5l·r\e1 is ClLtalified for membership, ami it believes Israel's ~dmissioll to
memLlership should now be recommended by the
Security COLmciL

Etant donne la tournure que les evenements ont
prise Cl'S demiers temps, i1 convient que le Conseil
de securit!: clonne rn<lintenant une sllite favorable
a la den'lanue cl'aumission d'I5rae!. Une telle mesure encouragerait le Gouvernement d'Isr.ael, re·
continuer
assumer ses
cemment institue,
respollsabilites.
Pour ces raisons, ma delegation repete une fois
de pillS que, a. son avis, l'Etat d'Israel est qualifie
ponr etre admis al'Orgarusation, et elle estime que
le Conseil de securite se doil maintenallt de recommander son admission.

a

a

Mr. TSIANG (China): I suggest that the
Security Connci! shottld handle this item in the
usual wuv, which is to refer ,it to the Committee
on tbe Admission of New Members.' In the
Committee there can be a thorough examination
of the merits of the question, particularly from
the point of view of technical law and the facts.
"'nen the report of the Committee is sl1bmitted
to the Security Council, we can have a full debate.
If we do not follow our usual proced'me, I am
afraid that we may have a debate now, and then
when the report is submitted, we shalt have another debate. During the course of the meetings
held in .Paris there was a lengthy ddJate [383rd,
384th, 385th, 386th me<1tings] in the Security
Council without the substance of the item ever
being discttssed by the Committee. Tllis time I
suggest that we adopt our lIsual procedure.

M. TSIANG (Chine) (traduit ie ra1~glair):
Je propose que le CoulSeil de sccttritc procede,
pom cette question, de la maniere habitllelle, c'esta-dire ql1'il la reJ1Voie all Comite d'adl1lission des
l10uveaux Membres. Ce Comite pourra examiner
dans le dHaille bien-fonde de la elemande, notamment du double point de vue du droit et des faits.
Lorsq ue le Comite aura sOtlmis son rapport au
Conseil de securlte, la question pourra etre debattue dam le detail. Si, ,Ht ccntraire, le Conseilne
s'tn tient pas sa procedure habitnelle, je crains
que cela n'entraine [me discussion mainlenant et
qu'il n'y ait ensuite unc autre discussion, lorsque
le rapport du CUlIIile sera jJ<ll"venu <tu ConsciL Au
cours des seances temles a Paris [383eme, 384etite;
385e"iJw, 386eme], il y a eu au Conseil de securite
une discussi011 pro1ongee, sans que le fond de la
question ait jamais fait l'objet d'une dis:ussion au
Comite d'admission des nOUVeaLl;{ Membres.
CeUe fois-ci, je propose que le Conseil s'en tietine
a. la procedure habituelle.

Mr. SUNDE (Norway): The Norwegian dele~
gation wisbes to support tbe proposal of the
representative of China.

M. SUNDE (Norvege) (traduit de l'ang[ais):
La delegation norvegienne rient appuyer la proposition elu representant de la Chine.

. Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt): I would rather
say, in view of our known opinion of this whole
matter, that under the circumstances~whichare
known to the whole world if the whole world
wishes to see them-the Security Council should
not have agreed to consider the application f~r
membership which we now have before us. ThlS

Mahmoud FAwzr Bey (Egypte) (traduit de
l'anglais) : p-our mai, je dirai plutOt, conformenjent,a. I'opinion bien cannue ell' ma delt~gation sur
toute cette question, gIll', dans les circonstances
actuelles ......;. circonstances hidentes pour le monde
~tjer, a condition que le monde entier vcuille
bien les voir - le Conseil de securite n'aurait pas

a

a

10
applic<ttiCln should have been discarded as one
presented by a body which has. established for
itself a long continued and persistent record of
disobedience'to the Security Council, and of
defiance to the Security Council, the entire United
Nations, tbe whole civilized world. The least we.
should do is to follow the wise suggestion of the
representative of China. Thrlt is the I~ast ~e
ShOl1lrl do; otherwise, we shall be add:~g stlll
more artificiality to the question of Palestlne ancl
to all the matters related to it. I bape we shall
not follow this latter course.

du accepter d'examine!' la clemande d'admissiOll
dont il est actue11ement saisl. 11 aurait dft rejeter
cette demande d'achnission commE' oyant ete flfCsentee par un organisme ayont a son actif \me
longue serie ininterrompue de desobeissances au
Conseil de secntite et de dbfis lances au Conseil de
securite, a l'ensemble de l'Organisation des Nations Unies et au monde clvilise tont entier. Nom;
clevrions a totlt le mains suivre la sage suggestion
du representant de la Chine. Alltrement, nous
.ajouterions encore ;LU caractere artificiel de la
question pa1estinienne et de toutes les questions
qui s'y rattachent. ]'espere que le Conseil ne
choi5ira pas cette demiere voie.

Mr. AUSTIN (United States of America) : If
there were any real subst;mtia1 issue of £.act abollt
the qualifications of this applicant for membershi;J
in the United Nations, then I could see some cause
for again referring the application back to the
Committee on the Admission of New Members.
We ail know the history of this case. We are
all very familiar with it. The report of the Committee on tbe Admission of New Members is not
very old; it is dated 6 December 1948, and is
contained in document 5/1110. This report shows
that the regular oruer of business has been com~
plied with.

M. AUSTfN (Etats-Unis d'Arnerique) (frlldt.it
de l'anglais): S'il pouvait y avail' le moimlrc donte
quant aux titres que l'Etat d'Israel peut prodllire
a I'appui de sa candidature. je comprendrais qne
sa demande d'admission soit a nouveau renvoyee
au Comite cl'admission des nouveaux Membres.
lIhis le Consei1 conna'it bien I'historique de ee
cas, taus les membres le connaissent parfaitement.
Le rapport du Comite d'admission des nouveaux
r-"Iembres n'est pas tres ancien; i1 ne remonte
qu'au 6 decembre 1948, et se trouve contenu
dans le document SjlllO. Ce rapport pl'ouve que
la procedllre reguliere a ete suivie.

The present application is not a case of an
original application which has never been referred
to the Committee. This application has been
referred to the Committee, and the Committee
was in a peculiar situation. The Security Council
was also in a peculiar situation, because the
General Assembly was in session at the time and
rule 60 provided for certain time-limits which
created, as ha5 been stated, an artificial embarrassment. Uncler those considerations, the
Security Council Committee On the Admission
of New Members made a report. I shall re.ad
that report, because it answers the claims made
for postponement. It answers first the claim that
this matter hrtS not been considered. Note tbe
first sentence. The report reads:

"TIle Security Council Committee on the Admission of New Members has discussed Israel's
application for admission to membership in the
United Nations.
"As a reslllt of its rliscussions, the Committee
came to the conclusion that it was not at present
in possession of the requisite information to enable
it to come to any decision. In particular it was
pointed out in the Committee that the General
Assembly itself had not yet reached any con~
elusion on the Palestine qUl':stion as a whole.

n ne s'agit pas, dans le cas present, d'ltne
demande (['admission presentee pour la premiere
fois et dont le Comite n'aurait jamais ete saisi.
CcUe demande a deja ere renvoyee au Comite,
qui s'est trouve dans Ulle situation p::.rticuliere.
Le Conseil de securite, hli aussi, s'est trouve daos
une situation particu1iere, car, a l'epoque, l'AssembIee generale se trouvait en session, et I'ortide 60 dn reglement interieur prevoit certains
delais qui ant eree, comme i1 a ete indique, uoe
difficulte artificieIle. C'est dans ces conditions que
le Comite d'admission des nouveaux Membres a
fait un rapport. Je vais en donner lecture, car
ce rapport repond aux demandes d'ajournement
de la questlon; il repond, d'abord, a I'affirmation
selon 1aquelle ceUe question n'aurait fait l'objet
d'aueun exarnen. VeLlillez noter la premiere phrase
du rapport. En void le texte complet:
"Le Comite du Consei1 de securite a delibere
sur la demande cl'Israel tendant a san admission
a l'Organisation des Nations Unies.

"Il reslllte de ses deliberations que le Coroite n'a
pa~ estime posseder, au stade nctnel, les eh~ments

d'appreciation propres a lui permettre de se prononcer. Il a, notamment, He signale au sein
au Comitb que l'Assemblee generale n'avait pas
encore eIJe-meme pris position st:!" l'ensemble de
la question de palestine.

"The USSR and Ukrainian SSR delegates declared, bowever, that for their part they saw
no reason whatever for delaying Israel's admission
to the United Nations. The Syrian delegate, on
the other hand, expressed his opposition to the
application for admission, and added that the
application did not merit consideration.

"Les c161egues de l'URSS et de la RSS
d'1Jkraine ont, cependant, fait remarquerque, pour
leur part, ils consic1eraient gn'il n'y <lvait aucune
raison de retarder l'admission cl'Israel a l'Organisation. De son cote, le detegue de la Syrie a
declare S'Qpposer a la demande d'adll1ission, ajoutant que cette demande ne meritait pas d'ctre
prise en consideration.

• "The Security CQlllld1 Committee on the Admission 0 f Ney; Members has instructed me to
apprise the Cotmcil of the above. The Committee. consider~ that it will be for the Security
Councl1 to deCIde at the proper time whether

"Le Comite du Conseil m'a charge de porter
qui precede a la connaissance dtl Conseil de
secmite. Dans la pensee du Comite du Conseil,
il appartiendra au Conseil de decider, le moment
venu, s'il convient qu'il en rHere a nOllveau au
Cl"

1l
to refer the m<ltter back to the Commi:tee or take
a decision itself."

COlllite ou qu'il se prononc:: dircctement luimeme,"

The letter is signed by Joseph Nisot, Chairman
of the Security Council Committee on the Admission of New Members. The communication
[S/1267] which placed this question before the
Council refers to the application [S/109~J, .'Lnc1
the application makes reference to nde 60 of the
provisional mles of prQi..;edure, with its timelimits, all of which we have now passed.

La 1ettre dont je viens de uonner lecture est
signee de Joscph Nisot, Pre;;ielent elu ComiH d'ad~
mission des nouve<J.tlX Mentbres. La communicaR
tion [S/1267] par laquellc le Conseil a ete saisi.
de r:fttf ·qtlf'~tion <:e rHere a J" rl"'m:'1<1e. d'HJl.llli~­
sion [SilO?3], et celle-et fait etat de. l'artic!e 60
du reglcment interieur provisoire du Conseil de
securite, not.amment de3 cteluis qu'il flxe, et qui
se trOl1vent tous dep<lsses a l'heure actueUe.

The qllesticll therefore naturally arises: is this

En consequence, la question suivant se pose
naturellement: s'agit-il bien la d'une ql1estion qui
exige ttnC nouvelle discussion au Comite cl'admission des llOUVealL'C Membres? Est-ce vraiment le
cas? Chacun, bien entendu, repondra a ceUe question se10n le point de vue atKlue1 il se place id
aujourd'hui, car, maimenant que la qllestion a
ete soulevee, il faut que le Coaseil la tranche, et
le Conseil devra decider s'il entencl aller franchement de l'avant ou s'i1 entend ajourner l'examen
de la question. Quelle que sait l'opinion dll public,
le Conseil de securite, 1ui, COllnait les faits. Je ne
stlis pas d'avis d'ajoumer ceUe question en la
renvoyant nouveau all Cornite d'admission de~
Iluuveaux Membres.

a matter that rcqu,rcs further discussion in the

Sccurily Council Commiltee on the Admission of
New Members? Now, really, does it? Every
man will answer that, of course, by the position
he takes bere today, because now that the question
has been taised, we afe confronted with that
isslte; tbe Security Council will have to decide
whether it means to gO on frankly and candidly
with thlS matter or whether it means to postpone
it. No matter what though mn)' be in the
minds of the people, we as the Security Council
lmow what the facts al-e. I do not favollf postponing this matter by the method of referring it
to the CutIll1litlet: again.

a

Mr. MAUlC (Bnion of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): As early as
December 1948, at the Security Cottncil's meetings in Paris, the USSR delegation gave a full
statement of its views on the questioll of admittin!!, the State of Israel to membership in the
United Nations. The USSR delegation spcke in
f.'lvour of admission, as it considered that there
was already then every reason far the Security
Couticil to examine the application of the State of
Israel and to reach a bvourable decision on it.
At that time, however, certain delegations advanced a number of farRfetched and artificial
excuses, as a result of which the question was not
examined when il should have been and was
postponed for a considerable period. It was postponed despite the fact that t11e Israeli Government's applicalion fur admission to the United
Nations had been' dltly examined by the Committee on the Ad'llission of New Members in
accordance with the rltles of procedure and the
established cttstom, so that all procedural requirements had been met even at that time.

M. MALIK (Union des Repllbliques socialistes
sovietiques) (traduit dn ntsse) : En decell1bre dernier, lors des seances du Conseil de securite tenu02S
a Paris, la delegation ele I'URSS a deja eu I'occasion d'exposer en detail ses vlles sur l'arlmissioil
de l'Etat d'Israel
l'Organisatian des Nations
Unies. La delegation de l'URSS s'est promncee
en faveur de cette. admission, car die estimr..it des
ceUe epoqtle que le Conseil de securite possedait
taus les element3 necessaires pour examiner la
demande d'admission de J'Etat d'Israel et pour
y donner une s'clite favorable. Cependant, cer~
taines delegations ant' invoque
l'epoque toute
une serie de pretextes ttrtificie1s et fabriqlles de:
toutes pieces, ce qui a empeche l'examen de cettc
question qui <t ete reporte une date assez eloignee.
L'etude de cette question a ete ajonrnee ma1gre
le fait que la dem.atldc d'admissioll a l'Organisatlon des Nations Cnles soumise par I'Etat
d'Israel avait ete dUI1l~nt examinee par le Comite
d'admission des nouveaux Membres, aimi que
le prevaient le reglement interieur et ks regles
etablies, et que, par consequent, des ceUe tpoque,
on ,wait suivi la procedure normale.

As [ have already pointed Oltt, the USSR dele~
gation considered that evell tllen there was every
reaSon for reaching a favourable decision on the
ql1estion of ;;dmitting Israel to the United Nations,
<IS it is well known that the Israeli Government
is a peace~loving Goverrunent which loyally <.:OIUplied with the requirements of the United Nations
and in particular with the Security Council's
orders and also that the Israeli Government fttlfils tbe conditions of Article 4- Df the United
Nations Charter.

Comme je l'ai deja fait remarguer, la deh~­
gatioll <le l'URSS bait cl'avis que le ConSfil etait
parfaitement fonM a donner des cette epoque une
suite favorable a la demande d'aelmission adressee
par Israel l'Organisation des Nations Unies. En
dIet, chacUll ~alt qu'Israel est un Rtat par.ilil]l\f
qui execute loyalemellt les decisions ele l'Orga~
nisation des Nations Unies et, notamment, les
instructions elll Conse;! de 5Ccllrite, et que cet
Etat rcmplit les conditions enoncees a l'Artic1e 4
de la Charte.

For these reasons, and also in view of the fact
that the Israeli Government's applic.ation has a1~
ready been examined by the Committee on the
Admi3sion of New Members, the USSR delegation cannot see any reason for postpaning the
consideration of this question any longer. It feels
that the Security Couti.til should decide this
question without -any futther delay. It supports ~

Se fondant sur touk,; ces considerations, ainsi
que sur le fait que la demande d'Israel a deja ete
examinee par le Comite: d'adr:Jissiol1 des nouveaux
Mel:;JLres, la delegation de :'URSS ne voit pas
de raison d'ajourner a notlveau I'exarnen de
cette question, et eile estime que le Conscil de
sectirile doit la resoudre sans tarder; la delegation de l'URSS appuie la demande d'Israd

a

a

a

a

12
thl;l Israeli Government's application and will vote
for that State's admission to the United Naticns.

et votera en faveu:- de l'admissicn de cet Etat it
l'Organisation des Natipns Unies.

Mr, TSIANG (China): My suggestion was made
without the least idea of prejudging the ultitrate
de:isior. of the C01..t IIdl in this connexlon. Neither
did I intend it to be a device for postponing action
in this matter. I assume that the applicant State
,W0111d lil<e the General Assembly to take action
in this case during b,e second part of its tHrd
'session to be held in New York, but if we refer
the application to the Committee on the Admission
of New Mc~bers, there will still be time for that
to happen.

M. TSIANG (Chine.) (traduit de l'anglais):
Ma suggestion ne pn~tendait Ilullement pn~jugcr
la decisicn que le Conseil prendrait eventuellement
en la mati~re. Elle ne cOl1stitmd pas non plus,
dans man mtentioll, un moyen destine a. retarder'
cette dec:sion. Je presume que l'Etat candidat desirerait voir l'Assemblee generale Se prononcer
sur sa demande lors de la seco:1de partie de la
troisiemc session qui s'ouvrira prochainement a
New-Yo:-k; or, s; nous renvoyons la dem<lnde all
Comite d'admission des nouveaux Mernbres, il
spra tnlljo1lt's pnH~ible de n~~gler la question en
temps utik

I wish to say that I do not entertain any prejudice on this subject. In Paris my delegation stated
over a:1d over again that it thought that the ad~
mission of Israel at that time would have been
p~emattlre. We considered that since the Assembly was about to make another effort at conciliation, time should be allowed to malce possible the
achievement of some substantial success along
the lines of conciliation before we admitted Israel
to the United Nations. A considerable time has
p2ssed since our discussions in Paris. Meanwhile,
our efforts haVe met with success, as was declared
at the beginning of this meeting.

Je voudrais souligner que je n'ai aucune idee
en la ll·,atiere. A Paris, ma delegation
a Jedare a lllainlt:S repriscs c.uc, .i son nYis,
I'admission d'Israel etait alors prema:uree. Etant
donne qtle l'Assemblee se disposait ~ renouveler
ses tcntativcs en vue d'unc conciliation, il nous
a semble gu'il fal"ait laisser s'ccouler un certain
temps pour que des progres t'ee[s puissent etre
realises dans ceUe voie, avant d'adlllettre Israel
a l'Organisat:on des Nations Unies. Beaucoup de
temps s'e~[ ecuule depuis notrc ciscussion 6.
Paris. Dans l'inten'alle, ainsi qu'il.a ete declare au
debut de la seance, nos effol·ts cnt ete couronnes
de succes.

In be opinion of my delegation :t is now :ime
for the Security Council to take action on this
application. It is well known to members of the
Council that =y Government recogllized T.~raeJ
on 1 March. When this question is voted upon,
my delegation will vote in favotlr of admission.
Nevertheless, I put forward my wggestion because it appeated to me that at this jt1~rtt1re the.
Secur:ty COl1ncil should :1ot have a heated, (;on,troversial discussion on this issue, and that a
,storm here mig:lt h2vc bad effects on the course
of events in Palestine T mnsidered that a discussion 'in the Conmittee might diminish the
possibilities of differences of opinion. That was
the real motive of my suggestion, and the ~pirit
in whirh I m:\de it, T do not insist upon it, but
I thi!1~ that it wocld be wise for the Security
Cou[I(:ll tc adopt the customary proced ure in this
matter.

Ma delegation est d'avis qu'il est temps que le
Conse.il de securite prenne position sur cette
demande. Tous les membres ~avelit qt.:e mon
pays a recon:1U Israel le ler mars. Lorsque cccte
question sera mise aux voix, ma delegation votera
en faveur de I'admission. Si, neanmoins, j'ai fait
cctte stgges:ion, c'est parce qu'il m'a semble.e
que lp Conse] de securite devrait eviter, l'heure
actuelle, d'entamer un debat anime et houleux
sur cette question ct que, si un orage ec1atait id,
cela pourrait avoir des repercnssions facl1euses
1;ur !~ cours des evene.ments en P3.lestine. rai
pense qu'une discussion au sein du Comite aurait
attenue nos divergences de vues eventuelles. C'est
la la raison qui a motive ma suggestion, et c'est
dan,,: "'et esprit que je l'ai faite. Je n'insiste pas,
mais iI me semble qu'il serait sage ql1e le Conseil
de sect:rite suive la procedure habituellc en la
matiere.

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt): I believe that
we h~ve already spoken long enough about the
questlDn whether or not to refer th:s matter t) the
Committee on the Admission of New Members.
I sho.ll therefore add only a few words in this
cormexioll.

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypte) (traduit de
l'allg1ais): 11 me semble que nons avons deja
discute assez longuement la question de savolr
si cette demande doH etre rer.voyee au Comite
cl'admission des nouveaux Membres: je me contentera: dOllc de dire quelques mots a ce. sujet.

We have been bId that the time-limits have
passed, Then why the rUSh, why the hurry? If
the time.-limits have passed, there ~s no time-limit
to meet.

precon~t:e

a

On nous a dit que le delai de rigueur Hait passe.
S'il ell csL ainsi, pourqnoi ce~te hate, cette preci-

pitation? Si les delais sont passes, il n'y a pas
de delai absenee.

a

We h",ve also been told that there is no contention regarding the facts . I do not know what
is meant by the word' "facts" here. As far as
tny delegatlon is concerned, there is indeed con~ention regarding the so-called facts. I am speak.
mg both of the: basic f2CtS and positi<Jns and of
what we might call the evolving facts.

OnnouS a dit egalement que les faits sont indiscutables. Je ne sals pas de quels "faits" it s'agit.
En ce qui cancerne notre delegation, ces pretendus
faits Sont bel et bien discutables. Je ne fais pas
seulement allusion aUK faits essentids, <lUX positions fondar:1entales, mais a ce qu'on peut appelet'
les faits en COUT> d'evolution.

As sev<:ral representatives have already pointee.
Ottt, a lcng time ha;; pa~:;,ed ,;ince the COllunittee
on the Admission of New Members and the
Security Cout:cil last took up this matter. Is i:

Ainsi que plusieurs representants 1'0nt deja
fait remarqucr, bcan::oup de: :emps s'est eroule
depuis que le Comite d'admission des t1ouveaux:
Membres et le Conseil de securite ont discute la

[3

not reasonable, is it really askl ng too much is it
being too exacting, to ask what has happened
dnring that long period of titr.e? vVhat for
example, is the intention of the applicant in' connex!on with the territory which ~': is still holding
agal1lst the orders of 1.1e Sectlnty Council and
as far as we are concerned, in violation of all
law anc. right? Is it tco much to ask, is it 11nreasonaJle to ask, what the intenfon of the applicant is in conncxion wi,th the Arabs who have
been displaced and dispersed in and around
Pakstir.e? What is the applic:int's ioteoti(ln? We
W2nt t.o know.
These are situations wh:ch have been continuing and developing du:-ing the last two months
or SQ. They have not ceased; they persist. Is one
being very diffict11t when he wants to k:1ow about
at! these matters ~ I might say that, when I speak
abotlt dispersed or displaced Arabs, I am nul
speaking al)out a handful of them, about one
'family or tvvo. It is common :cnowledge that they
represent thlee-quarters of a whuk na-tion.
In spite of the fact t11.3ot t:le -ep·:esent~tive of
Chinu -dop_~ not insist l~pon b:s suggestion, I submit-a:1d r thin1: tl1(' l"epr~sentative of China believes-that we should follow the normal procedw-e i:1 this mntter instwd of resorting te, an
:musual procedtlre and according special treat~
:11Cllt to a pa.rtictllar part)'.
In this connexion, I wuuld suggest that too
much capital should not be made of the part taken
by the applicar.t in connexion with the recent
agreement reached at Rhuues, I repeat that wc
mt1st understand that agreement in its proper
light and appraise it according ·1.0 i':.s proper proportions-neither Dore l1:lr les,. I ::;Ublllit <:tgain
that we shodd rder this matter to th Committee 011 the Adrnission of New Menbers.

ques:ion pour la dem:ere fois, Chercher a sa"oir
c~ qui s'est passe clans cc long intervaJle, est-ce
del'a:sor.nablc, est-.ee trap demander, est·ce faire
preuve ~e trap d'exige:1ce 1 Quelles sont, par exem~
pie, les mtentlOl1S du candldat :i l'egarC: dt: territoi1'e qu'il detien~ en vio1atior: dcs onhs dl.l
Conseil de securite et, it :1otre avis au mepris de
tOllt droit? Est-il anormal de ue~nder queUes
sont les intentions du candidat it l'egard des Arabes
chusses de leu~s foyers et disrerse~ en Palestine
ou dans les Etats avoisinants? Est-ce trap demander? QuelJes sont les intention.., d,l c<lndidati'
N ous aimerior,s bien le savoir.
Voila une situation qui continue d'e-voluer depuis
pres de deux mo:.s. (ette sittmtion n'e:. pas cesse
d'cxist<:.r, eUe su[}siste, list-<:.c se lllcntrer trop
chicanier qlte de pretendre savoir it qmi g'en
:enir? Je dais preciser que, lonque j~ parle
d'Arabcs chnssCs de leurs foyers et disp~rsP", il
:le s'agit pas d'une poiguee d'Arabes, d'une or;
dl':Ux famJles, rrais, tout le rnonde le sait, des
trois quarts d'une n:;tion.
En depit Qn fait qw~ le representan: de la
Chine n'imiste pas sur sa suggestion, je dcm<:.nde
- ':'t je pense que le representGnt de la Cline est
de man avis - que notts suivions la pl"DcCdure
habituelle en la matii~re au lieu de recourir une
procedure extraordinaire et d'accordeI" UlI :raiterr.ent preterentiel .a un candidat.
A ce p~opos, 11 ne: com'ient pas,
111011 avis.
d'attacher trap d'im?ortance au role jaw: pzr le
car:dimt clans les negotiations qui ant abodi i
l'accord conclu It Rhodes. eet accord, jc le
repete, doit etre. ccnsi~ere SOilS son v~"i j~ur,
clans ses prcportlOns reelles, ai plUS nl maillS.
J e demande enCore 11TIe fois que cette ~t1estion.
soit renvoyee au Comite d'acmission des nouveaux Membres.

a

a

The PRESIDENT: (IraJ:slated from Spanish):
I think I should. ill1m~cliatcly ask the Council to
decide whether ISI'ael's application should be re"
·ferred to the Comm:ttce on tbe Admission oi
New Members or wh~ber the Council should
continne with the coasideratiou of tne qucsticn
this afternoon,

Le PltEs:DENT (tyad~j,it de l'espn.g1Jol);
Je crois que je dois soulllettre irr,mediatelllent a
1'f'X":l.rnen dll Consei1 la question de ~avoir si la
de:nande presenb'ie par Isr<lcl doit etrc transmbe
au Comite Cadmission des nouvea1nC lVlembres
Oll si ,;lll contraire le Consei! doit pO:ll"suiv~ seS
tr1'.va'ux et e..-..;amin~r la question cet apres-midi.

Mahrnoud FAW;'.:I Bey (Egypt): I shoulcl like
pc:-mission to make tt bl'ief statement before we
reach the vote on the point of whether to ,re!er
this r.:tatter to till; Comoittec on the Adm'<;<;1011
of New Members or to deal with it otherwise,
especlallv in view of the fact that other statements bave been rnwJe on the 5t,bst~nee of the
matter before LlS now,

Mahmoud Fllwz[ Be; (Egypte) (tr(/,dtdt tie
l'angla:is); Ava:1.t j'cn arriver.au vote ,SOl'. :a
quesf.on de savoir si cette demande dOlt ette
renvcyee au Comite. d'admission. 4es r..o~rean,
Membres ou fai~e l'objet d'une uecl~lO:l dlffe"'ell,te,
je demanderai aJ P~esi::l:nt la perrn~sstO~ de faz:-e
tine breve ceclaratlOn, ctant donne surtout que
d'autres dedara:ions ont ete f(..lle~ qUI pct"t~.:.:t slIr
le fond de la question dont nmts somtles SatS1S,

The matter we new have before is of great
consequence to the Middle East and to the whole
of the civilized world. It is of great consequence
to the body and soul of the United Nations, iD
the structure and principles of this greatest of
all Cl-gan;z::ttio:1s.
A~ applir:ation is made by a Zionis.t State to
become a Member of t:le UniteC: Nations, The
Ziun:$t State is il Stnte b1l.sed on r~ligion tu~ed
R:1cl twisted into a fanatical political doctnne.
Let L1S look for a while a: that State, since we
must: let U~ luok into its record and history.
Where is that State? On what territory does
It exist? On who3e terrjtory? What are its £ron-

Ce:te question f'5t grosse .de <:ons~quen<:es pour
le Mo)'en-Orient tout entler et I ensC1llble, du
monde civilise die est d'nne importance capltde
pour l'Org:mi~ation des Nati::ms Unies, corps et
ame, pour la struc:ure e~ 1e~ principes de la. plus
noble de tOl:tes les orpmsatlOns,
Une demanc1e est presentee par ltll E~~t ~-i;)niste.
qui yeut d~venir 1fembre de l'Org'll11~<l.tlOn des
Nations Unies, L'Etat sioniste en, q~lest:o;l est ~n
Etat qui est fonde sur, une l"el~s:,on dl.f.~nne,~,
tmnsformee er. Ut". fanatlsme polttlque. P'lJl?qutl
le £aut, examinons un instant cet Etat, ex.'llllI11DnS
son Classe et son r.istuite,
O~ est Cft Etat? Sur quel ter:itoire existe+il?
A qui Rppartie~t Cl'. terdtoire? OU sont ses fron-

14
tiers? Can anyone honestly answer these questions without admitting the g[;Uillg and-perhaps
to some-embarrassing fact that the present
applicant for membership has not definite territory of its own, has 110 defined frontiers, and
that upon wllatever territory it is crouching, that
territory does not belong to it according to law
or even on the hases of any decision of the
United Nations. Suppose that such a decision
could have been m<l.de at all in accordance with
the Ch<l.rte.r. Can anyone honestly or candidly
decny that world political Zionism l1as extorted
most of Palestine from its lawful people, that
it has driven Illost of them-more than twothirds-from their homes and lands and placed
them face-ta-face with humiliation, hunger,
pestilence and death, that world political Zionism
thus, and in other ways, is trampling under its
feet even the most elementary human rights and
is defying sanity, decency, law a>ld the United
IN'Rtions? Can anyone really deny these facts?

tieres? A cc~ questions, peut-on repondre honnetement sans reconnaitre le fait evident - embarrassant peut-etre pour certains - que rEtat
qui presente cette demandc n'a, ni tenitoire defini
lui appartenant en propre, ni frontieres bien deli.
mitees, et que le territoire auquel il s'accroche
ne IUt appartient, ni en vertu d'un droit, ni meme
en vertu d'une decision des Nations Unies? En
admettant que l'admission puisse etre prononcee
conformement aux dispositions de b Charte, pent·
on franchement et honnetement nier le fait que
le sionisme politique mondial a arracbe it ses
hahitants legitimes la plus gran de partie de la
Palestine, qu'il a cbasse de ses foyers et de SfS
terres une large part de la population - plus de
deux tiers - l'exposant aux humil[ations, a la
faim, a la peste,
la misere? Que le sionisrne
politique mondial, en cette occasion et en d'autres.
occasions, a faule aux pieds les droits humains.
les plus eIementaires, et qu'illance un de£. au bon
sens, a In decence, all droit et aux Nations Dnies j
qui done, en verite, peut le nier?

Of course, I know to my sorrow that some are
succumbing, to the requirements of political opportunism and that some, also as a result of the
present helplessness-I am sorry to have to tlse
the word-of the United Nations, are resigned
to the fait acco11lpli. However, I feel duty bound
to warn against fmy new Munichs, any more abdi.
cation to violence and insidiousness. If -this OlUgust
body Pllts a premitim on aggression, there can be
no United Nations and there can he no sane
international life.

Je sais - je ne le sais que trap, malheureu~
sement - ql1e certains s'abandonnent aux exi.
gences de l'oppol"tunisme politique et que, en raison de I'impnissanee actueIle de l'Organisation
je regrette d'~voir i
des Nations Unies employer ce mat - certains se resignent i accepter le fait accompli. Neanmoins, i1 est de mon
devoir, ie le pense, de prevenir le Conseil contre
de nOLiveaux Munichs, contre de nouvellrs abdi·
cations devant la violence et la perfidie. Si cet
illustre Conseil en v/ent a donner une prime a
l'agression, rien ne subsiste plus, ni de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, ni meme des relations
internationales etablies stir tine base saine.

Egypt is determined steadfastly to maintain its
stand Oil the principles of tile Charter and will
not consort with aggression nor subscribe to
the denial of human rights of the Arabs or of any
other people. Egypt hopes to find support in its
stand; it intends to defend it-if possible with
others, if necessary alone. In this latter con~
tingency, Egypt would feel supremely honoured,
although extremely disappointed.
Can anyone rightfully COlmtenance the idea of
admitting to membership in our Organization an
applicant whose history and record bears undeniable witness of constant defiance and contempt for the United Nations? Indeed, were such
a State already a Member ot the United Nations,
one cOllld rearlily understand that we would be
convened hen~ today to apply not Article 4 of the
Charter bllt Article 6, which stipulates the expul.
sion from the Organization of a Mem1Jer which
has consistently violated the principles contained
ill the Charter. The record so far and the applicant's position even now towards t11e United
Nations do not show good reason or good intent; they do not inspire confidence.
I do not want to pass from the sublime to the
ridiclllous, but may I mention that even when
Mr. Shertok wrote that the applicant accepted the
obligations of the United Nations Oiarter, he
added "from the day when it becomes a Member
of the United Nations", Was this merely a slip
of the pen? Was it a reflection of the subconscious? Or was it an invitatior'. for us to abandon Zionism's spoils up to the present and hope

a

L'Egypte est fermement reso1tle a rnaintenir
son attitude qui se fonde sur les pr:ndpes dc la
Charte; eUe ne se fera pas le complice de l'agression; elle n'acceptera point que Soient violes les
droits humains des Arabes ni de taut autre peuple.
L'Egypte espere etre soutemle dans sa position;
elle a l'intention de la defendre, avec d'autres, si
possible, et, au besoin, toute seule - dans ce cas,
l'Egypte se sentirait tres honor<2:e, mais extremement de~t1e.
Qui peut honnetement cnvisager la possibilite
d'admettre au sein de notre Organisation un Etat
dont l'rustoire et le passe portent le temoignage
indiscutable d'une rebellion constante contre les
Nations Unies et du mepris de leurs prindpes?
Au contraire, si un tel Etat etait deja Membre des
Nations Unies, on comprendrait Sans peine que
nons sayons reunis ici aujourd'hui pour appliquer,
non l'Article 4 de la Charte, mais bien l'Artic1e 6,
lequel prevoit l'expulsion de l'Organisation d'un
Membre qui s'est rendu coupable de violations
canstantes des principes de la Charte. Par son
attitude passee et meme par son attitude presente
a l'egard des Nations Unies, l'EtRt en question
ne fait preuve, ni de ban sellS, ni de bonne intentions; il n'inspire aucune confiance.
Je ne vouc1rais pas passer id du sublime au
ridicule, mais qu'il me soit pennis de melltionner
le fait que M. Shertok, comml1l1iquant par ecrit
que l'Etat candidat acceptait les obligations de la
Charte des Nations Unie'>, a. ajotlte: "du jour
ou il deviendra Membre des Nations Unirs".
Etait--ce la un lapsus, une mRnifestation du subconscient? Ou bien etait-ce tine invitation qui
nous etait adressee de renonce.r ace, quinous a.

15

against he,[w that in the future we may get a
better de<ll from world political Zionisr.l ?
I do not want to -talk too long, but before
closing I shimld like to clispel any possible 1uisconception which m;ght Occur in ~ome mines regarding the rec.ent armistice agreement conc~uded
<It Rl'.odes and rega:-ding the staM of the Egyptian delegation hel·e today concer:1ing the application now before the Security Council.

I need only remind the Council that the Rhodes
armistice agreemen:, as its own terms c~earlj'
state, is 0: a purely military natu:,e and contemplates no prejudice in any way to the rights,
claims and positiuns of either party in the ultimate peaceful settlement of the Palestine question. The R110des armistice agreement was signed
by us in to1l1pliance with the Security C01:.ncil's
resolution, Th:s is :n keeping with our record 0:
respect [(;1' amI compliance with the resolutions
of tr.e Security ecuncil. That we have agreed
to establish an armistice between the ar:ned forces
of both sides and :1ot to resort :0 ferce in the
final settlement of the Palestine question does not
necessarily, 01" in ;my legi(' or sense, mean that
we consider 111at that side is eligible for member·
ship in the United N atiens. The two matters are
quite separate and in no way interdependent. The
stand that the Security CClmdl will ever.tually
take on t11C application now before it will be of
incalculable significance to the world.

In voting for or against the application~ we
Cannot get away fram the fact that we are e.lt?er
upholding fUlld?Il.1ental hum~n and pohttcal
rights, or subscnh:ng to terrorlsm ar.cl ~he cor.til1ued denial of jl1~tire to a whole nat1011, the
Arabs 0 f Palestine.

ete pris par les sionistes, el: esperant contre toule
esperar.ce qu'a l';lvenir le sionisme politil]ue mondial agirait mieu:;: notre egard?

a

Je ne desire pas prolongel'le dehat, mais, avant
de terminer, je vDtldrais dissiper tout lllalentendu
qui pourrait se prodtllre ehez certains en ee qui

a

ceneerne le recent accord d'ar.:nistice conc1u
Rhodes et :'attitude ~doptee at1jourd'hui p<lr l<l
deU~gation egyptienne
l'egard de la demande
c1'admi~sion dont le COIl!'..il de sepude. est sai~i.
]e Gois simplemen: rappeler au Conseil que
I'accord d'armistice condu a Rr.odes, comme ses
termes l'indiquent c1a~rement, n'cst qu'un accord
de caractere puremem rnilitaire et ne prejuge en
rien les droits, revend:cations et positions de 1'une
ou I'autre des parties en Cl" qui concerne le reglemel1t definitif de la question: palestinienne par des
moyens pacifiques. Nous avons signe I'armistice
de Rhodes pour IlOUS soumettre aux resolutions
dtl Conseil, conforme.ment ;l no:re. attitude const<:.nte de respect et d'obeissance a t'egard des
resolutions du Consei1. Mais le fait que nous ayons
ai:cepte de signer un armistice entre les forces
a:·mees et c.ue nous ayons accepte de ne pas recourir a la forc.e POtIT le reglement definitif de la
qllestioll palestinienne n'implique pas necessairement, ni logiquement, que nous esti1llons que
l'autre partie renplit les conditions requises pour
e:rc admise comme Membre de l'Organisation
des Nations Dnies. vs deux: questions sent tout
a fait disti:1ctes et compJetement independantes.
La decision que ?rendra eventuellement le Conseil
de securite au sujet de la demande d'admission
dont il est saisi aura une importance incalculable
pour le monde entier.
Quel que soit notre VO:e relativement a cette
demande, no1.lS ne votvons echD.pper at! fait qu'ou
bien no1.ls defendons Ies droits fondamerltaux: de
l'homme e~ ses droi:s politiques, ou bien nOllS
1:011S faisons les compliccs du terrorisme et d'un
constant deni de justice a. l'egarcl d'une natiou
entiere, celle des Arabes de Pa:estine.

a

Tie PRESIDENT: (translated from Spanish):
May I remind members of the Council that we
are not disctlssing the sl1bstance of Israel's application, but simply whether or not it s:lO~ld be
referred to the Committee on tr.e Admlsslon of
New Members.

Le PR2SlDENT (trac1(it de l'espagnol):
J'appelle l'attention du Conseil sur le fait que
nous ne sommeo;,: pa~ Cll train de discuter la
demande d'adm;ssion presentee par Ismel qu~nt
su fond, r.:mis simplement la question de savoir
si elle doit etre renvoyee un Comite d'admission
des nouveaux Membres.

A vole 'was taker. by show of hands, as followS"
In !tJ:<Jour: Cblna, Egypt, Norway, United

1l est prvced6 au vote d mail! lroell.
Volent p(Jur: Cbine, EgY9te, :t\orvege, RoyaumeUni.

Kingdon·..

Agaitl.'t.' Argentina, Cuba, 'rnited Stf.tes of
America.
Abstaining: C,mada, France, Ukrainian Soviet
Soc:alist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.
The result

at the vote 'WaS 4 itt favour,

3 against, ana 4 abstelltions.
The propnsal was not adnpted, having tanled to

Votent t:Dntre: Argen~ine, Cuba, Etats-Llnis
d'Alllerique.
S'abstiennent: Canada, France, Republique
socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine, Union des Rep-ubliques soeialistes sovie~ique~.
Jt y a 4 1!oix en iaueur dt~ renvoi de la demande
an Comitc d'ad1n1ssion aes nouveau% Membres,
3 voi.o: con/Ye, et 4 abstentions.

N'ayant pas obtjmu le vote affi1'jnatif de .rept

obtain the affir11tctive votes of seven 'insmbe1"S.

membres, la proposition liest pas adoptee.

The PRESIDENT: (translated fro·m Spanish):
As a result of the vote, the application will be
dealt with by the Council.

Le PRtSTDENT (trwuit de l'esragnol):
Pat suit de ce vote, la demande d'admission sera
exatr.illee par le CO:1seil.

Mahrnoucl FAWZI Bey (Egypt): I have certain. doubts concerning the prucedurc wc have

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypte) (traduit ~e'
l'anglais): Teprouvt quelque doute sur la proce-

16
just followed. It seems to me that we have voted
on two proposals, one to refer the matter to the
Committee r)fl lI~c AJmissloll of New Member:>,
which did not sectlre the necessa.ry votes, the
other to Qiscuss the matter in the Security
Council without reference, which aho did not
secure tlle necessary numbe: of votes. For the
correctness of our record, I wish this point to be
clarified before we proceed any further. I want
to. know where we stand.

dure que not:s venous de suivre. Il me semble que
notl'e vote a parte sur deux propositions, l'L1ne
tendu,nt a renvoyer la question au Comite d'adrni ssion des nouveaulC Membres, laquelle :l'a p:o.s
obtenu le nombre de voix: neccssaire~, l'autre tendant a discuter la question au sein du COrIseil cc.
securite sans la re:lVOyer et qui n'a pas non plcs
recueilli le nombre de voix exige. Pour l'exaetitude de notre proces-verbal, je dcmaode que Ce
PDint soit precise avant que. nous pOl1fsuivior.s
l'examen de ceUe question. le voudrais savo:r
Otl no1,;S en sommes.

tk TSJANG (China): I wish to raise a point
of order.

M. TSIAr,C (COine) (tra.iuit ae l'anglais):
Je desire soulever une question d'o:dl'e.

I should like to call attent:on to rule 59 of our
rules of procedure, which reads in part as follows:
"The Secret",ry-Gcncral shall immediately
place the application :or membership before the
representatives on the Security Council. Unless
the Security Council decides otherwise, the appli~
cation shall be referred by the ?resident to a
committee of tr.e Security Coullcil upon which
each men:ber of the Security Council shall be
represented."
In urde;·, Ulereforc, to avoid the step of send~
ing this application to the committee, the Council
must decide otherwise, The Coundl has not de~
cided othenvise. According to rule 59, it appears
to me that it is natural to refer this matter to the
Committee.

J'aimerais attirer l'a:tention du Conseil sur
l'article 59 de noire reglem~nt interieur, dont
void un cxtrait:
"Le. Sccretaire general parte immMiatement
a la connaissance des Tcpresentants au Consei!
de securite la demande d'admission. A mains que
le Conseil de securite r..'en decide autrement, le
?resident renvoie la demande d'~dmission a.
l'exn.men d'Ull comile du Conseil de securite dans
lequel sont representks tous les membres du
Conseil de seeurite."
P:n consequf'nt, pour eviter la mesure qui
consiste a renvoyer cette dcn:ande au Comite, le
Conscil doit en decider autre:nent. Or, iJ n'en a
pas decide autrement. Allx te:llles de l'ar~icle 59,
i1 me semble clone qu'il est normal de renvoyer
cette question au Comite.

Mr.AusTIN (United States of America): I
humbly sJbmit that the pcint of order is not
well taken. A reading of the rule is sufficieilt to
show that it is not well taken. The rule relates
to what the President shall do. It says:

"Unless the Sec.urity Council decides otherwise,
the application shall be referred by the President
to a corr:mittee of be Security Council upon
which each merr:ber of the Security Council shall
be represented."
The President decided that question some time
ago, He decided not to send the application to
the Committee. The matter is on our agenda for
consideration by the Security Council because of
tha~ ruling of the President and because of the
fonner report of the COITul1ittee [S/1110j. That
for:ner report of the Corrunittee to which the
applicatio:1 was originally referred states l.le following:
.
"The Commi:tee ccnsiders that it will be for
the Security Council to decide at the proper time
whether to refer the matter baek to the Committee or to take a decision itself."
That is a departure-if there is one...,.-from the
rules, bu't the Security Council finds itself con~
fronted with this sit"Jation. A member of the
Security Council made a motion "to refer the
matter back to the Committee"-that is the language of the Committee's report-and he took the
risk of losing that inotion. The Security Council
is l'.lread)' seized of this question; if does not
have to go thrcugh that route; it does not have
to refer the ite.,'n back to the Committee, unless
it so wishes. A vote was taken on the'mction and
the Security COlmcil did not decide to" ref~; the

M. AUSTI~ (Etats-U:1is d'Amerique) (traduit
de l'ar.glrlis): Qu'il me soit ;rermis de faire re-

marqllcr que la question d'orclre qtli vicr:t d'etre
soulev~e n'est pas tres pertinente. Il sufiit, pour
le clemontrer, de lire l'article en question du
reglement intelieur. Cet article es: relatif a cc
que doit faire le President. Il est ainsi con~u:
"A mains que le Conseil de securite 11'en decide
alltrement, le President renvoie la demande d'admission a l'examen d'un comite dtt Conseil de
securilk clans !eq·.le! sOnt t·epn:;sentes tous les
membres du Conseil de secude."
Le President a pris, it y a quelques instants, une
decision sur ceHe question. Il a decide de ne plS
transmettre la demande au Comitc. C'est a la suite
de celle dkhion d:l President et aU5si du rapport
<Lnterieur cl\..' Corr.ite [S/1110] que la question
flgure, pour examen, a'1'ordre du jour du Conseil
de securite. C~ rapport du Conlit6 auguel la
demande a ete, a i'origine, transmise, declare:
"Da:1S la pen see du Cornite du Conseil, it
appart:endra 'l.ll Conseil de decider, le moment
venu, s'il convient qu'il en reU:re it nouveau au
Comite ou qu'il se pranouee directement luimeme. "
Peut-etre est-ce Ut s'ecarter du reglement, mds·
telle est bien la si:u~tion en presence de laque]e
se trouve le Conseil de securite. Un membre du
Couseif de securite a Fesente nne mot:on tendant "a renvoyer la question a u Comitt~" - ce
sont la les termes du rapport du Comite - et it
a pris le risque de voir rejeter cette motion. Le
Conseil de securite est deja. saiside cette c:uesticn.
I1 n'a pas a s't:ugagt:r uaIls cettt: yoie. 11 n'cs~
pas tenu de renvoyer la question au Comite., a
moins qu'il n'en eprouve le d6sir.Cette motion a
ete mise aux voix, et le Conseil de securite n~apas

.

17

appIica:ion back to the Commit:ee. VIe are therefore still seiz2d of :he quest~on, and tha: question
is as stated by the Pre~itlent-ilamdy, whether
we vote to admit the State of Israel 10 membership, 1 belieye that is the cor,ect a?pEcation of
rule 59,

decide de renvoyer la cernande au Comite, N ous
demeuro:1s, par comequent, ffiisis de la question
qui SE pfl§sente bi ffi de la f::u;;on r;.ui a
indiquee
par le President, c'est-a-dire que nous Rllons voter
pO:Jr savoir si nous nous prcnonl;ons ou non en
faveur de J'admission de l'EtJ.t d'Israel. Je cr6i5
que telle est j'intcrpretatioIl cxacte de I'article ':9.

The PRESIDE~T: (trallSlated from S pcnish) ;
My ruling on tile question :s as follows: Israel's
application i'l under c:onsideration and will continue to be disctlssed ')y the Council. A sufficient
ntllnber of votes was not obtained to enable the
application to be referred to the Co~mi:tee on
the Admission of New lIrembers, and the Council
will therefore c::mtinue to discuss the question.

Le PR:frSIDENT (tl"ad1tit ae 1'p..~Pl111nol):
En ma qualtte de President, je tranche la question
de la fa~on st:ivi".nte: la demande d'Israe1 est et
doit continner a Hre exa.l-:Jinec par le Conseil de
securite, Le nombre de vo:x necessaires pour
renvoyer cette d~mallde au Comite d'admission
des nouveaux Membres n'a pas He atteint; ell
consequence, la discussion se poursuit au sein du
Conseil.

ele

Mahl'l1oud PAWZ: Bey (Egypte) (trad1iit de
l'angtais) : J'ava:s demande la parole imrnedlate:-l1ent ilvant la declaration du Presider.t, ]e ne
m'He-ve pas contre le fait ce n'avoir pas eu la
p$.rale a ce mam..n[, ma-is je tiens i hire remarquer que j'aurais desirer parler Qvant que le
P~esidellt pre:me cc ql1'il a ap?eJ:e sa decision.
For my part, and on beh<1J: of my delegation;
.En mon nom et en cebi de ma detegalioll, jc
I consider that this ?oint :s 1I0t se:tled and that dais dire ql1e j'estime que ce point n'est pas regie
no ruling has been maJe, I shall come to this et qll'al:cune decision pre~i[kntiellt n'a ete prise,
later.
J'y reviendmi p:us ta:-d.
First of cl.l, I agree t>ntin'.1y with the representTout d'abord, je suis er.ti<'.:-ement d'accor(. ayec
ative of China. On He other hand, W.'lile ad~ le repr~sentallt de h CllillC, D'c;.utrc part, et tout
mitting t:mt Engliah is not my language, I cannot en rappelant que l'angla:s n'est pas ma 1augue
rer.d rule .';9 o[ our j·;llcs of procedure in tne m~temelle, je dOl.; indiquer qm jc me v::>is
salne way as d:d the represen:ative of the United dans l'impossibi:ite d'interpre1er l'article j9 de
Sta.tes. Lt:5 stated very dearly that unless tne Ilotre r~glernellt illterieur de la. meme fa~on ([ue
SecUlity Council decide, otherwise, Lhc I'rcsidcnt I'u fait l~ representant des Etats-Unis, Cet article
of, the Security Council shall refer the applica- stipule ~res clairement que, a moillS qt:e le Conseil
tion to 6e Comn'.ittee on the Admission of New de securite n'en decide :nttremen:, le President
renyoic la dem=cle all Comite d'ad11lissicn des
Membera.
nOtwea:1X Me01tres,
I canr.ot really sce all)' two interpretations for
11 ne m'est reelle:nent pas possible de concc\'oir
deux interpretations de c~t artide; je ne pel1X ell
th~s rule, I canr.ot see any interpretation ,other
than t11€ oue ex/Cressed by he representative of voir d'auhe gue eeLe qui a ete donnee par le repreChina, If :·efere:1co is tnade to a report by the sentant de la Chin~. Si 1'0n se re:ere a:1 rapport
Commieee on the Admission of New Members, du Comite d'admissiol1 des ncuwaux Membres,
m:gh: T submit that neither the Committee 110r qu'il me soit permis de faire remarquer que,
the Security CO'.1Deil itself can, withont going l~i k Con-jtc, n: le Conseil de secttTite lui-mEme
throngh the prefer processes, change rule S9 or ne peuvent, :ans suivre entierement la ?rocedure
ar.y oth-~r rtde ir: our rllles nf procedure. These prevlle, modifier l'artic1e E9 DU n'importe quel
rules of procedure have ':Jeen approved through autre article de tlolre reglcment interieltr, Ce
discussion and voting in tl~e Security Council, regJemcnt a ete adopte apre:s avoir ete dtscute
VI'e l:Rnnot l:hange them in a minute, jtlst like et mis aux voix au sein cia Comei1 de securite.
that, wi:ho'.•t going through the proper proceSses, NOttS ne pOtvotts le cha:lger comme cela, en LIne
V'le have :0 ·Je very :areft,1 about this matter, mitmte, S'l.ilS sUlv:-e toute la prccednre prcvue;
nous dt'von~ etre circollspects el~ la n;atiere.
vVhat t~,e ?resident called "a ruling", 1 conLe Presid~llt Cl qualife de "decision presiden~
sider to be ae expression of opinion on his part. tieJ:e" cc que j'estime etre l'eKpression d'une
He is certainly entitled to this .opinion, bu: I do opi:tion persDnnelle, ~I Cl certa:ne:nent le dro:t dc
mt ~or.sider it a ruling. The Presided of the £01'111ulcr une telle opinion, rr.ais je ne la consiSect:rity Cound: has 110 right to decide d ques- dere pas con~me une decision oresidentielle.
tion on w:1ich the Council naE te vote, A vote Le Presiuent un Conseil ne sectrite n'a pas
has ~o be taken, and f-Jrthennore, we have taken le droit de prendre ',me decision dws une quess'.1ch a vote ani the SeC1lrit)' Ceuncil failed to tiol1 511r laquclle le CDnseil c1l1it se 1)r0l1oncer
make a:1y decision other :11a:1 to reJer the matter par un vote, Un vote doit intervenir; cr, nons
tf1 trp Committee, How tlien can we say that the
avans vote, et le Consei1 n'a pas ete en mestl.e
COU:lcil, without going thrcugh the proper pro- de prendre une decisLoll a·..ltrc que celle qui
c~ses and withcut allY Ceremony, can just forget
consiste a renvoyer la quesLOn au Comite.
about rule 59 <Ind fcrg~t flhotlt the vote taken COmmen~, dans ces conditions: pou:-rions-nolls
by the Secnrity Council? I submit tllat we must etre wtorises it dire (ue Le Conseil peut, sans
adhere to om rules of procedure. I do not want sttivre toute la proced·jl'e preyue et sans autre
to sayl thal instead 0: hearing convincing argu- formIC de pro:es, ne ten:r compte, ni de'I'arments '~10 this point, I see 6e she.dow of a pttm- ticle j9, ni de la decisio]1 prise, cl. la st1ite tl'tm
.MatmoucJ .F'.o,WZI Bey (Egy/Ct>: Before the
President jttst spoke, I had asked to speak I am
not r,'lisir.g ::my objection to m)' not being recognized in proper time, I wanted to speak before
:he Presided made what he called :1is ru:ing.

18
pcred child in whosf': favour-most honestly I
admit-such arguments arf': made.

vote, par Le Conseil ele securite. J e pretends que
nous devons nous en tenir etroitement a notre
reglement interieur. Je n'irai pas jusqu'a. dire
que, au lieu eJ'avoir entendu sur cette question
un expose d'arguments convaincants, j'ai vu se
profileI' l'ombre d'tln enfant gat~ en faveur de
qui - de. la fa<;on la plus honnete qui soit, je le
reconn.ais - des arguments sont avances.

Mr. TSIANG (China): I rf':gret that I sholtld be
the cause of a long procedural debate. Wasting
time on a wrangle of procedure is something
which I try to avoid at all times. Since, however,
this point is, in my opinion, of some importance
in the development of the Security Council, I
would ventme to say a few words more.

M. TSIANG (Chine) (traduit de I'cmgla,is):
.le regrette d'etre la cause de ce long debat sur
une questi.on de procedure. Je m'efforce toujours
d'eviter que n011S ne perdions notre temps en gllerelles ue ceUe nature. Cependant, puisquc la ques~
tion dont il s'agit revH, a mes yeux, nr:e certaine impolt,mce en ce qui concerne revolution
ues travaux du Conseil, je me pCl'metlrai d'ajouter quelques mots.
Le Camite d'adl11ission des 1l0uveaux Membres
a etabli son rapport a Paris. Si les membres du
Conseil veulent Dien examiner cc document, ils
constateront qu'il ne s'agit pas la d'tm rapport
au sens oil nous l'entendons generalement. Ce
rapport n'a aucunc substance; i1 ne nOL1S l'ecom~
mande pas l'admission OU la non-admission; if se
limite a des qltcstions de procedure; il s'arrete au
au moment d'aborder le fond de la question, et
cela en raison des incertitudes qui regnent ql1ant
it la situation. Le rapport renvoie la question
au Cansell de securite en disant: "Si veus
desirez que nous poursuivions nos travaux en
vtle d'aboutir a une recommandation ferme, noUS
irons de l'aVal'lt. Si vous ne desirez pas lIne nous
flgissions, nons nOtlS en tiendrons la."
Tel est le sens du rapport. Ce n'est pas tm rapport ele la nature de ceux auxqllels nous sommes
habitues en matiere de demande d'admission. Il
serait certes exagere de dire que ce rapport est
confonne a l'article 59. L'article 59 ~st tout a
fait exp1icite: il oblige le Conseil a rcnvoyer la
demande it un -comite dependant de lui Ha moins
que le COllseil de securite n'en decide autrement".
Aucune autre decision n'est intervenue. Jc ne
comprends pas pourquoi ceux des membres du
Conseil qui pensent differemment insistent sur ee
point. Dans une situation comme celle ou nous
nous trouvons, j'estime, en efiet, que nQUS anrions
grand tort d'insislel' pour que I'on adopte une
methode qui ne neus apportel'ait aucun profit, tout
en entrainant une irregulnrite en ce qui concerne
In procedure. Je le repete: jt: ne crois pas qu'il
serait sage de preceder ainsi.
M. AUSTIN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit
de l'anglais) : Le President voudra bien me per~
mettre de me rMerer a l'article 30, dont it
connait assurement le tex:te. Cet article pn~voit
que: "Si un representant souleve une question
d'ordre, le President se prononce immediatement
sur ce point".
C'est ce qui s'est passe. 11 a ete propose. de
trilnsmettre la question au Comite d'admission
ues n011\'C<lllX Membres; ceUe proposition n'a pas
ete adoptee. Le President s'est a]ors pronollce
sur l'ordre des travaux. A ce moment, le representant ele la Chine a souleve, en propres tennes, une
qucstion d'ordre, et il a rappele I'article 59. Nous
avons soutenu, nous, que les dispositions de eet
article ont ete respectees dans leur esprit et clans
leur lettre par la decision presic1entielIe.
Il y a la ttne decision prise pal' le President,
quoi qu'en puisse dire le representant ele l'Egypte;

A report was made in Paris by the Committee
on the Admission of New Jvfernbers. If members
of the Security Cottncil will look at it, however,
they will find that it is not a report as we nornlally
conceive a report. It contains no substance; it
does not recommend either admission or non~
admission; it considers only the procedure, and
stops at the very thrcshold of the substance
because of the great uncertainty of the situation.
It refers the matter back to the Security Council,
saying, "If you wish us to proceed to make a
substantial recommendation, We shall go ahead.
If you do not want us to take action we s11a11
remain inactive."

That is the gist of the report. It is not an
ordinary report on the application of the kind
to which we are accustomed. To say that it
satisfies rule 59 is certainly stretching a paint.
Rule S9 is quite explicit and makes it mandatory
Ilpon the Security Coundl to refer such an
application to a committee of the Security Council
"unless the Security Council decides otherwise".
There has not been any decision otherwise. I
do not understand why those representatives whQ
think otherwise should insist on this point, because
in a situation of this kind it seems extremel-v
unwise to me to insist on a course of action whic.h
gains no substantial advantage and at the same
time involves an irre&'llarity in procedure. As I
say, I do not appreciate tIle wisdom of such a
course of action.
Mr, AUSTIN (United States of America) : The
President will pardon me for referring to rule 30,
with which I assume he is f.amiliar. That rule
reads: "If a representative raises a point of order,
the President shall immediately state his ruling .. ,".
Thrlt is what happened. There was a motion
to transmit the matter to the Committee all the
Admission of New Members, and it failed of
passage. The President made a ruling on tile
order of business. Thereupon, the representative
of China raised a point of order in so many words
and poillted to rule 59. We claimed that tbat rule
was being carried out in its spirit and its letter
by the ruling of the President.
There is a ruling by the President, no matter
what the representative of Egypt says abotlt it;

19
it cannot Ill" changed simply by saying that :t IS
net a ruling, but only an opinicn. It was a n,ling
M. c. poi:1t 01 order, :L{de 30 states that, if a
representlti-,e wishes to challenge sue I] a rnling,
he 1ms the right to 10 so. Bat then sCltnefling'else take~ place-and the burden cannN be $hifted
in the other. Rule 30 contint:es: "Il it is chzl~
lenged, t:le :President shall sllbrdt this ,n,linJ::" to
the Security CO~llCiJ for immediate decision and
it shall st:alld unless overru:ed,"

dlt ne ;Jeut etre ;lIcdin.ee en disant purement et
simplel11enl (ju'tllc fle cor.stitlt(: pas tIDe decision,
mais den cl'autre qu'u:1e opinion. n s'agi: c.'une
decisiun SLr Ulle q:.lcstion d'ordre. L'artide-,1,O pre~
'..oit que, si un representant se pr:Jpose de contester la 'Ialidite de cette decision, i1 a le droit
de le faire. Mais alors un a:ltre element interviwt ~ on lie S~ll~;l.i: davantage edlapper la
regie dans cc cas sue dans l'autre. L'article 30
pOl1l"Suit: "S'il y :'l contestation, le President en
reEerc an Ccnseil de securite pour decjs~ol\ immediate, et b regie lju'il a rro~)osee est m<Jin:cn!1e,
moins qu'elle ne soit annuU:e".

a

a

I have not heard ~nybody cllallenge :ht ruling
as yet; I have only hearc c')ffi[llaints about it.

Jusq'-l'U present, je n'ai entendl1 perwr.ne contester la decision prise; :e n'ai ~ntendLl,
ce.
sujet, que des rel'lamatio05.

The PnlLSlD~;N'. (tra/:slaterl from Spanish):
Before calling :1P;)11 t1·,1:: representative of Egypt,
I would like to soy :hat I co not consider we are
dealir.g with a new afplication. This application
wa~ sent to t11e Committee !it the p:-oper timethat information is given in dowment S/1110. I
consider thnt we are dealing wib a. renewal Ot
the applic:lti::ln. <is :s sh:nvll' or. the agetida, and
rht1t rule 59 is :herefore not appJica':lle. un:ess
anyo:le challenge=; my ruling.

Le PREsIDENT (tradllit de l' ~spa.gncl) :
AV<!:-Jt ele dountr la jXLrole .1\1 Ttp'esentrmt de
l'Egypte, je tiens a rJec:ar~r que je n'estimc pas
qu'il s'agisse d'une nouvelle Jelllar.dlO; la demamll'
a deja ete tra:lsmise om COOlite e;l son telr.ps le uocl1mer.t 5/1110 ell fait :oi; j'estinw qu'il
s'agit d'un reno'..1vellement de la delll<lnUe, ainsi
Gllt: l'i:1c1ique I'ordrc du jour et qt:e, si la decision
presidenlielle n'e.,>t lX1S contesree, il ne cO:1V:ent
pas d'<l.ppliquo· l'artc1e 59 de notre reglel1ler.t
interieul".

Mahmouc FAWZI Bey (Egypt): It is with
great r::h.ctancc thJ.t I contrihltl' to :he fur:her
prolongat:on of our dejate 011 6is point,. bllt I
cons:dcr it very ilnporta;lt, botr, in itself and even
more on general prjncip:es.

Ir. spite of tbe lateness of the hOltr, I think
that t1:e i.Je~t W2.y to suve time is to make haste
slo",ly, and to FO, as dear;y as I can, throllgh
the 711<1ZC of argumencS wUl':h we now h3ve before
us. \Ve have heard, for examp:e, that the qL1cstion
whcther or not to refer :he natter to the Comfllitteeor: the :\drn:ssior. of New Members was not
be.ftlre llS and tr.at the Se-emit)' Council is already
seIzed of the matter, That is true, but among the
things we h.,d to decide and UpOf. which we
aetlmlly voted was wl·.ethe: or net to refer the
l;l1atte:- to the Committee en :he Admission of New

a

Mahrr:o\Jc1 F}.WZI Bey (Sgyp~e~

(trad'lit de

l'allqla,is) : C'est bien a regret que je wntribue ,1.

prolonger ~ncore :Jot re r.l6bLt sur ce <Joint, ma:s
j'attache une grande imrOltance ~ la questi.on..
pour elte-meme C:~ sur:o>..:t [Jout' le pl'inci;Je qui
cst en jell,
nien que l'hetll'e soit avancee, je pmse que la
meilleme £a<;on pour mQi de menager le temps
dll Conseil, -~'est enco:e de lnC hi.te~ lentemf'.nt
et de l1'avancer, dans le oedale des argume:r.ts
qtli nO\lS ont ete. ~OUlll~S, qt,'avec une vision bien
daire d~ ce dont il s'agit. Te prends un exemple:
110',IS <,vons tntcllrJu C:ire ·ici que nrus n'avions
pas examiner s'il colwenait :m nOn de renvoyer
l'affaire au Comite d'adn..ission des ncuv~aux
Men:bres et que c'est le Consell de sccmite qllt est
maintClla~t sai~i de la Question. Oui, c'est exact,
mllis al: nombre des ?o:nts SLlr lesquels nons avions
prendre un/, (\~ci,io!l et sur lesque.ls neus ~ous
sommes :::>ronontes par un VD~e se trotw<ut la
question (if' savoir si on rer:verrait ou non I'affaire
au Comite d'admiss:on des no·.weaux Melubres,

a

Members.

a

This :-eminds me of tr.e President's remarks to
lhe effect, jf I understood properly, that we aie
not n0W d~aling with a new membcrshi? or a ilew
ap:l1icatioll, )L1t that we are dealing with an old
ap?lication. I again war.t to knol,\ where wc are,
if we were dealing with an old applicatiw and
pot with a new Olll:-which I do not conce<:1e Rt
all, in any degree. Why, then, die we vote on
whetlu;r Cor no: to refer it to the Co:nmittee?

Ceci me renet en memoire une re01arque faite
par !'IOtre President, s<.vcir, si j'<ll :)len :ompris,
q'.l(~ nouS ne nO\l!': I"lccupions ~as de ~a ques~ion
d'lme nouvelle candidature ou d.'nne nOllvellc de~
mande, m<.is bien plu:6t d'nae demande deja
anc;enne. En::ore tll1e fois, je voudra:s savoir
("1\'1 nOns en sommes, si nom nons OCCtlpons, non
d'une nouveUe demande, mais d'une demande
ancienne - ce que jt ne: pui, r.ullement nOmettre.
Dans ces conditions, pouquoi done a'Ons-nous
vote sm le po~nt savoir
['ous renvoyons ou
non la demande (!u Ccnd';?

a

s:

As he re[)T'eSetltiLtiye of Qlina toJcl the Cotmtil
a short while ago, even as regards the old <t?pIication the Co:muittec on the Admissitll1 of New
Mer:luers got Ottt of the tang1e by cobg some·
thing ill a r:la:mer which we c~n ca] perfunctory.
\Ve have no real re90rt f Tom the Committee in
the proper "euse, and n"lW two more r:1onths have
passed. In two months maflY things tan happen;
mnn)' thin[;s have h;\ppened :11 botl1 a C:ynamic and

Comne l'a d:t j/ 'I a un Instant :e t'ept'eSe:ltant
de la Chine, :TIe-me en cc qui cone-erne la dClllftndc
ancienne, le Comite d'admission des notlvea~x
1Jembres est sarti de l'impass{: ol'. it se :rouvai.t
en usan:
ce que nous ~Ol,rrions appeltr un artiice. Ce ql1e nmts avons :-e~u du Comite ['.'est pas
un vrai rap-po:-t, UIl rapport au ~ellS pl'Op~e clu
telmt, aJOl·s qt:e Jell}\: llwis de plus se wnt ecou·
les. En del1x mois, bien des choses peuvent se

ue

20
a static way-people doing things they should not
do, and holdinp,: things they should not hold.

As to the correlation between rules 30 and 59,
I cannot see the argument our colleague has ptesented. He says that when the President makes a
Tuling, if such a Tuling is challeng-ed, then the
Council will vote upon the opposing proposaL Yes,
he is quite right in that, provided we have a
ruling and that the President of the Council acted
according to his prerogatives in giving such a
ruling.

I do not think anybody can reasonably say tbat
the President of the Cot1l1dl can make any ruling
at any moment on any matter, There are certain
matters whidl can be the subject of a rding
from the President, and others which cannot.
Therefore, wc cannot just take rule 30 as something absolute and isolated from anything else
induding: the other rdes of procedure which w~
have before us.

Some members may not like me to call the
President's expression an opinion; tlley ,"VD.!!t me
to call it a rUling. But will it be a ruling, and a
cor~ect one within his prerogatives, by ou r simply
callmg" it a ruling, if it is not within his prerogatives, if it is not according to the rules we
aTe supposed to foEow?
4

, What 11appened is this. I repeat, we were asked
whether the Council would decide otherwise than
to refer this application to the Committee on the
Admission of New Members. Reference to the
Committee is imperative. The expression used in
mle 59 is "... shall be referred by the President
" It does not say "will"· it does not say
"lTIa~". It says ". . . shall b~ referred by the
PreSident to a committee of tile Security Cou·ncil".
How, then, after the Council has failed to decide
otherwise, can we say that we should not refer
tbt matter to the Committee on the Admission of
New Members?
I am. spealdng- not only on this point itself but
on 'the I.de~ of the Council's upl\Olding-and i am
sure thiS lS v~ry ~ear to the heart of everyone
present-certam thmgs, let us .say. I am soeaking
in the ir:terest of the decorum of the Council. I
hope we shaH all agree to uphold it.

" 1:11. MALIK (U~ion of Soviet Socialist Repub-

,leS) (tyanslated t~om Russian): The question
seems to be suffiCiently cJear and there is no
reason to make it more complicated. The Israeli
Government's application came before the Security
Council at the beginning of December. In conformity :vith rule 59 ofth~ rules of procedure,
the PreSIdent of the SeClmty Council duly referred it to the Committee on the Admission of
New Members. The Committee ex:amined the
application and returned it to the SeCLlrity Council
for consideration, without taking any deci~ion.

produire, et il s'en est cffcctivement produit beaucoup, aussi bicn du point de vue dynamiq11e que
du point de vue statique: on a fait des choses'
qu'OI1 n'aurait pas dD. faire, et on a maintertu une
situation qui n'aurait pas du etre maintenue.
En ce qui concerne la corn~lation etablie par le
representant des Etats-Unis entre 1es article 30
et 59, je ne comprends pas bien l'argumentation
presentee pm' notre collegue. 11 dit que, lorsque
le President se prouonce sur une question d'ordre,
si sa decision est coutestee, le Conseil vote sur
la proposition soumise par le representant qui
fait opposition. Oui, i! a padaitement raison
sur ce point, pourvu, cependant, qu'i! y ait decision, et que, en se pronon<;ant, le President du
Conseil ait agi dans le cadre des prerogatives
dont il jouit.
]1'. ne pense pas que qu") CJue ce soit puisse raisonnablement dire que le President du Conseit
ait la facl1lte, a tout moment, de se prononcer sur
n'importe que1 sujet. 11 est cel'taines questions
qui pet1Vent faire I'ohjet d\me decision du President, alars qu'il n'en va pas de meme pour d'autres.
Par consequent, nous ne saurions nous borner
,'t prendre l'article 30 comme quelquc chose d'ab~
solue, d'isole, ne tenant memc pas compte lies
autres articles c1u reglement que nou~ avons
sous 1es yeux.
Peut-etre certains membres du Conseil n'aiment-ils pas me voir, dans le cas present, appeler
"opinion" l'expression de la pensee du President;
ils vQudl'aient que j'emp1oie le mot "chkision";
mais suffirait-il de l'appeler "Mei~io\J" pour qu'elle
le devienne en verite, pour qu'e!le reH:ve bien des
prerogatives du President, alors qu'el1e sort, en
realite, du domaine de ces prerogatives et qu'elle
n'est pas conforme aux dispositiol1s des reglements que nous somme~ censes d'observer?
Voici Cl'. qui s'est passe: on nous a dcmande,
je le repete, si le Conseil voulait prendre une
autre decision que de renvoyer cette demande au
COlllite d'admission des nouveaux Membres. Le
renvoi au Comite est obligatoire. L'artic1e S9 dit:
Le President renvoi I'. la demande . . .";
l'artic1e ne dit pas "peut rcnvoyer la demande",
il dit "le President renvoie la demande d'admission
a l'examen d'un comite du Conseil de securite".
Dans ces conditions, et etlli1t donnc que le Conseil
n'a pas pris de decision contl"<l.ire, somment
peut-on pretendre que nous ne devons pas renvoyer la question au Comite d'admission des nouveaux Membres?
Mon observation va plus loin; ce aquoi je pense
-et je ~llis sur que tOllS les membres du Conseil
seront tres sensibles a Cl'. point de vue - c'est
que le Conseil pourmit, disons-Ie, encourager eer..
tains actes. Mon but est de defendre la dignite
de Cl'. Conseil, et j'espere que nous sommes tOllS
d'accord a cc sujet.
It •

••

M. MALllC (Union des Republiqnes socialistes
sovietiques) (traduit du nusc); La question me
semble sllffisamment c1aire, et il n'y a pas lieu de
la compliquer. La <1emande d'admission de I'Etat
cl'Isl"::lel est parvenue au Conseil de securite au
debut de decembre. Conformement it l'artic1e 59
du reglemcnt interieur, elle a ete dtiment transmise
par le President all Conseil de securite au Comite
cl'admission des nouveatlx 1.Iembres. Le Comite
l'a examinee et I'a renvoyee all Conseil de securite
sans avair pris de decisiof2.

21

As early as December, the Secu~ity Council
considered the substance of the ques~lOn, namely,
whether the State of Israel should be admitted
to membership or not. The question was examined
from that angle. At the request of certain delega.tions the discussion oi t11e qu~stion was postponpd
for a period of from si,x weeks to t~o mont~,
When that time had expIred, the Senmty Council
res"ltmed examination of the questior..

En decembre, le Conseil de sec~rite a deja
examine quant au fond la question, qui etait
cel1~ de sayoir s'il faut admettre Israel l'Organisation des Nations Unies ou bien s'iI faut rejeter
sa demande. C'est sous eet aspect que la question
;l, ~tr: pX:l.min~.
Sur la demande de certaines
delegations, i1 a ete decide de rectmsiderer cette
question apres ur. mois et dem: DU deux mois.
Cc delai s'est ecoule, et le Conseil de securite a
Tcpris l'examen de c.e probleme.

The applicatior. has alread:y been consi~ered by
the Committee; the Councll has recelVed the
Committee's report and is now r.ontinuing the
discussion on the substance of the qt:estion of
Israel'S admission to membership in the United
Nations; yet, despite all this, a new pr?posal has
been put forward, namely, that the quest:on should
again be referred to the Committee on the Admisison of New Members. That proposal was
put to the vote: it failed to obtain a majority
and was consequently rejected. The Security
Council is therefore continuing to examine the
substance of the Israeli Goyern:nent's application
for :l.dmission to the United Nations.

Bien que ceUe demande ait deja ete examinee
par le Comite, bien que le Conseil ait deja re<yu :e
rapport de celui-d et qu'il continue maintenant
examiner quant an fond la question que pose
I'aclrnission d'Israel a l'Organisation des Nations
Unies, il a ete propose de renvoyer nouveau cette
question dewmt le Comite d'admission des nO'Jveau:x: Membres. Cette proposition a He mise
aux: voix; eile n'a pas ohtenu la. ma.jorite necessaire, et elle a ete rejetee. Par conseguent, le CO:1seil de sccunte continue :l etudil'cT qmmt al: fond
la demande d'admission
l'Organisatio:l defS
Nations Unies presentee par l'E1at d'Israet.

I think that the gt:estion is sufficiently clear and
that there is no reason to make it more compli~
cated. The Council should continue to examine
the question.

I1 me semble que la situation est suffisarnment
claire, et il n'y a pas lien de la compliquer. C'est
le Conseil de securite qui doit continuer l'examen
de ceite question.

The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish). I
consider that the point of order has been settled
and that, if no one challenges my ruling, the di$~
cussion on that subject is dosed.

Le PRESlDEiN'f (traduit de l'£stagnal) :
J'estime que la G,uestion d'ordre a
regIee et,
s'it n'y a pas de r.onte!";1:Ation, je declarerai l'inci.
d<:nt clos.

I would now like the members of the Council
to decide whether we should meet at 3 p.m. tomorrow in order to discuss the substance of the
application and proceed to a vote, if the discussion
reaches that stage.

D'atltre part, je demanderai aux memb~es du
Conseil s'il leur <;onvient de se rennir demain
15 heures ann de discuter la question de la demande C:'admission quant au fond et, le cas
de passer au vote.

a

a

a

a

ete

a

echeant,

In the absence of any objection, it is so decided.

Puisqu'il n'y a pas d'objection, il en est ainsi
decide,

The meeting rase af 6.40 p.m.

La seanCe ~st leve~ a 19 h. 40.
