A/65/PV.101

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fifth session

101st plenary meeting
Tuesday, 21 June 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 163
Appointment of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations
Letter from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the President
of the General Assembly (A/65/865)
Draft resolution (A/65/L.80)
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
has before it document A/65/865, which contains a
letter dated 17 June 2011 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the President of the
General Assembly.

Nations for a second term of office from
1 January 2012 to 31 December 2016.’”
In connection with the recommendation of the
Security Council, the General Assembly has before it a
draft resolution submitted as document A/65/L.80.
As Member States are aware, each regional group
has sent letters endorsing the candidature of Mr. Ban
Ki-moon for appointment as the United Nations
Secretary-General for a second term. In recognition of
this step, the Chairs of the regional groups were invited
to co-sponsor draft resolution A/65/L.80, on behalf of
the entire United Nations membership.

The letter reads as follows:

I now invite His Excellency Mr. Nelson Messone,
Permanent Representative of Gabon to the United
Nations, who is also President of the Security Council,
to introduce draft resolution A/65/L.80.

“I have the honour to inform you that the
Security Council, at its 6556th meeting, held in
private on 17 June 2011, adopted by acclamation
resolution
1987
(2011)
concerning
the
appointment of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations. The resolution reads as follows:

Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): I have
the honour of taking the floor before the General
Assembly as President of the Security Council in order
to convey the recommendation of the Security Council
concerning the appointment of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations.

‘The Security Council,
‘Having considered the question of the
recommendation for the appointment of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations,
‘Recommends
to
the
General
Assembly that Mr. Ban Ki-moon be
appointed Secretary-General of the United

As you have just now recalled, Mr. President, the
Security Council at its 6556th meeting, held in private
on 17 June 2011, adopted by acclamation resolution
1987 (2011), according to which it recommended to the
General Assembly that Mr. Ban Ki-moon be appointed
Secretary-General of the United Nations for a second
term of office, from 1 January 2012 to 31 December
2016. Following that adoption, I conveyed that

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-38238 (E)

*1138238*

A/65/PV.101

recommendation to you, Mr. President, in my letter
dated 17 June 2011, which representatives may find in
document A/65/865.
I now have the honour and the pleasure of
introducing, on behalf of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Gabon, Germany, India, Israel,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Nigeria, Portugal, the Republic of
Moldova, the Russian Federation, Senegal, South
Africa, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America, the
draft resolution contained in document A/65/L.80,
which stipulates that:
“The General Assembly,
“Having considered the recommendation
contained in Security Council resolution 1987
(2011) of 17 June 2011,
“Expressing its appreciation for the
effective and dedicated service rendered to the
United Nations by Mr. Ban Ki-moon during his
first term of office,
“Appoints Mr. Ban Ki-moon SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations for a second term
of office beginning on 1 January 2012 and ending
on 31 December 2016.”
In introducing this draft resolution to the General
Assembly, I can state with certainty that over his past
four and a half years in service to our Organization,
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has carried out the
duties entrusted to him with excellence and all possible
objectivity and independence. Indeed, in his duties he
has been able to fulfil the expectations accompanying
the tasks he has accomplished over the last four and a
half years, sometimes in very difficult and trying
circumstances. He has devoted his energies to
promoting peace, justice and international security.
Furthermore, he has succeeded in forging and
strengthening
partnerships
between
regional
organizations and the various United Nations bodies in
order to improve synergy and coordination of effort,
and always with a view to better serving the cause of
peace and development, as well as the promotion of
human rights around the world.
A man of experience, Mr. Ban Ki-moon has been
active on every front — in Africa, Asia, Europe and the
Americas — offering his good offices and mediation
services for preventing conflict and restoring peace. He

2

has worked to strengthen the central role of the
Organization in maintaining international peace and
security, particularly in Africa. There is no need to
recall that we owe to Mr. Ban Ki-moon the recent
establishment in Libreville, Gabon, of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, following
other offices already existing in the region.
I am certain that in the course of his second term
of office he will persevere with the energy he breathed
into the Organization. I therefore recommend that the
General Assembly adopt draft resolution A/65/L.80 by
acclamation.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of Gabon has just proposed that the
Assembly adopt the draft resolution contained in
document A/65/L.80. May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/65/L.80 by acclamation?
Draft resolution A/65/L.80 was adopted by
acclamation (resolution 65/282).
The President (spoke in French): I have the
honour to announce that His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon has been appointed by acclamation SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations for a second term of
office, beginning on 1 January 2012 and ending on
31 December 2016.
I now request the Chief of Protocol to escort the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
into the General Assembly Hall.
The Chief of Protocol escorted the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, into the General
Assembly Hall.
The President (spoke in French): I have the
honour to officially inform you, Sir, that the General
Assembly has appointed you as Secretary-General of
the United Nations for a second term of office,
beginning on 1 January 2012 and ending on
31 December 2016.
In my capacity as President of the General
Assembly, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
on behalf of all the Member States for the remarkable
work he has done to date as leader of the Organization.
His reappointment today is a sign of the esteem and
confidence that all States have in him. Loyalty,
discretion and conscience are the qualities that he
swore to uphold when taking his oath of office.

11-38238

A/65/PV.101

Loyalty, discretion and conscience are qualities that
have not been not mere words. For what will soon be
five years, they have truly guided his actions every
day. Since his assumption of office, he has been active
on many fronts. In a complex and difficult international
environment, he has strengthened the role and the
visibility of the United Nations by adopting reform
measures, launching exciting and innovative initiatives
and calling, faithfully and constantly, for respect for
human rights, the rule of law and the other values that
are rooted in our Charter.
Allow me to mention just a few examples that, in
my opinion, illustrate his tireless commitment to
serving the international community.
In the area of security and peacekeeping, the
creation of the Department of Field Support
emphasized more effective management, with a view to
greater impact on the ground. With respect to
disarmament and reducing the world’s nuclear arsenal,
his initiative in convening a meeting on disarmament
on the sidelines of the General Assembly last
September gave new impetus to that key issue.
Regarding the empowerment of women and the
promotion of their rights, he will be remembered as the
man who worked to create the United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
by combining the mandates of various programmes in
order to achieve greater efficiency. The Global Strategy
for Women’s and Children’s Health, whose progress we
were able to assess last week during the development
dialogue in the General Assembly, is another telling
example. I cannot do justice to his achievements by
listing them all, but I should mention once again his
commitment to combating climate change and
fostering sustainable development, as well as
promoting safety in the use of civil nuclear energy.
The past few months have been a particularly
tumultuous period for the international community.
Members have said that the Arab spring was a once-ina-generation opportunity. It is essential that we
manifest our solidarity with the people who aspire to
greater freedom, democracy and well-being. Recent
events have shown once again that the world needs the
United Nations and that the United Nations needs a
Secretary-General with the qualities of leadership and
determination. The world needs a solid, credible
Organization with a Secretariat and intergovernmental
bodies that are mutually reinforcing.

11-38238

As President of the General Assembly, I want to
express to the Secretary-General how much I value the
excellent collaboration between our two Offices and
his great readiness to cooperate. He has always been
extremely transparent concerning his activities and
travels abroad. For example, on 28 March, having
barely returned from a trip to North Africa, he
appeared before the General Assembly to report on
recent developments in the region. These ties are
important. They foster dialogue between the Secretariat
and Member States and contribute to the revitalization
of the General Assembly, both within the Organization
and on the international stage.
As the Secretary-General is aware, that task is not
easy. But I assure him of the full support of the General
Assembly and its member States. This second term of
office will allow him to work even harder to promote
the fundamental values of the Charter. On a personal
level, I congratulate him again on his achievements and
wish him every success in the future.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Abdou
Salam Diallo, Permanent Representative of Senegal,
who will speak on behalf of the Group of African
States.
Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): It is my
great honour and privilege, on behalf of the Group of
African States, to address our warmest congratulations
to His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon on his welldeserved appointment to a second term as SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations. Indeed, his appointment
by acclamation moments ago by the General Assembly
is a telling expression of the positive assessment of the
work Mr. Ban Ki-moon has already accomplished
during his first term in office. It also represents the
widespread feeling of satisfaction that is undoubtedly
at the core of the massive support for his candidature.
The Group of African States, on whose behalf I
speak, is pleased to continue to support his dynamic
and sincere efforts to implement the noble ideals and
objectives of the Charter of the United Nations, on
whose behalf Mr. Ban Ki-moon has become one of the
most visible defenders. His professionalism, dedication
and firm determination have raised high the torch of
the United Nations due to the resulting great progress
made in terms of the internal management of human
resources and the many fields of the daily action of the
Organization. That progress was all the more
significant as it was often carried out in difficult

3

A/65/PV.101

periods of multiple and varied challenges from all
quarters.
I therefore welcome the vigorous and effective
manner in which he faced the most pressing problems
of the day while playing a leadership role in the light
of the many crises that caused upheaval worldwide.
His daily struggle as the head of the Organization has
made it possible to refocus efforts, namely, on the
promotion of peace and security, the achievement of
the Millennium Development Goals, the fight against
climate change, respect for human rights, democracy
and the empowerment of women. It goes without
saying that Mr. Ban Ki-moon’s achievements during
his first term of office were marked by successes upon
which we base our hope that this reappointment will
permit him to achieve many more. That is why Africa,
which has been at the heart of his concerns, renews its
total confidence in him, while remaining convinced
that his second term of office will be an opportunity to
strengthen his efforts in favour of the African
continent.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Mansour Ayyad Alotaibi,
Permanent Representative of Kuwait, who will speak
on behalf of the Group of Asian States.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): It is a
great honour for me to address the General Assembly
on behalf of the States members of the Asian Group at
this historic meeting of the Assembly to express our
sincere congratulations to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, following the
Assembly’s adoption of the recommendation of the
Security Council to appoint him to a second term by
acclamation. We thank him for assuming the
responsibility of a second term, and we appreciate the
great sacrifices borne by his family as they support him
in his work to serve the international community and
humankind itself.
The unprecedented support for the SecretaryGeneral manifested today by all of the regional groups
and the Security Council reflects the international
community’s appreciation for his tireless efforts in the
past four and a half years to enhance the legitimacy,
independence and credibility of the United Nations and
to effectively carry out its functions pursuant to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

4

Our purpose today is not to discuss his numerous
achievements or his various initiatives in many areas,
including, among others, the humanitarian and
economic spheres. Today, the Asian States reaffirm
their confidence in the Secretary-General, who clearly
deserves it, to lead the Organization for five more
years under challenging circumstances affecting
international peace and security. Additional complex
and interrelated international issues also require
concrete collective solutions; foremost among them are
climate change, the realization of the Millennium
Development Goals, global pandemics, combating
poverty and hunger and the achievement of social
justice, peace and security worldwide.
We understand that these challenges are difficult
and that the path to resolving them is not easy. Political
will is necessary to achieve our common goals. The
Asian States are confident that the great experience
gained by the Secretary-General, along with the resolve
and determination he has shown over the past years,
will ensure that he will continue to make every
possible effort and to devote all the necessary potential
and resources to coordinate and guide international
action in order to face these challenges and
international problems.
We hope that the Secretary-General will continue
his efforts and initiatives to reform the United Nations
in order that it may carry out its functions and
mandates efficiently, effectively and transparently. We
wish him every success in achieving the legitimate
goals and aspirations of the international community in
a world of peace, security and stability. From this
rostrum, we would like to reconfirm that we are all
united in supporting him, that we will stand behind him
and that we will cooperate with him to achieve the
goals for which the United Nations was established.
I would like to conclude by citing to the
Secretary-General the words of Dag Hammarskjöld,
“Never look down to test the ground before
taking your next step; only he who keeps his eye
fixed on the far horizon will find the right road”.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Alexandru Cujba,
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Moldova,
who will speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern
European States.

11-38238

A/65/PV.101

Mr. Cujba (Republic of Moldova): I am
particularly honoured to deliver this statement on
behalf of the Group of Eastern European States on the
occasion of the reappointment of His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon as Secretary-General of the United
Nations. The Eastern European Group has previously
expressed its full support to Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and we
are pleased to have this opportunity to wholeheartedly
congratulate him on his reappointment for a second
term.
During the past four and a half years, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon has demonstrated his deep commitment to
multilateral diplomacy as the central approach to
promoting international peace and security, enhancing
international cooperation and finding concerted
solutions to global problems. His distinguished tenure,
his respect and sensibility for the diversity of the
United Nations, and his composed and comforting
cadence have been and continue to be complementary
to our endeavours to reach compromise, deeper
understanding and tolerance within this global body.
The
Organization’s
strengthening
and
consolidating leader is essential to our Assembly as we
join our efforts and determination towards the
achievement of far-reaching and ambitious global goals
while delivering effective international responses to
global challenges. We are particularly encouraged in
that regard by Mr. Ban’s position that the agenda of
Member States is his agenda.
The results of Mr. Ban Ki-moon’s tireless
activities in this high position have shown his genuine
commitment and energetic approach to his
responsibilities. He was instrumental in steering the
work of the Organization during the numerous
financial, economic, food and energy crises that
severely tested the international community. Many
initiatives were launched and have been implemented,
with some already completed, in crucial areas such the
empowerment of women, climate change, peace and
security, peacekeeping and peacebuilding and
sustainable development.
It is the role of the United Nations to seek
solutions for all the various priorities and challenges
that our peoples face. We all want to put them to good
use and to benefit from the valuable potential of the
United Nations. That is the main task of the
Organization. A thoughtful and firm Secretary-General

11-38238

is a guiding compass to help us navigate the many
problems and challenges ahead of us.
Mr. Ban Ki-moon has demonstrated that moving
the United Nations forward is possible. While building
on the achievements of the former leaders of the
Organization, we shall be committed to new
endeavours. We stand by Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon in his efforts to build a stronger and more
effective world Organization while reinvigorating the
entire United Nations system. Promoting greater
coherence among the different parts of the United
Nations system and other relevant actors and
enhancing the representativeness, transparency,
accountability, efficiency and effectiveness of the
United Nations are actions that have high priority on
the agenda of the Secretary-General, and are in line
with the positions expressed by the entire membership.
We look forward to working with the SecretaryGeneral and his team in delivering sustainable results.
Last year’s summit on the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) produced a five-year
action plan towards their achievement. While multiple
crises are threatening their implementation, and
prolonged insecurity in the global economy puts
pressure on some of the development gains, we have
the time and the political will to work to deliver strong
and inclusive economic growth to achieve the MDGs
and to look forward to new horizons after 2015.
Recent natural disasters of increased frequency
and intensity have struck countries and peoples all
around the world, causing tragic loss of life and
suffering and drawing attention to the fragility and
preciousness of our environment. Owing to the
Secretary-General’s engagement in addressing climate
change, this issue makes headlines in public policies
and in international multilateral forums. Most
important, it consolidates civil society’s and the private
sector’s engagement for a cleaner and safer Earth. As
we head towards the Rio+20 Conference next year, a
sustainable future is another task on our agenda.
Human rights, the rule of law and democracy are
interlinked and mutually reinforcing core values and
principles of the United Nations. We recognize the
valuable role that the Secretary-General plays in
bringing together the efforts of different stakeholders.
We call on him to continuously bestow his attention on
this area.

5

A/65/PV.101

We also commend the Secretary-General’s
commitment to build on the momentum in the area of
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.
We also praise his diligence in coping with
international security challenges. His individual
approach and, so often, his personal presence on the
ground in places affected by conflicts or humanitarian
crises are commendable, and we encourage him to
continue working closely with Member States in order
to respond to the needs of our peoples and
communities.
Finally, on behalf of the Group of Eastern
European States, I express our full confidence in
fruitful cooperation with the Secretary-General in the
coming years. We pledge our commitment and support
for his priorities for a strengthened, dynamic and more
operational United Nations. We wish him success and
persistence in fulfilling the responsibilities of his
office.
The President (spoke in French):I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Pablo Solón, Permanent
Representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
who will speak on behalf of the Group of Latin
American and Caribbean States.
Mr. Solón (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke
in Spanish): I am grateful for the honour of
representing the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States at this important plenary meeting of
the General Assembly. On behalf of Latin America and
the Caribbean, I express to Mr. Ban Ki-moon our
congratulations on his having been appointed as
Secretary-General of the United Nations for a second
term.
The members of the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States endeavour to enhance the power and
influence of the United Nations. In that regard we
underscore the role of the Secretary-General in
implementing the purposes of the Charter.
We appreciate his dedication and hard work in
facing the many challenges before the international
community. We welcome his reappointment, seeking to
enhance democracy and transparency in the United
Nations while taking into account and addressing the
different concerns of Member States.
In conclusion, allow me, on behalf of the Group
of Latin American and Caribbean States, to express to
the Secretary-General our readiness to continue our

6

cooperation with him to achieve the noble objectives of
the Charter of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Ron Prosor, Permanent
Representative of Israel, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Western European and other States.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): On behalf of the Group of
Western European and other States, it is my distinct
honour to congratulate the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, on his appointment for a
second term.
The unanimous support for the SecretaryGeneral’s reappointment offered by members of the
Group reflects the widespread recognition of his
exceptional abilities as a leader. Always striving to
serve as a bridge-builder, Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon has displayed a tireless commitment to his
duties over the past five years. He has sought to
advance the causes of peace, security, stability and
human rights. With great dedication, he has led the
international community’s efforts in many conflict
zones and its response to tragic natural disasters all
over the globe.
In the face of a major economic crisis, the
Secretary-General provided essential leadership and
worked to ensure that those most affected by the
downturn were not forgotten by the international
community. To advance global prosperity, SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon helped to facilitate renewed
commitments to the Millennium Development Goals,
spurring progress on many vital issues, such as climate
change, global health and the eradication of poverty.
In an age of fiscal austerity, the SecretaryGeneral has emphasized the pressing need for a more
innovative and effective Organization. He has offered a
consistent vision for the reform of United Nations
institutions. One important milestone in that effort has
been the establishment of UN-Women, a new entity
that promotes gender equality and women’s
empowerment. The Group of Western European and
other States welcomes the Secretary-General’s
commitment to continuing to work to make the United
Nations more transparent, accountable, efficient and
results-oriented.
The coming years are sure to bring with them
great challenges. The Group is confident that
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, at the helm of the

11-38238

A/65/PV.101

United Nations, will continue to offer essential
leadership for the international community. We wish
the Secretary-General every success over the next five
years, and pledge to continue offering our full support
for his work.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of the United
States, who will speak on behalf of the host country.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): This is an
important day in the life of this institution. On behalf
of the United States of America, the host country of the
United Nations, I have the honour of warmly
welcoming Mr. Ban Ki-moon’s reappointment as
Secretary-General of the United Nations. No one
understands the burdens of that role better than he, and
my Government is grateful that he is willing to
continue to take them on.
For the past four and a half years, the SecretaryGeneral has navigated turbulent waters with a steady
hand. We have all benefited from the wisdom and
experience that he has amassed over the course of a
long, distinguished and selfless career of public
service. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon is a leader
who listens to the voices of the voiceless — the
refugees sheltered beneath United Nations tents, the
children
vaccinated
through
United
Nations
programmes and the innocent civilians whose lives
have been saved by effective United Nations action.
Under the Secretary-General’s leadership, the
United Nations has moved to meet the challenges of a
new century, in which we must all work together to
find shared solutions to common challenges that pay no
heed to borders. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has
been a champion of peace and security, an advocate for
development and a voice for universal human rights.
He has spoken out with compassion for Haiti, for
democracy in Côte d’Ivoire and for the responsibility
to protect in Libya. He has urged us all to confront the
common challenge of climate change. He has
encouraged us to promote truly sustainable
development that expands the circle of prosperity. And
he has insisted on recognizing that lesbian, gay,
bisexual and transgender rights are simply human
rights.
The Secretary-General has also understood that
an institution built in the wake of the Second World
War must renew and reform itself to meet the
challenges of a very different world. He has already

11-38238

made important changes, such as hiring more women
for senior posts and proposing the deepest reduction in
the United Nations budget in more than a decade.
Under his leadership, the United Nations launched the
global field support strategy, created the Ethics Office,
and merged four disparate bodies into the important
new agency UN-Women. But far more work awaits the
Secretary-General in his second term. We look forward
to working with him and his senior leadership team as
they ensure that the United Nations moves swiftly to
reduce bureaucracy, update its business practices,
ensure budgetary discipline, promote transparency and
create a culture of economy, ethics and excellence.
In all those efforts, we know that the SecretaryGeneral will be guided by his abiding commitment —
in the words of the Charter of the United Nations — to
“save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war”, to reaffirm our common faith “in the dignity and
worth of the human person” and “to promote social
progress and better standards of life in larger freedom”.
We also know that he will continue to rely on valued
colleagues and counsellors, including of course his
wonderful wife, Madame Ban Soon-taek, whom we
also thank today for her support and sacrifice.
In the twenty-first century, we need the United
Nations more than ever to help bridge the gaps
between war and reconciliation, division and
cooperation, and misery and hope. We are therefore
fortunate to have a Secretary-General who has so often
spoken of himself as a bridge-builder. As SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon again takes up one of the
toughest jobs in the world, the United States renews its
pledge of friendship and support.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Kim Sung-hwan, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Trade of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Kim Sung-hwan (Republic of Korea): It is
my distinct honour and privilege to address the General
Assembly today. I stand here to share with all members
the great joy of the people of the Republic of Korea at
the reappointment of the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon. On behalf of the Korean
people and Government, I express the warmest
congratulations to the Secretary-General on the
unanimous decision on his second term. The Republic
of Korea greatly looks forward to another five fruitful
years under his outstanding, dynamic and competent
leadership of the United Nations.

7

A/65/PV.101

The Secretary-General is widely acknowledged
and respected in Korea, and beyond, for his virtues of
integrity, diligence and a strong work ethic. In the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, where he spent
most of his career, he is remembered with great
admiration as a legendary diplomat. His legend stems
from his many distinctive attributes and hinges on his
ability to communicate with the people from the heart,
to make the most sensible decisions in the most
difficult moments and to realize justice based on
courage. Those are the assets that have driven not only
his career, but also his life.
His achievements as Secretary-General of the
United Nations over the past four and half years are
grounded not only in those qualities, but also in his
humanity. He has placed priority on reaching out to
those in great distress all around the world in locations
such as Haiti, Gaza, Myanmar, Chile and Pakistan,
when natural disasters and conflict hit those areas.
What is more, he has been determined in echoing
the call of the people for democracy and human rights
when the time came. Recently, in North Africa and the
Middle East, he took swift and decisive steps to lead
the world to address the situations with both wisdom
and courage. In addressing those crises, he
demonstrated not only humanism, but also determined
action based on good judgement. In the case of Côte
d’Ivoire, his tireless passion played a pivotal role not
only in safeguarding the principles of democracy, but
also in protecting civilian lives.
In the face of an increasing number of global
challenges, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has
constantly
underlined
the
central
role
of
multilateralism. With his commitment, the critical issue
of climate change has been elevated to the top of the
international agenda. Moreover, international efforts to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals have been
further galvanized.
The position of Secretary-General of the United
Nations, as the first Secretary-General, Trygve Lie,
once described it, may be the most impossible job on
Earth. However, we have every confidence that, with
the full support of the Members, the Secretary-General
will continue to be the leader in showing the way
forward to achieve the goals that unite us, namely,
peace and prosperity for humankind.
It is my sincere hope that, throughout his term in
office, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon will continue

8

to enjoy the unanimous support evident here today. For
its part, the Republic of Korea will stand firmly behind
his noble endeavours to create a stronger United
Nations for a better world.
In that regard, the Republic of Korea will
continue to support and join the United Nations efforts
to successfully reach the Millennium Development
Goals. In addition to our commitment to doubling
official development assistance by 2015, Korea is
implementing domestic policies and pursuing global
partnerships that will contribute to accelerating the
development consensus of the Group of Twenty
Summit held in Seoul last year. Furthermore, we will
host a high-level forum in Pusan in November to assess
the effectiveness of aid and to discuss the possible
linkage of aid policy to development effectiveness.
The Republic of Korea is strongly committed to
maintaining international peace and security, and will
continue to support the United Nations role in
preventing and responding to conflicts around the
world. Currently, some 600 Korean soldiers are serving
in nine peacekeeping missions, including in Lebanon
and Haiti. The hosting of the 2012 nuclear security
summit in Korea will also serve as a clear
demonstration of a sincere commitment to global peace
and security.
I would like to bring my remarks to a close by
extending my best wishes for the continued success of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in making the United
Nations a stronger and more effective Organization. I
assure the United Nations that the Korean people and
Government will be part of that process.
The President (spoke in French): I now invite
those who have just spoken — the President of the
Security Council, the President of the Economic and
Social Council, the President of the Trusteeship
Council, the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly
and the Chairs of the Main Committees — to come to
the platform.
I now request the Chief of Protocol to escort the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
to the platform.
The Chief of Protocol escorted the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to the platform.
The President (spoke in French): By resolution
65/282, of 21 June 2011, the General Assembly has
appointed His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon Secretary-

11-38238

A/65/PV.101

General of the United Nations for a second term of
office, beginning on 1 January 2012 and ending on
31 December 2016.
I now invite him to take the oath of office on the
signed original Charter of the United Nations. I would
like to take this opportunity to thank the National
Archives of the United States of America for having
brought the signed original Charter from Washington, D.C.
The President of the General Assembly
administered the oath of office to the SecretaryGeneral.
The Secretary-General: I, Ban Ki-moon,
solemnly swear to exercise in all loyalty, discretion and
conscience the functions entrusted to me as SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, to discharge these
functions and regulate my conduct with the interests of
the United Nations only in view, and not to seek or
accept instructions in regard to the performance of my
duties from any Government or other authority external
to the Organization.
The President (spoke in French): I now invite
His Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to
make a statement.
The Secretary-General: With the members’
decision this afternoon and with their warm words,
they do me a very great honour, one beyond
expression. Standing in this place, mindful of the
immense legacy of my predecessors, I am humbled by
members’ trust and inspired by our sense of common
purpose.
This solemn occasion is special in another respect
as well. On being sworn in a few moments ago, I
placed my hand on the United Nations Charter — not a
copy, but the original signed in San Francisco. Our
founding fathers deemed this document so precious
that it was flown back to Washington, D.C., strapped to
a parachute. No such consideration was given to the
poor diplomat accompanying it; he had to take his
chances. We thank the United States National Archives
for its generosity in lending it to us today and for their
care in preserving it.
The Charter of the United Nations is the
animating spirit and soul of our great institution. For
65 years, this great Organization has carried the flame
of human aspiration — “We the peoples” — from the
last of the great world wars through the fall of the
Berlin Wall and the end of apartheid. We have fed the

11-38238

hungry, delivered comfort to the sick and suffering and
brought peace to those afflicted by war. This great
Organization, the United Nations, is dedicated to
human progress.
We began our work together, four and a half years
ago, with a call for a new multilateralism, a new spirit
of collective action. We saw, in our daily work, how all
the world’s peoples looked more and more to the
United Nations. We knew then, and more so now, that
we live in an era of integration and interconnection, a
new era where no country can solve every challenge on
its own and where every country should be part of the
solution.
That is the reality of the modern world. We can
struggle against it, or we can lead. The role of the
United Nations is to lead. Each of us here today shares
that heavy responsibility. It is why the United Nations
matters in a different and deeper way than ever before.
To lead, we must deliver results. Mere statistics will
not do it. We need results that people can see and
touch, results that change lives and make a difference.
(spoke in French)
Working together, with goodwill and mutual trust,
we have laid a firm foundation for the future. When we
began, no one spoke of climate change. Today, it is at
the heart of the international community’s concerns.
When we began working together, nuclear
disarmament was a dead issue. Today, we see progress.
We have advanced on global health, sustainable
development and education. We are on track to
eliminate deaths from malaria, and with a final push
we can eradicate polio, just as we did smallpox a long
time ago.
We have shielded the poor and the vulnerable
against the greatest economic upheaval in generations.
Amid devastating natural disasters, we were
there, saving lives in Haiti, Pakistan and Myanmar.
As never before, the United Nations is on the
front lines, protecting people and helping to build
peace — in the Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Somalia and in Afghanistan, Iraq and the
Middle East.
We have stood firm for democracy, justice and
human rights. In Côte d’Ivoire, North Africa and

9

A/65/PV.101

elsewhere, we have carved out a new dimension for the
responsibility to protect.
We created UN-Women to empower women
everywhere, including within the United Nations
system itself.
And yet we never forget how far we have to go.
We must continue the important work that we have
begun together.
(spoke in English)
As we look to the future, we recognize the
imperative for decisive and concerted action. In
economic hard times, we must stretch resources and do
better with less. We must improve our ability to deliver
as one. We must do more to connect the dots among the
world’s challenges so that solutions to one global
problem become solutions for all — on women’s and
children’s health, green growth and more equitable
social and economic development.
A clear time frame lies ahead — the target date
for the Millennium Development Goals in 2015, next
year’s Rio+20 Conference, the high-level meeting on
nuclear safety in September and the nuclear security
summit meeting in Seoul next year.
In all this, our ultimate power is partnership. Our
legacy, such as it may be, will be written in alliance,
the leaders of the world leading in common cause. As
in the past, I count on the Assembly’s support and on
even deeper partnership. By acting decisively to renew
my mandate, the Assembly has given the gift of
time — time to carry on the important work that,
together, we have begun.
In the months to come, we will be reaching out
for the Assembly’s views and ideas. Drawing on those
discussions, I shall present our broader long-term
vision at the next plenary session in September.

forebear, I take that lesson to heart. It has been a great
privilege to serve as the Organization’s SecretaryGeneral. That the Assembly should ask me to serve
once again makes it all the greater.
With gratitude for the Assembly’s support and
encouragement, and honouring its trust, I pledge my
full commitment. I am proud and humbled to accept
the Assembly’s support.
As Secretary-General, I will work as a
harmonizer and bridge-builder among Member States,
within the United Nations system and between the
United Nations and a rich diversity of international
partners.
To quote the great philosopher Lao-tzu, “The way
of heaven is to benefit others and not to injure. The
way of the sage is to act but not compete”. Let us apply
this enduring wisdom to our work today. Out of the
competition of ideas, let us find unity in action.
Honouring the Assembly’s trust, I pledge my full
commitment, my full energy and my resolve to uphold
the fundamental principles of our sacred Charter.
Together, let us do all we can to help this noble
Organization better serve “we the peoples” of the
world. Together, no challenge is too large. Together,
nothing is impossible.
(spoke in French)
Together, nothing is impossible.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
We have thus concluded our consideration of
agenda item 163. Above all, we have taken a very
important decision that is going to guarantee the
prosperity of our Organization in the next five years.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

My predecessor Dag Hammarskjöld once said,
“Never, for the sake of peace and quiet, deny your own
experience or conviction”. Like my distinguished

10

11-38238
