S/PV.8050

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8050th meeting

Thursday, 14 September 2017, 10.50 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alemu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ethiopia)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Michon
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2017/746)
Letter dated 30 August 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/201/747)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-28642 (E)
*1728642*

S/PV.8050

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.50 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2017/746)
Letter dated 30 August 2017 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/201/747)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeremiah
Mamabolo, Joint Special Representative for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/746, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, and document
S/2017/747, which contains a letter dated 30 August
2017 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mamabolo.
Mr. Mamabolo: I am grateful for the opportunity to
brief the Council once again on the situation in Darfur.
Per resolution 2363 (2017), the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) has
proceeded with its reconfiguration while continuing
to implement its strategic priorities on the protection
of civilians, mediation between the Government of
the Sudan and armed movements, and support for the
mediation of intercommunal conflicts.
UNAMID has started phase one of the
reconfiguration, namely, the closure of 11 team sites and
a reduction of military personnel strength from 15,845
to 11,395 and police personnel strength from 3,403 to
2/6

14/09/2017

2,888. Since June, UNAMID has closed four team sites
in North and East Darfur, and the remaining seven will
be closed by the end of September. The Mission has
developed plans to deploy the Jebel Marra Task Force
and requested the Government for land to establish
a temporary operating base in Golo. The protection
strategy for Jebel Marra is also being developed to
ensure coordination with humanitarian partners and
tailor military and police activities to the area. The
review of the civilian personnel, commensurate with
the new troop ceiling and configuration, has been
completed and will be reflected in the submission of
the revised UNAMID 2017/18 budget.
Regarding the situation in Darfur, after the brief
clashes in East and North Darfur in May and June
between the Government of the Sudan Armed Forces
and the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minawi (SLA/
MM), supported by the Sudan Liberation Army/
Transitional Council and the Justice and Equality
Movement, Darfur largely remained calm. The clashes
are a reminder of the need for a commitment by all
parties to cease hostilities and to take major strides
towards a permanent and lasting peace.
With the exception of the violent clashes
between the Rezeigat and the Ma’alia in East Darfur,
which resulted in significant casualties, there has
been a reduction in the number of intercommunal
incidents, owing partly to the intervention of the
native administration, community leaders and local
committees supported by the Government, the United
Nations country team and UNAMID. Violence against
civilians, banditry and criminal activities continued,
albeit on a smaller scale, with the majority of the cases
occurring against internally displaced persons (IDPs),
farmers and women. On the human rights situation,
there has been some progress. The President pardoned
six human rights defenders on 29 August. Efforts are
being made at the local level to extend judicial services
beyond urban centres, and the perpetrators of criminal
incidents, in some instances, have been apprehended.
However, much still needs to be done to improve the
overall human rights situation.
Most of the insecurity currently experienced in
Darfur can be attributed to the tensions originating
from the underlying causes of the conflict, exacerbated
by the proliferation of arms in the hands of civilians
and militia groups. Intercommunal disputes, usually
triggered by competition over land, water, livestock and
mineral resources, have become increasingly violent
17-28642

14/09/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

owing to the availability of weapons. On 6 August,
the Government of the Sudan launched the third phase
of the arms-control campaign, reiterating that only
members of the regular forces were to be allowed to
carry, acquire or stockpile weapons or ammunition.
Subsequently, the Second Vice-President conducted
a sensitization tour of Darfur followed by initiatives in
the various states led by the Walis. Reactions to the
arms-collection campaign in Darfur vary, with the
opposition and non-signatory movements, some tribes
and militia groups critical of Government intentions,
with others such as the Arab militia leader Musa Hilal
opposed outright to the process.
Meanwhile, progress in the implementation of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur remains limited,
particularly on those outstanding issues that are
fundamental to sustainable peace in Darfur, such as
durable solutions to displacement, the administration
of land, water and other scarce resources, and the
issue of armed militias. UNAMID continues to engage
the remaining Commissions and Fund of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, but their lack of capacity
and presence in Darfur continues to pose a challenge.
Efforts by the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel, with the support of UNAMID, for a cessation-ofhostilities agreement and the resumption of direct
negotiations towards an inclusive peace agreement to
end the conflict, have remained inconclusive. Further
to my engagement in Paris with Abdul Wahid, Minni
Minawi and Gibril Ibrahim, I have sent a report to the
parties detailing the current status of the mediation
process, especially the stalemate in the negotiations on
cessation of hostilities.
The movements insist on a sequencing of the
negotiations from the cessation of hostilities to
discussions on the controversial issue of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur. The Government, on the
other hand, insists on a commitment to the Document
as a basis for negotiations and Doha as the venue for
the talks. Abdul Wahid maintains his refusal to join the
peace process. While we will continue to engage both
parties to break this stalemate, we call upon the Council
and those with influence on the parties to stress the
importance of a political settlement and desist from
bringing more suffering to the very people that they
profess to represent.
Displacements were reported following the clashes
between the Government of the Sudan and the SLA/

S/PV. 8050

MM in North Darfur in May and June, although the
figures could not be confirmed. IDPs continue to
require protection and humanitarian assistance on a
daily basis. There is an urgent need for the Government
of the Sudan, with the support of the international
community, to find sustainable solutions that would
enable the IDPs to return to their homes voluntarily.
Cooperation with the Government of the Sudan
has noticeably improved. The humanitarian operating
environment continued to improve, with partners
reporting faster approval for movements within Darfur
and fewer denials of access. UNAMID also continues
to experience decreased movement restrictions.
UNAMID remains committed to working with the
Government authorities to overcome the remaining
access challenges.
The issuance of visas and the clearance of essential
equipment continue to improve. However, the Mission
is still awaiting the issuance of visas for human rights
staff. The shipments currently being held represent a
fifth of the number held this time last year.
The cooperation of the Government for the
reconfiguration of UNAMID, particularly for the
establishment of a temporary operating base in Golo, is
a matter of priority.
In conclusion, I would like to express UNAMID’s
appreciation to the Council for the support that we
continue to receive.
The President: I thank Mr. Mamabolo for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, allow me to thank the Mr. Jeremiah
Mamabolo, Joint Special Representative for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), for his presentation of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/746).
Uruguay underlines the report’s indication that,
despite the decrease in armed clashes between the
Government of the Sudan and rebel forces, the security
and human rights situation in Darfur remains unstable.
It should also be noted that one of the main flash points of
violence in Darfur continues to involve intercommunal
conflicts, which are closely related to the root causes of
the conflict and are exacerbated by armed militias, as
well as by the fact that weapons are proliferating among

17-286423/6

S/PV.8050

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the civilian population and that rule-of-law institutions
continue to lack the capacity and effective means to
meet those challenges.
My delegation considers it vital that the Government
of the Sudan and the armed movements comply with
their unilateral declarations concerning the cessation of
hostilities and move on to the next stages of the peace
process, facilitated by the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, with the support of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for South Sudan and
the Sudan and the Joint Special Representative for the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. Progress in those areas would allow for the
establishment of the necessary conditions for effectively
addressing the root causes of the conflict, such as
intercommunal conflicts, and, moreover, contribute to
the safe return to their homes of the more than 2 million
internally displaced persons in Darfur.
As noted in the report of the Secretary-General,
UNAMID is moving forward in its reconfiguration
in accordance with the Security Council’s adoption
of resolution 2363 (2017). As we have repeatedly
said, the Government of the Sudan’s cooperation
with the Council and UNAMID is indispensable for
successfully achieving that transition. We note that the
general environment in which UNAMID is operating
has shown signs of improvement, while, at the same
time, a decrease in the number of criminal incidents
and traffic restrictions have also been noted.
Nevertheless, the Mission continues to face several
logistical difficulties that continue to hamper its work,
including delays in issuing visas, especially for human
rights workers in the Area. In that regard, we urge the
Government of the Sudan to expedite the process of
resolving outstanding operational restrictions, while
living up to all its obligations in that respect and
sustaining the positive spirit that characterized the
review process of UNAMID. Furthermore, although
the Mission is drawing down, we are aware of the
important and continuing necessary role that it plays
in the area of the protection of civilians, including, for
example, monitoring human rights violations, carrying
out daily patrols and supporting intercommunal
conflict mediation.
To conclude, allow me to express Uruguay’s
gratitude to all UNAMID personnel, the United Nations
country team and humanitarian workers, who continue
4/6

14/09/2017

to work tirelessly and often in difficult conditions so as
to achieve sustainable peace in Darfur.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks Joint
Special Representative Mamabolo for his briefing to
us on the situation in Darfur and on the status of the
implementation of Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
As we have stated over the past several months,
we would like to highlight again the fact that clashes
between the Sudanese Government and rebel groups
have been considerably reduced in comparison to
previous years. Although intercommunal conflicts
were noted, resolving them is nevertheless linked to the
root causes of the conflict. Strict compliance with their
unilateral declarations on the cessation of hostilities by
the Government and armed groups allows for progress
to be made in the peace process, which the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel, the Joint
Special Representative and the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for South Sudan and the Sudan are
facilitating so diligently.
The relative calm afforded by the cessation of
hostilities must lead to bolstering the political processes
aimed at achieving peace in Darfur. The national
dialogue has allowed for advances in governance reform
with the participation of various political parties. It
is important that those new structures, which have
resulted from the national dialogue, be able to focus on
the implementation of the Doha Document. However,
it is critical to resolve differences with regard to the
Document. Implementing the provisions of the Doha
Document would allow for addressing root issues,
such as the adoption of land-related laws. Moreover, it
also provides for a permanent ceasefire involving the
armed movements and the disarmament of the civilian
population and militia, among other components, that
constitute fundamental requirements for establishing
stable and lasting peace in Darfur. We therefore call
on the movements that are not signatories to the Doha
Document to resume talks and move forward in the
political process, which represents the only way out of
the conflict in the Sudan.
Concerning progress in implementing the
recommendations set out in resolution 2363 (2017),
which we adopted several months ago, we believe that
it is crucial to work towards ensuring State presence
and strengthening the institutions and the police in
the territories from which the African Union-United
17-28642

14/09/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8050

Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) will
draw down. To carry out the reintegration processes
and ensure the security of the civilian population,
there must be constant and fluid coordination between
the Government, the United Nations country team
and UNAMID.

of the Council during the month of August. Finally, I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2017/746) and, of course, Mr. Mamabolo, Joint
Special Representative for the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, both for his
briefing and his sincere cooperation.

We also welcome Government measures to
strengthen judicial institutions — a key measure for
achieving success in the reconciliation processes and the
fight against impunity. In the same vein, we believe that
the Government’s campaign to collect illegal weapons
and unlicensed vehicles in the Darfur region is a positive
step, which, despite the complications it is experiencing,
is noteworthy. Those governmental measures, which
are in line with the process of peacebuilding and being
carried out by the United Nations, require the support
of the international community.

I welcome the outcome of the twenty-first consultative
meeting between the African Union and the United
Nations, which took place last week in your country,
Mr. President. The meeting reaffirmed the central
aspect of the strategic partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations and called for
a strengthening of the partnership in order to achieve
peace and stability throughout our country, Africa. The
partnership between the two organizations through the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) is an outstanding example of the
vitality we wish to see. We hope to see a strengthened
partnership, especially with regard to African
capabilities and capacities, early warning mechanisms,
conflict prevention and resolution, rebuilding and
the necessary financing for peacekeeping missions
in Africa.

In addition to the challenges I mentioned here, the
humanitarian situation of internally displaced persons
continues to concern us. Although there were no major
displacements this year, millions of internally displaced
persons remain exposed to various forms of violence,
among whom women and children are the main victims.
Let us hope that progress will be made in the plan
for the voluntary resettlement of internally displaced
persons. Moreover, the effects of inclement weather,
such as the flash floods in the Kalma camp, and the
spread of disease have claimed several lives since June.
We trust that the Government, as it has demonstrated
before, will ensure the necessary support for enabling
UNAMID to comply freely with its mandate and for
granting access to humanitarian workers so that they
can carry out the tasks of caring for those affected.
In conclusion, we recognize that there are many
challenges in this new phase of UNAMID, and we
would like to commend the work that has been carried
out in the Sudan over the past 10 years. Their work
and dedication in search of peace is one of the most
noble and difficult tasks in the world. We express our
gratitude to them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): First
of all, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I wish you every success. I also would
like to thank the Permanent Representative of the Arab
Republic of Egypt, who successfully guided the work

In recent months, the five states of Darfur have
seen the mobilization of all segments of society and all
institutions to lay the foundations of peace and stability,
thanks to the efforts of the Sudanese Government and
the United Nations — particularly UNAMID and the
African Union. That has enabled the consolidation of
security and stability throughout the entire region after
the rebel movements were neutralized and forced to
withdraw from Darfur and the Sudan, so that all can
finally focus on implementing development projects
and strengthening intercommunal reconciliation to set
Darfur back on a positive path to contribute to building
a modern Sudan — as it was once doing.
As the Council may recall, the President of the
Sudan, Mr. Omar Hassan Ahmad Al-Bashir, expressed
the intention of the Government to implement the
campaign to collect illegal arms from all Sudanese
citizens. The campaign was launched under the
supervision of the Vice-President of the Republic,
Mr. Hasabo Mohammed Abdul Rahman, following the
adoption of a staggered national plan that starts with
awareness raising about the need to surrender weapons
and then with the implementation of one of the oldest
laws in the Sudan, on weapons and ammunitions, for
those who continue to violate it. Preliminary reports
indicate that the plan is thus far progressing well,

17-286425/6

S/PV.8050

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

but the collection, marking, seizure and elimination
of weapons is a very costly operation that requires
significant technical capabilities. That is why we called
upon the international community to lend its assistance
to ensure that this crucially important plan to sustain
peace and security is implemented. As the Council is
aware, the proliferation of weaons among civilians is
one of the drivers of conflict. That is why we again call
upon the international community to help implement
the plan. Its positive impact will not be limited to
Darfur alone, but to all of the Sudan.
Furthermore, the measures that the Government
of the Sudan intends to undertake in cooperation with
its brotherly and neighbouring States are significant,
especially in terms of limiting the flow of weapons.
That is an important question that also requires the
assistance and attention of the international community.
Following the Council’s adoption of resolution
2363 (2017), which enshrines the Secretary-General’s
proposals and those of the African Union’s Commission
aimed at reconfiguring UNAMID and reducing its size,
the Sudanese Government reaffirmed its commitment
to cooperating and coordinating with UNAMID to
implement the resolution.
The first stage saw the closure of three positions,
and we intend to close 11 more towards the end of the
year. The withdrawal and closure of various UNAMID
positions sends a positive signal that international
community confirms that the situation has returned
to normal and that security is being maintained. That
has been demonstrated through the massive return of
displaced persons to their villages, as well as the addition
of a great many heads and chiefs of rebel movements
to the peace process. Consultations are still under way
and are taking place at various levels. They are aimed at
convincing the other chiefs and heads of armed groups
to join the peace process under the auspices of the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel.
At a logical and political level, the changes that
we are witnessing in Darfur force us to reconsider
the sanctions that have been imposed on the Sudan
since 2005 pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005). Those
sanctions must be reviewed. We are open to listen to

6/6

14/09/2017

and consider any ideas, including those presented by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
As we have stated on numerous occasions, the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur remains the only
way to achieve lasting peace in Darfur. It is one of the
more comprehensive solutions among those aimed at
eliminating the crisis. Despite the mild refusal of certain
heads of rebel groups to support the Document, over
85 per cent of its provisions have been implemented.
There is therefore a need to continue along that course
in order to ensure that peace returns to Darfur and all
of the Sudan.
Efforts made by Qatar, the sponsor of the Doha
Document for Peace, to rehabilitate Darfur and rebuild
villages in order to facilitate the voluntary return
of citizens to the region, as well as its support for
development projects. have contributed significantly to
the current situation in Darfur. We would also like to
thank many other brotherly States, such as China, Japan
and Turkey, as well as the League of Arab States. The
Government of the Sudan wishes to see the international
community continue to lend its support to ensure that
we are able to implement the remaining aspects of the
Doha Document and to convince non-signatory parties
to accede to it as soon as possible. Thus, we could put
an end to fighting, which would enable us to implement
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes, the return of refugees and reconciliation
among communities.
In conclusion, we would like to convey our gratitude
to UNAMID for its many contributions. We would like
to pay tribute to the peacekeepers who have laid down
their lives for the Sudan. Finally, we would like to
express our gratitude to troop- and police-contributing
countries. We would like to reiterate our readiness
to cooperate with regional and international partners
until all components of UNAMID have left our
country — thereby demonstrating and proving the
success of this huge peacekeeping operation.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion of
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

17-28642
