Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

with a view to making possible the extradition, in accorda11ce with international law, of thc persons referred to in
article II of this Convention.
IV

ARTICI.E

Thc States Parties to the present Convention undertake to
adopt, in accordance with their respective constitutional processes, any legislative or other measures necessary to ensure
that statutory or other limitations shall not apply to the prosecution ami punishm~nt of the crimes referred to in articles I
and II of this Co11vention and that, where they exist, such
limitatio11s shall be abolished.
ARTICLE

V

This Convcntion shall, until 31 December 1969, be open for
signature by any State Member of the United Nations or
member of any of its specialized agencies ar of thc International Atomic Energy Agency, by any Statc Party to the
Statute of the International Court of J ustice, ami by any other
State which has been invited by the General Assembly of the
United N ations to become a Party to this Convention.
VI

ARTICLE

This Convention is subject to ratification. Instruments of
ratification shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of
the United Nations.
A,mcLE VII

This Co11ventio11 shall be open to accession by any State
referred to in article V. Instruments of accession shall be
deposited with the Secretary-General of the Unitecl N ations.
ARTIL"LE

VIII

l. This Convention shall enter into force 011 the ninetieth
day after the date of the dcposit with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations of the tenth instrument of ratification
or accession.
2. For each State ratifying this Convention or accecling to
it after the deposit of the tenth instrument of ratification or
accession, the Convention shall enter into force on the ninetieth
day after the date of ~he deposit oí its own instrument of
ratificatio11 or accession.
ARTICLE

IX

l. After the expiry of a period of ten years from tbe date
011 which this Convention enters into force, a request for the
revision of the Convention may be made at any time by any
Contracting Party by means of a notification in writing addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
2. The General Assemhly of the United Nations shall decide
upon the steps, if any, to be taken in respect of such a request.
ARTICLE

X

l. This Convention shall be deposited with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall
transmit certified copies of this Convention to all States referred
to in article V.
3. The Secretary-Gencral of the United Nations shall inform
ali States referred to in article V of the following particulars:
(a) Signatures of this Convention, and instruments of ratification and accession deposited under articles V, VI and VII ;
( b) The date of entry into force of this Convention in
accordance with article VIII ;
(e) Communications received under article IX.
ARTICLE

XI

This Convention, of which the Chinese, English, French
Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall bear
the date of 26 November 1968.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized
for that purpose, have signed this Convention.

41

2392 (XXIII). Question of the puniahment of
war criminals and of persone who have
committed crimes against humanity
Thc General Assembly,
Considering the fact that a draft optional protocol1
to the Convention on the Non-Applicability of Statutory
Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes against Humanity2 has bee.n submitted,
N oting that the Convention on the N on-Applicability
of Statutory Limitations to W ar Crimes and Crimes
against Humanity does not preclude the study of principies that may be affirmed in the future in determining
the nature of tribunals constituted for the tria! of
persons accused of having committed war crimes and
crimes against humanity,
Believing that this draft optional protocol raises issues
that are close.ly related to the general question of international criminal jurisdiction,
Recalling its previous consideration of the question of
international criminal jurisdiction,
Recailing further its decision at the 1676th plenary
meeting not to include the item entitled "International
criminal jurisdiction" in the agenda of its twenty-third
session but to defer the item to a later session,
Decides to take up this draft optional protocol at
such time as it resumes consideration of the question
of international criminal jurisdiction, or at such other
time as it deems appropriate.
1727th plenar31 meeting,
26 November 1968.

2393 (XXIII). Capital punishment
The General Assembly,
Recalling that article 3 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights provides that everyone has the right
to life, Jiberty and security of person,
Recalling further that article 5 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights provides that no one
shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment,
Having considered the report entitled Capital Punishment3 in the light of the comments• thereon of the
Ad Hoc Advisory Committee of Experts on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,5 and
the report entitled Capital Punishment-Developmcnts
1961 to 1965, 6
Taking note of the conclusion drawn by the Advisory
Committee from the report entitled Capital Punishment
that, if one looked at the whole problem of capital
punishment in a historical perspective, it became clear
that there was a world-wide tendency towards a considerable reduction in the number and categories of
offences for which capital punishment might be imposed,
1 A/C.3/L.1570/Rev.2.

~ General

Assembly resolution 2391 (XXIII), annex.
Nations publication, Sales No.: E.67.IV.15, part I.
4 O /ficial Records of the Economic and S acial C 011ncil,
Thi,·ty-fifth Scssion, Anne.rcs, agenda item 11, document
E/J724, sectio11 III.
5 In accorda11ce with Economic and Social Council resolution 1086 B (XXXIX) of 30 July 1965, the Ad Hoc Committee
was established 011 a permanent basis as the Advisory Committee of Experts on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders.
0 United Nations publication, Sales No.: F.67.IV.15, part II.
~ Unitecl

General Assembly-Twenty-third Sesaion

Taking note also of the view expressed in the report
entitled Capital Punishment-Developments 1961 to
1965 that there is an over-all tendency in the world
towards fewer executions,
Taking note of the report of the meeting of the
Consultative Group on the Prevention of Crime and
the Treatment of Offenders held in August 1968, in so
far as it relates to the question of capital punishment, 7
and of the view of the Group that there is a strong
trend in most countries towards the abolition of capital
punishment or at least towards fewer executions,
Desiriiig to promote further the dignity of man and
thus to contribute to the International Year for Human
Rights,
l. Invites Governments of Member States:
(a) To ensure the most careful legal procedures and
the greatest possible safeguards for the accused in
capital cases in countries where the death penalty
obtains, ínter alia, by providing that:
(i) A person condemned to death shall not be deprived
of the right to appeal to a highe.r judicial authority
or, as the case may be, to petition for pardon or
reprieve;
( ii) A death sentence shall not be carried out until
the procedure.s of appeal or, as the case may be,
of petition for pardon or reprieve have been
terminated ;
(iii) Special attention be given in the case of indigent
persons by the provision of adequate legal assistance at all stages of the proceedings ;
( b) To consider whether the careful legal procedures
and safeguards referred to in sub-paragraph (a) above
may not be further strengthened by the fixing of a
time-limit or time-limits before the expiry of which no
death sentence shall be carried out, as has already
been recognized in certain international conventions
dealing with specific situations;
(e) To inform the Secretary-General not la ter than
10 December 1970 of actions which may have been
taken in accordance with sub-paragraph (a) above and
of the results to which their consideration in accordance
with sub-paragraph ( b) above may have led;
2. Requesfs the Secretary-General to invite Governments of 1\Iember States to inform him of their present
attitude to possible further restriction of the use of
the death penalty or to its total abolition, and to state
whether they are contemplating restriction or abolition
and also to indicate whether changes in this respect
have taken place since 1965 ;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
a report on the matter dealt with in paragraphs 1 (e)
and 2 above to the Economic and Social Council at
one of its sessions to be held in 1971.
1727th plenary meeting,
26 November 1968.

2394 (XXIII). Capital puniehment in eouthern
Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling that article 3 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights provides that everyone has the right
to life, liberty and security of person,

'See Of!kiol Records of the General Assembly, Twndy"""" Stsnon, Annexes, agenda ítem 59, document A/7243,
annex.

Further recalling that article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights provides that no one shall
be subjected to torture orto cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment,
Recalling Security Council resolution 191 ( 1964) of
18 June 1964 urging the Government of South Africa
to renounce the execution of any persons sentenced to
death for their opposition to apartheid,
Recalling Security Council resolution 253 ( 1968) of
29 May 1%8 condemning the inhuman executions
carried out by the illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia
which have flagrantly affronted the conscience of
mankind and have been universally condemned,
Also recalling General Assembly resolution 2145
(XXI) of 27 October 1966, ;n which the Assembly
decided that South Africa's Mandate far South West
Africa was terminated, that South Africa had no other
right to administer the Territory and that henceforth
South W est Africa carne under the direct responsibility
of the United Nations, 8
N oting with concern the existence of the death penalty
as a means of suppressing resistance to the policies of
apartheid, racial discrimination and colonialism by the
illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia, by the illegal
South African régime in Namibia and by the racist
Government in South Africa,
l. Condemns the illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia, the equally illegal South African régime in
Namibia and the racist Government in South Africa for
resorting to the application of the death penalty and
the threat or use of capital punishment in their attempts
to suppress the natural aspirations of the peoples of
southern Africa to social and economic justice, civil
rights and political freedom ;
2. Calls upon the Government of South Africa to
renounce the execution of any persons sentenced to
death for their opposition to apartheid;
3. Requests the Commission on Human Rights and
the Economic and Social Council to keep this matter
under constant review.
1727th plenary meeting,
26 November 1968.

2399 (XXIII). Report of the United Natione High
Commi11ioner for Refugeee
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees9 and having heard
his statement, 10
Taking ncte of the progress achieved in the field of
international protection of refugees who are the High
Commissioner's concern and in the search far permanent solutions of their problems through voluntary
repatriation, integration in countries of asylum or
resettlement in other countries,
Recognizing the positive effects of the High Commissioner's work on economic and social conditions of
the refugees in the countries concerned,
8 The General Assembly, in its resolution 2372 (XXII) of
12 June 1968, decided that from that date South West Africa
would be lmown as Namibia.
9 Ojficial Records of th, Gmeral Asstmbly, Tfl#11t1-third
Session, Supplement No. 11 (A/7211 and Corr.2) and S•nltment No. 11A (A/7211/Add.l).
10 lbid., Twenty-third Session, Third Cofflfflillu, 1611th
meeting, paras. 1-18.
