S/PRST/2006/1

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 January 2006
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5343rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 6 January 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The question
concerning Haiti”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reiterates its full support for the work of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Juan Gabriel Valdés.
“The Security Council reiterates that the future holding of elections is a
fundamental step towards the restoration of democracy and stability in Haiti.
The Council takes note with concern of the new postponement of the elections
in Haiti and, in this regard, trusts that the delay in the electoral calendar will
enable the resolution of logistical and technical problems in order to ensure
transparent, inclusive, free and fair elections.
“The Security Council urges the Transitional Government of Haiti and
the Conseil Electoral Provisoire to expeditiously announce new and definitive
dates for the elections, the first round to be held within weeks, but no later
than 7 February 2006, and to ensure that the elections will take place in
accordance with international democratic standards and under conditions
conducive to the widest possible participation. The Council calls upon all
relevant international stakeholders to continue to collaborate closely with the
Transitional Government of Haiti and other national authorities in this
endeavour. The revised electoral calendar and corresponding budget should be
realistic and comprehensive, and encompass national, municipal and local
elections.
“The Security Council reaffirms that security remains an essential
element for the holding of free and equitable elections. The Council expresses
its concern over the deterioration of security conditions in Port-au-Prince and
urges the Haitian National Police and MINUSTAH to continue their efforts to
further intensify their cooperation to improve the security situation in order to
restore and maintain the rule of law. In this regard, the Council pays tribute to
those MINUSTAH peacekeepers that have been killed or injured in the line of
duty.
“The Security Council is of the view that, after the elections, a period of
fundamental importance for the long-term stability will follow. National

06-20266 (E) 060106

*0620266*

S/PRST/2006/1

reconciliation and political dialogue should continue to be promoted as a
means to ensure long-term stability and good governance.
“The Security Council reaffirms that open and credible elections, based
on the ownership by the Haitian people, are paramount to the consolidation of
democratic institutions and procedures, but it recognizes at the same time that
they do not constitute the sole means to address the longer-term problems that
Haiti faces in the security sector and in the restoration of the rule of law, both
of which are critical to stability and sustainable development. The Council
welcomes, accordingly, the decision taken by the donor community to extend
the Interim Cooperation Framework until December 2007 in order to assist the
new elected Government to continue reconstruction efforts. The Council
reaffirms that short, medium and long-term strategies, within a unified
framework, are needed to ensure coordination and continuity in the
international assistance to Haiti.”

2
