S/PV.8903

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8903rd meeting

Friday, 12 November 2021, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Ravindran
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Maman Sani
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Ben Said
Mr. Roscoe
Mr. Mills
Mrs. Tra Phuong Nguyen

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the G-5 Sahel Joint Force (S/2021/940)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-33470 (E)
*2133470*

S/PV.8903

Peace and security in Africa

will be a decisive test. In an increasingly complex and
interconnected world, many fear being left behind
while old systems break down. We are only beginning
to understand this phenomenon and how we can halt the
rise and spread of terrorist movements.

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the G-5
Sahel Joint Force (S/2021/940)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Chad to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations; and Ms. Fatimata Ouilma Sinaré, President
of the Burkina Faso chapter of the Network on Peace
and Security for Women in the Economic Community
of West African States Space.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/940, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix (spoke in French): Since the previous
meeting of the Security Council on the Sahel (see
S/2021/484), the situation in the region has remained
extremely volatile. Insecurity and instability are a
major impediment to growth and development, and the
civilian population is paying the highest price. Every
day, many lives are lost to terrorist attacks. Millions
are displaced, children can no longer go to school and
primary health care remains inaccessible to many, even
as the pandemic rages on. The armed and security forces
of the member States of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) are meeting this threat with determination
and courage in a situation where the odds seemed
stacked against them. They deserve our solidarity.
Today I wish to pay tribute to them, acknowledge their
sacrifice and salute their bravery and strength.
Combating terrorism is among the greatest
challenges of our time. The way that the international
community responds and addresses the root causes
2/17

12/11/2021

In that context, the important decision of the G-5
Sahel member States to take in hand their security
challenges by creating the counter-terrorist Joint Force
of the G-5 Sahel is a significant accomplishment.
Since it was first deployed, in 2017, the Joint Force
has continued to sustainably ramp up its operations
despite major challenges. Next week, the G-5 Sahel
Defence and Security Committee is set to approve the
Joint Force’s 2022-2023 workplan, which contemplates
several major operations in each of the Joint Force’s
three sectors. In recent weeks, the Joint Force has
also demonstrated its ability to quickly launch an ad
hoc operation — Operation Serres d’Aigle — in order
to respond to an imminent attack on the people of
Burkina Faso.
Nevertheless, as the Secretary-General noted in
his letter to the Security Council (S/2021/850), the
Joint Force continues to face significant challenges.
The return of foreign fighters from Libya, domestic
challenges and political uncertainty, as well as major
shortfalls in equipment and capacities, weigh heavily
on the armed and security forces of the Sahel that make
up the Joint Force.
(spoke in English)
In his letter dated 4 October, the Secretary-General
presented you, Mr. President, with the key findings
of an assessment carried out by the Secretariat, under
the lead of the Department of Peace Operations.
During that exercise, the assessment team evaluated
the operationalization of the Joint Force and possible
avenues for enhanced support.
The Joint Force is now at a crossroads, and there
is a risk that it will lose the gains that have been made.
The Secretary-General is clear, in both his letter and
his recent report (S/2021/940), that the Joint Force
remains a vital part of a collective security response to
the multiple challenges facing the region — terrorism,
weak border security and trafficking in persons,
illicit goods, weapons and drugs. It is the collective
responsibility of the international community to
support the commendable efforts of the G-5 Sahel
member States.
21-33470

12/11/2021

Peace and security in Africa

The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) has spared
no effort in supporting the Joint Force within the
framework of its mandate. In that regard, I would like
to express gratitude for the European Union’s crucial
financial support, which has made the support of
MINUSMA possible. Since the previous briefing of the
Council on the Joint Force, the Mission has undertaken
all the necessary steps to ensure that contractors can
deliver life-support consumables to all seven battalions
deployed under the Joint Force command.
However, there are limits to that support model.
It relies on donor financing, the future of which is, as
per its definition, unpredictable and cannot meet all
the Joint Force’s needs. We remain convinced that only
a dedicated support office, funded through assessed
contributions, can provide the Joint Force of the G-5
Sahel with the support that it needs and that would also
enable it to become more effective and enhance the
scope and reach of its work.
At the same time, enhanced support also requires
strengthened collaboration and continued efforts by the
G-5 Sahel States to enhance ownership and improve
institutional governance and dialogue. Setting up a
support office, should the Security Council decide to
do so, would require the full cooperation of all relevant
entities of the G-5 Sahel, including the Defence and
Security Committee and the Executive Secretariat,
and further efforts to strengthen and clarify civilian
oversight and command and control and to reinforce
mechanisms to protect human rights. In the immediate
term, the G-5 Sahel States could also capitalize on
comparative advantages and pool and share their
resources and military equipment in support of the
Joint Force. In his letter, the Secretary-General also
proposes the establishment of an advisory office, which
would provide technical and expert assistance to the
Executive Secretariat of the G-5 Sahel in a number of
cross-cutting areas, including the pooling and sharing of
resources. I would like to emphasize that the dedicated
support office is our first recommended option, and
that the advisory office is our second-best option in the
case that the Security Council is not able to assist the
support office. The advisory office could also assist
with efforts to strengthen institutional governance
within the G-5 and, as such, it would be an important
step towards the setting up of an enhanced full support
package in the medium to long term.

S/PV. 8903

Important strides have been made by G-5 Sahel
States in the prevention and mitigation of human rights
violations by members of the armed and security
forces while carrying out counter-terrorism operations,
as well as in protecting civilians through enhanced
patrolling. The establishment of the Human Rights and
Conduct and Discipline Compliance Framework and
the strict application of the human rights due diligence
policy on United Nations support to non-United
Nations security forces have been instrumental in that
regard. Of course, much still needs to be done in that
area. But, once again, the establishment of a dedicated
support office would provide an opportunity to scale
up not only logistical and operational support, but also
efforts to protect civilians, promote human rights and
ensure greater coherence among military, political and
development efforts.
Security efforts alone are not sufficient to address
the crisis in the Sahel. A holistic approach that honours
the primacy of politics and addresses governance
deficits and the root causes of poverty and exclusion is
required. It should also seek to provide opportunities
and fulfilled lives for the many young people in the
region. I would therefore like to reiterate the call of the
Secretary-General for the establishment of a dedicated
political forum, comprising representatives of the G-5
and other international and regional organizations,
such as the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the United Nations and the
European Union, as well as members of the Security
Council. Such a forum would both promote regional
ownership and foster enhanced international support,
while ensuring that the operations of the Force are
aligned with important political processes, including
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali.
Many donors and partners provide bilateral support
to the G-5 Sahel member States. Those contributions are
valuable and have helped to fill important capabilities
gaps and shortfalls. However, in the light of the serious
crisis unfolding in the region, a comprehensive and
collective approach is needed to support a collective
security initiative.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Chad,
who is participating in this meeting on behalf of the
Group of Five for the Sahel.

21-334703/17

S/PV.8903

Peace and security in Africa

Mrs. Baroud (Chad) (spoke in French): First of all,
I would like to congratulate Mexico on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of November, and thank you, Mr. President, for
the invitation extended to Chad to participate in this
important meeting devoted to the operationalization
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) Joint
Force and the situation in the region. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his relevant report
(S/2021/940) and Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peace Operations, for his
insightful briefing on the report and the situation of the
G-5 Sahel.
The security situation in the Sahel remains very
worrisome, as the Secretary-General highlighted in
his report. In addition to the terrorist threat facing
our States for several years, the lack of a solution to
the multidimensional crisis in the Sahel unfortunately
gives free rein to the proliferation of other emerging
opportunistic challenges due to existing tensions,
which persist despite the efforts of States of the region
and their partners to curb them.
The intercommunal conflicts that are multiplying
and causing loss of life in several G-5 Sahel States
are fuelled by the security crisis against a backdrop
of competition for increasingly scarce resources as a
consequence of the climate crisis, whose effects are felt
throughout the Sahel due to the region’s structural and
ongoing vulnerabilities.
The absence of coherent responses with a real
impact on the ground, based on the specificities and
vulnerabilities of the region in the context of global
climate action, as well as the unfulfilled promises to
countries in difficult situations, such as those of the G-5
Sahel, in the context of implementing the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the third International Conference on
Financing for Development, add to the disillusion and
despair of the local populations.
In addition, the lack of significant progress in
ensuring security by eradicating terrorist attacks,
despite the efforts of the G-5 Sahel States, and the
presence of external forces could undermine the action
of States and their partners and cast doubt over, or even
question, their ability to root out terrorist groups, who
will not hesitate to take advantage of the situation, if
they have not already done so.
4/17

12/11/2021

The return of mercenaries and foreign fighters
expelled from Libya is an additional element in an
already very dark picture. If such a return is not done in
an orderly manner under the aegis of the United Nations
and in close coordination with the States concerned,
within a proper disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process, the repercussions of that return
risk further destabilizing the Sahel and undermining
the efforts of the States of the region, supported by
partners, to secure and stabilize the region.
The G-5 Sahel States are therefore now more
convinced than ever that the G-5 Sahel is a unique,
relevant and beneficial initiative, emanating from the
States concerned, and remains the only framework
for action capable of providing the most appropriate
solutions to the challenges facing our subregion. The
G-5 Sahel States are also convinced that, if it has
adequate resources commensurate with those serious
challenges, the G-5 Sahel has the capacity to eradicate
the terrorist threat and bring about security and wellbeing for its people, to the benefit of the entire region
and the world. While the G-5 Sahel is an initiative of its
member States, it is also an instrument for international
peace and security, for security is indivisible. The
security of the Sahel and Africa is also the security of
the world.
The Joint Force and the G-5 Sahel economic pillar,
the Priority Investment Programme, are carefully
considered, pragmatic, realistic and feasible responses,
based on the reality on the ground and the real needs of
each country. Those instruments have been developed
through extensive consultations with and support from
international partners. The G-5 Sahel Joint Force and
its Priority Investment Programme therefore remain the
most appropriate solutions to the problems facing the
Sahel region. They require consistent support from all
friends of the Sahel to achieve their objectives, which
constitute our shared goals.
It should be noted that important progress has been
made in the context of the operationalization of the G-5
Sahel Joint Force. As for the development component,
it is awaiting the additional resources promised by
partners for the implementation of Priority Investment
Programme projects. Those projects, which are highly
anticipated by our populations, address the areas of
infrastructure, governance, resilience and security and
are necessary for improving the living conditions of the
G-5 Sahel populations.
21-33470

12/11/2021

Peace and security in Africa

As the Secretary-General notes in his report,
major challenges remain. Nevertheless, our States have
demonstrated the political will to tackle those challenges
in order to achieve the full operationalization of the
various G-5 Sahel mechanisms. That operationalization
must be conducted in accordance with the overarching
guidelines, standards and norms set out by our Heads
of State, particularly in the area of human rights, as
agreed with our partners, and to which our countries are
committed. We all share the will and ambition to pursue
our common goals at the national level and within the
framework of our organization, the G-5 Sahel.
In that regard, I would like to stress that, in order
to ensure effective governance of the G-5 Sahel and its
optimal institutional capacity, structural reforms have
been undertaken at the Executive Secretariat, formerly
known as the Permanent Secretariat. During the G-5
Sahel Summit held in N’Djamena on 15 February, the
Heads of State instructed the Ministerial Council and
the Executive Secretariat to accelerate the finalization
of the reform process in order to provide the
organization with an effective institutional structure
for the implementation of its strategy. The reform of
the Executive Secretariat has already been completed,
and there is also a process under way to revise the G-5
Sahel convention of establishment to take into account
the implications of that reform.
It is also worth recalling that a trust fund to receive
contributions to the Joint Force was established in 2018
and is fully operational, with the Executive Secretariat
bearing responsibility for its management mechanism.
That means considerable efforts are under way, with
concrete results already having been achieved in terms
of the strengthening of the governance and institutional
capacities of the G-5 Sahel. We reiterate once again
the firm commitment of the G-5 Sahel, in accordance
with the instructions of its Heads of State, to carry out
structural reforms of our organization to render it fully
effective and able to fully assume, in accordance with
the established standards, its responsibilities in the
pursuit of the G-5 Sahel’s objectives.
With regard to the implementation of the human
rights due-diligence policy, considerable efforts have
been made and progress achieved. However, challenges
remain, and our commitment to continue in our efforts
and collaboration with our partners is steadfast. We
reassure our partners that we will spare no effort to
reach the required standards. We are relying on their
support and assistance to achieve that.

S/PV. 8903

We take note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral and welcome the relevance of its analysis and
conclusions. The progress noted reflects the ongoing
efforts decided by the Heads of State. The reforms
aimed at strengthening the institutional capacities and
efficiency of the organization are being finalized. We
are counting on the support of our partners to achieve
that universally sought-after objective.
With regard to the two options presented by the
Secretary-General in his report on support for the Joint
Force (S/2021/850), the final decision lies with the
Security Council. Nonetheless, we would like to thank
the Secretary-General once again for his analysis and
conclusions. We welcome his consistent position on the
need to ensure sustainable and predictable funding for
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, which our Heads of State have
repeatedly stressed at every opportunity. We reiterate
once again our appeal in that regard to the Security
Council. The G-5 Sahel States also fully share the
Secretary-General’s conviction that a United Nations
support office would be best positioned to provide the
appropriate support that the G-5 Sahel needs.
Therefore, we reiterate our call to the Security
Council to create a support office so as to provide the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force with sustainable, predictable
and reliable funding. That would enable the Joint
Force to put an end to funding concerns and instead
focus entirely on its fundamental mission, namely, to
bring security to the region in order to create a climate
conducive to development where the populations fully
enjoy well-being and their human rights.
Finally, I would once again like to thank all bilateral
and multilateral partners for their support to the G-5
Sahel and its member States. Alongside the efforts
of the member States themselves, that support has
contributed to the progress made by the G-5 Sahel. The
continued and increased support of partners is essential
for the achievement of the G-5 Sahel’s objectives.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Sinaré.
Ms. Sinaré (spoke in French): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Mexican presidency for convening
today’s meeting on this topic.
The security crisis prevailing in the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) region has exacerbated the
significant gender inequality that already existed,
underpinned by several sociocultural beliefs and
barriers that are deeply rooted in tradition.

21-334705/17

S/PV.8903

Peace and security in Africa

In terms of gender-based violence and other harmful
practices, the Niger has the highest rate of forced and
early marriages in the world, while the rate of female
genital mutilation in Mali stands at over 80 per cent
among women and girls between 15 and 45 years
old. In Burkina Faso, women make up just 14.96 per
cent of the National Assembly, while approximately
56 per cent of children between the ages of 3 and 17
do not attend school due of a lack of security. In the
Lake Chad basin region, women suffer sexual abuse,
abduction and rape. In Mauritania, women are severely
underrepresented in senior political, administrative and
economic decision-making posts. Internally displaced
women find themselves in such difficult circumstances
that some of them have to sell themselves in order to
meet basic survival needs.
Women have therefore come together across
platforms and networks at the regional level, including
the G-5 Sahel Women’s Platform; the Network on Peace
and Security for Women in the Economic Community
of West African States Space, which I am representing
here today; the West African Network of Young Female
Leaders; and the Working Group on Women, Youth,
Peace and Security in West Africa and the Sahel.
Through those civil society organizations, action
plans are being developed to implement resolution 1325
(2000) and other resolutions in favour of women and
young people at the State level. There is also specific
work being carried out within my organization,
including a declaration made on peace and security
during the coronavirus disease pandemic in August
2020. We also conducted regional campaigns for peace
in the Sahel, which we are continuing to promote online.
In that context, we have created profiles and videos to
be disseminated on social media. I have made all of
those elements available to the Security Council in the
hope that they will be shared broadly among members.
We are seeing more interventions led by women,
who are enlisting alongside their male counterparts as
part of self-defence forces in order to help defend their
communities and their families against various forms
of violence.
But it does not stop there. We have women who
have been manipulated or convinced either by external
forces or the context to influence men and young people
to join armed movements. These women are helping the
armed movements by mobilizing and facilitating the
6/17

12/11/2021

warehousing of supplies and by providing information
to these fighters who are our enemies on the ground.
To address this, we have formulated some
recommendations that we would like to bring to the
Security Council’s attention.
First, substantial technical and financial support
for the development, dissemination, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation of the implementation
of national strategies and action plans for the
implementation of the resolutions for women and young
people must be provided.
Secondly, substantial technical, material and
financial support for women’s and young people’s civil
society organizations to implement long-term, positive
impact projects and ensure effective and sustainable
socioeconomic and political empowerment for women
and girls.
Thirdly, efforts must be undertaken to initiate,
encourage, motivate and facilitate dialogue between
armed movements and State and regional authorities in
order to silence the weapons in the Sahel region.
Fourthly, substantial technical, material and
financial support must be provided to ensure quality
education and health for all in our respective States.
Finally, we must encourage and provide substantial
technical and financial support for conflict prevention
actions in the G-5 Sahel region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Sinaré for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the various briefers for their briefings.
The situation in the Sahel continues to be of great
concern. We all saw this together during the Security
Council’s visit to Mali and the Niger. Despite the
success of operations in recent months, the civilian
population and local forces continue to pay a heavy
price in the face of terrorist groups. The 2 November
attack near Bani Bangou in the Niger caused the
death of several dozen civilians. The international
community’s resolute action and strong commitment
are more essential than ever.
The creation of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) Joint Force is an essential response by
21-33470

12/11/2021

Peace and security in Africa

the countries of the region to the threat. I would first
like to recall why France supports the establishment
of a United Nations support office for the Force. The
terrorist threat does not respect borders. Only crossborder military cooperation, such as the Joint Force, is
capable of responding to it. The latest operations have
helped to reduce the terrorists’ hold and strengthen the
bond of trust between the armed forces and the local
population. The European Union (EU) and its member
States are providing very substantial support to the
Force in terms of equipment. The EU also finances the
support mechanism implemented by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali.
The African Union authorizes the deployment
of the Force every year. West African countries have
contributed $12 million to enable it to carry out
Operation Sama 3 from March to June. This political
and financial support is substantial but insufficient.
To plan and conduct operations over time, the Joint
Force needs predictable and sustainable support, which
should be provided by a structure that has the capacity,
including financial capacity, to organize a logistical
support chain. The United Nations has this capacity. It
also has the legitimacy. But the Security Council must
take its responsibilities.
In his letter of last October (S/2021/850), the
Secretary-General again called for the establishment
of a United Nations support office for the Joint Force
funded through assessed contributions. This is also
the wish of the African States members of the Security
Council. The Secretary-General has indicated that this
structure could be operational within one year. This
office would offer solid guarantees on human rights.
Its cost would be limited, especially if it was decided
initially to concentrate support on Force-led crossborder operations alone.
France therefore calls again on the members of the
Security Council to support the establishment of this
office. Those who have reservations about this proposal
have not in fact offered any credible alternative.
Meanwhile, terrorist groups are gaining ground and
the situation is deteriorating. It is therefore time for the
Council to respond to the urgency.
Support for the Force is only one aspect of the
global response we must provide to the challenges
in the Sahel. Together with its partners, France will
pursue the approach defined at the Pau and N’Djamena

S/PV. 8903

summits. This involves complementing military efforts
with equivalent actions in terms of capacity-building,
State redeployment, development and humanitarian
aid. France is restructuring its military presence but
will remain militarily engaged for the benefit of all
Sahel countries that continue to request it, and we will
continue our consistent support for the development
of these countries. In 2020, the French Development
Agency committed more than €600 million to the Sahel.
To be effective, these actions require the full
cooperation of the States concerned. France fully
supports the efforts of the Economic Community of
West African States in Mali, including the decisions
taken at the 7 November summit. We again call
on the transitional authorities to do their utmost to
organize elections within the time frame to which they
themselves have committed.
Mr. Maman Sani (Niger) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the three African members of the Security
Council — Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia — as well
as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1), I wish
to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peace Operations, for his briefing. We
also thank the Permanent Representative of Chad,
Her Excellency Mrs. Ammo Aziza Baroud, for her
participation in today’s briefing on behalf of the current
Chair of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), as
well as Ms. Fatimata Ouilma Sinaré for her briefing.
Our recent trip to the Sahel demonstrated the
importance of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force and its potential
to wean the region from armed terrorist groups, which,
without a robust response, will create a new global
epicentre of instability and humanitarian emergencies.
Civilians are the primary victims of this violence. The
latest attack occurred on 2 November in western Niger.
The A3+1 condemns this cowardly and barbaric attack
on defenceless civilians and extends its condolences to
the people and the Government of the Niger.
In the light of that situation, we welcome the increase
in the number and pace of operations undertaken by
the Joint Force and the operationalization of its police
component. The execution of operations code-named
Sama 3 and Serres d’Aigle is an encouraging illustration
in that regard.
Given this state of affairs, the downsizing of the
Barkhane force and the Chadian contingent in the
central sector, and the possible flow of combatants and
small arms owing to the withdrawal of foreign fighters

21-334707/17

S/PV.8903

Peace and security in Africa

from the Libyan theatre, make it even more urgent
that the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), and the allied international
force fill the gaps. Without this, the atrocities against
civilians will continue and intensify.
The A3+1 takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral under consideration (S/2021/940) and his
letter dated 4 October 2021 on options for supporting
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force (S/2021/850). We fully share
the Secretary-General’s conviction that the creation
of a United Nations support office dedicated to the
G-5 Sahel Joint force remains the most appropriate
option. It has the advantage of providing the Force
with predictable funding, strengthening its operational
planning capacity and providing it with a human rights
protection framework. The need for action on this
proposal is urgent. There is no time for the international
community to procrastinate on providing support
options to the G-5 Sahel countries.
The A3+1 welcomes the fruitful exchanges that
the members of the Security Council had with the
authorities and the Commander of the G-5 Sahel Force
during their recent visit to Mali and the Niger. We hope
that the lessons learned from those meetings will have
helped to dispel the few reservations expressed by some
delegations about the option of establishing the support
office dedicated to the Joint Force.
The A3+1 welcome the crucial support provided
by MINUSMA to the Joint Force, including in Mali, in
the context of the stabilization and gradual restoration
of the authority of the State and the integrity of its
territory, particularly in the centre and the north of
the country.
With respect to the implementation of the
humanitarian rights compliance framework, the
significant progress made by the Joint Force in
developing and implementing the human rights and
international humanitarian law compliance framework
is to be commended, including the establishment of the
Civilian Casualty and Incident Tracking and Analysis
Cell and the integration of provost components into
all combatant units of the Joint Force, as noted by the
Secretary-General in his report. In that regard, the
A3+1 commends the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their support to the
Force in this area.
8/17

12/11/2021

Given the complexity of the challenges faced by
Sahelian States, the response to insecurity must not
be only military force; it must be holistic. We believe
it is important that Mali make clear progress in its
transition to civilian rule. The success of that transition
is crucially important to overcoming the threat of
terrorist groups.
Democratic legitimacy, the effective and fair
management of diversity and delivering local
development projects are key aspects, among others,
to restoring security to the Sahel. A coherent and
coordinated implementation of United Nations system
interventions, in support of national Governments’
efforts in those areas, will be critical for success. We
therefore call on all development partners of the G-5
Sahel countries to keep their commitment to fill the
funding gap of the security and development strategy
and its Priority Investment Programme, which focuses
on governance, resilience, security and infrastructure.
Owing to the combined effects of insecurity and
climate change, the humanitarian situation in the
Sahel has also deteriorated, with just under 30 million
people in need of protection according to the United
Nations. Intensified efforts to address the needs of
those vulnerable people are necessary if we are to avoid
creating a breeding ground for the recruitment of youth
by armed terrorist groups.
In conclusion, and as stated by the SecretaryGeneral in his most recent report on the issue,
“[t]he international community has a moral
obligation and shared responsibility to support
the member States of the G-5 Sahel in their
commendable efforts to bring peace and sustainable
development to the region” (S/2020/1074, para. 56).
They have shown their political will and commitment
by establishing the Joint Force to combat this terrorist
threat, which is of concern to all humankind.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary General JeanPierre Lacroix for his briefing on developments in the
region. We also thank the representative of the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) for
his briefing.
Russia agrees that, unfortunately, the situation in
the Sahel during the reporting period did not only not
improved, but in many ways deteriorated. Terrorist
activity and inter-ethnic and intercommunal conflict
21-33470

12/11/2021

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8903

increased again, which has had a very negative impact
on the security situation in the region. Fighters have
killed dozens of military personnel and hundreds of
civilians. Those are horrifying figures.

terrorism in the Sahelo-Saharan region. We trust that
the initiative of the African Union to develop, together
with regional organizations, an African standing force
in the Sahel will bear fruit.

The humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate.
The number of refugees and internally displaced
persons has increased, which creates challenges for
food security. All of that makes it imperative for States
in the region to take urgent steps to address acute
socioeconomic problems and strengthen their State
institutions and protect human rights. If they fail to
do so, the conditions for radicalizing the population,
including the youth, will only increase.

Russia is closely following the development of the
situation in the region. Military-technical assistance is
being provided to a number of countries, and military
and police personnel are being trained. We intend to
continue that work.

We support the efforts of the G-5 Sahel States
to deploy the Joint Force to combat terrorism and
organized crime, which has already become an
important part of regional security. We note with
satisfaction the counter-terrorist operations by the
Joint Force during the reporting period. We also note
the need for further coordination within the Joint Force
itself and with the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and other
military presence in the region.
It is clear that the full functioning of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force depends on two important factors: ensuring
its stable and predictable funding and providing
appropriate transport and logistical support. In that
connection, we support the assistance provided to the
Joint Force by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, in accordance
with its mandate set out in resolution 2584 (2021). At the
same time, we recognize that the difficult conditions
on the ground, asymmetrical challenges, long distances
and communication difficulties require more sustained
international support to the Force. In that regard, we
stand ready to hold a substantive discussion in the
Security Council on the proposals in the October letter
of the Secretary-General regarding increased assistance
to the G-5 Sahel Force through the United Nations. Both
options — either the creation of a small advisory office
at the Joint Force secretariat or the creation of a fullfledged support office — require a clear understanding
of their timing and feasibility, effectiveness, the costs
involved and the sources of funding. We look forward
to further dialogue with our partners on those issues.
On the whole, we are convinced of the importance
of further coordinated steps by Africans and the
international community to counter the scourge of

Mr. Ravindran (India): I would like to thank the
Under-Secretary-General for the Department of Peace
Operations, Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for his briefing today.
I also thank the Permanent Representative of Chad for
presenting the views of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel). The Chadian contingent has been playing
a key role in the G-5 Sahel, and we value the inputs
provided on the practical challenges that the G-5 Sahel
is facing on the ground. I also thank Ms. Fatimata
Ouilma Sinaré for her insights.
The security situation in the G-5 Sahel countries,
particularly in Mali and the Liptako-Gourma tri-border
area shared by Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger,
continues to be a matter of serious concern. Attacks by
terrorists and armed groups have increased in recent
months. The accounted civilian toll from those attacks
in the Niger alone is estimated to have surpassed 600.
Earlier this month, 69 people were killed in the western
region of Tillabéri in the Niger. In June, more than 100
people were killed in a village in Burkina Faso.
The recent report of the Secretary-General on
the threat caused by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, also known as Da’esh (S/2021/682), also
highlighted that terrorism in Africa continues to expand
in strength and in its area of control. We heard the same
from Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali, two weeks ago in the Council’s meeting on
the situation in Mali (see S/PV.8893). I would like to
recall the Council’s recent visit to Mali and the Niger
and the interactions with the leadership and various
stakeholders, who unequivocally mentioned that
addressing the threat of terrorism is a precondition
for achieving sustainable peace in the Sahel region.
Countering terrorism in the Sahel is not just the
responsibility of the countries of the region, it is an
obligation of the international community as well.

21-334709/17

S/PV.8903

Peace and security in Africa

For the past three years, the Council has been
grappling with the issue of support to regional security
initiatives such as the Joint Force of G-5 Sahel and
has remained divided on the ways and modalities to
support regional security initiatives. Unfortunately, the
Council’s indecisiveness has allowed terrorist groups to
expand their area of influence.
The threat of terrorism in the Sahel is real. The
countries of the Sahel region look to the Security
Council to enable them to more effectively fight
terrorist groups.
In that regard, I would like to make three points.
First, we all acknowledge that the security
situation in the Sahel has become more complex and
volatile in the recent years. The role of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) continues to be
critical in supplementing the efforts of the Malian
authorities to bring stability to the volatile northern
and central regions of the country. At the same time,
the operational support provided by MINUSMA to the
Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel has proved insufficient.
It is therefore important that traditional peacekeeping
be complemented by regional operations to neutralize
terrorist groups and entities.
Secondly, the Council consistently reiterates its
support for African solutions to African issues. The
Council must walk the talk and support the Joint Force
of the G-5 Sahel, including by providing the Joint
Force the necessary financial support through United
Nations-assessed contributions.
Thirdly, the Council has discussed how to
best support the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel. We
have witnessed the limitations of the logistical
support MINUSMA can provide. That approach has
burdened MINUSMA, thus adversely affecting the
implementation of its core tasks. The Secretary-General
is now presenting two proposals — first, an advisory
office to the G-5 Sahel Executive Secretariat and,
secondly, a dedicated United Nations support office
in the Sahel, a suggestion that the Secretary-General
has been making for the past few years. We need to
seriously look into both of those options.
In conclusion, the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel is
the best hope for the long-term regional ownership of
the maintenance of peace and security in the vast Sahel
region. The Joint Force needs sustainable, predictable
10/17

12/11/2021

and adequate support to deal with terrorist and armed
groups. The countries of the Sahel have shown their
resolve and determination to take on terrorism. We need
to support them unequivocally. Failure to do so could
result in serious political and security implications in
the region and beyond.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank the briefers for their
insights, not least those of our civil society briefer,
Ms. Fatimata Ouilma Sinaré. Let me again express
Norway’s deep concern about developments in Mali,
which affect not only the country, but also the region
and regional cooperation efforts. We continue to
strongly support the leadership and peace diplomacy of
the Economic Community of West African States.
Let me also express our solidarity with our
colleagues from the Niger after the horrific attacks
last week. That is just the latest example of a deeply
disturbing security and humanitarian situation in
the Sahel. We also know that violent armed groups
primarily operate in border areas in order to evade
accountability. That is alarming as it poses the risk of
this menace spreading even farther.
Given the concerning context, the Council spent
the recent trip to the Sahel listening for solutions. We
understand the need for flexibility, sustainability and
predictability for the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel. Moreover, as a regional response to regional
challenges, the Joint Force merits our attention and
support. It is for those reasons that Norway supports the
Secretary-General’s proposal of a support office for the
Joint Force. We look forward to discussing that further,
including how a support office could best supplement
other and future bilateral and multilateral support.
We know that the Joint Force operates in a
challenging context. Nevertheless, any support that
involves the United Nations must fully comply with the
United Nations due diligence policy. Military operations
must uphold their obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Norway remains deeply concerned about attacks
against civilians, including allegations of sexual violence
against women and girls, reportedly also committed by
members of the Joint Force. It is commendable that some
such perpetrators have been prosecuted or removed
from their positions. We encourage the scaling up of
efforts to monitor and ensure accountability in order to
prevent such incidents in the first place. The Force must
become more aware of the impact of their operations
21-33470

12/11/2021

Peace and security in Africa

on civilians and to prevent civilian harm. To that end,
Norway continues to support the implementation of
the compliance framework of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
Lastly, but importantly, military and security
measures alone will never be enough to ensure stability
and sustainable development in the Sahel region. As
Norwegian author Olav Duun once put it: “evil cannot
be killed with an axe”. Security cannot be the goal;
it is merely a means to an end. We need to maintain
a holistic focus on good governance, human rights,
climate change adaptation and basic services. In the
end, those are the things that matter for people in their
daily lives.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): I thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix and Ms. Sinaré for their
briefings, as well as the Permanent Representative of
Chad for setting out her view.
It is clear again today that violence is spreading.
Civilians are continuing to suffer and humanitarian
access is becoming even more challenging amid
growing political uncertainty in Mali and Chad, as well
as worrying trends in regional cooperation.
As others have said, just last week, we again saw
terrorist incidents in the Niger’s Tillabéri region,
leading to a significant loss of life. We extend our
sincere condolences to the families of the victims in the
Niger and to all of those living in conflict zones across
the Sahel.
As I stated when the Council last discussed the
Sahel in May (see S/2021/484), it is evident that any
military response to the problems of insecurity in
the region needs to be integrated into broader efforts
to improve governance and, indeed, to address the
socioeconomic challenges and underrepresentation and
mistreatment of women, as set out so clearly today by
Ms. Sinaré. The key to that in Mali is a timely democratic
transition, as the Council discussed at the end of
October (see S/PV.8893). During the visit to the region
last month, the Council had the opportunity to hear
first-hand about the engagement of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) with the Malian transitional
authorities in order to encourage their development
of a strategy for the protection of civilians in central
Mali. The Council also heard about the Niger’s efforts
to address insecurity and the impact of climate change
and to support access to education, especially for girls.

S/PV. 8903

The United Kingdom will support the work of the
Niger’s High Authority for the Consolidation of Peace,
aimed at improving the resilience of local populations
in the tri-border area and promoting dialogue between
communities and State representatives in order to
help resolve disputes. We also support and encourage
Government
engagement
with
humanitarian,
stabilization and development partners in relation to
internally displaced persons and refugee returns in
order to ensure that returns are safe and sustainable.
There can be no sustainable peace and security
in the Sahel without the protection of human rights
and compliance with international humanitarian law.
We continue to urge all Governments to investigate
allegations of human rights violations and abuses
when they arise, to prosecute those responsible and
to ensure respect for international human rights
standards and judicial processes in the course of
counter-terrorism operations. In that regard, we
welcome the announcement by the Malian authorities
of the three cases brought before the military tribunal
in Bamako this month. It is an important step forward
in the fight against impunity.
We recognize the efforts of the G-5 Sahel nations
and their partners to address security concerns and
tackle cross-border threats. We support the aims of the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force as a key part of the solution to the
challenges in the Sahel. We have noted the SecretaryGeneral’s letter of October (S/2021/850) regarding
alternative support models for the Joint Force, which
we had hoped would propose options for bilateral and
multilateral support mechanisms other than just the
United Nations. As we have consistently said, we have a
fundamental concern with United Nations involvement
in offensive, national counter-terrorism operations. We
therefore do not believe that the United Nations is the
right vehicle to provide durable support to the Joint
Force. But we stand ready to continue to engage with
partners to discuss possible alternative solutions that
would enable the Joint Force to build its own capacities
towards a self-sustaining basis over time. I reiterate
that that is only a part of the solution. In parallel with
that, there needs to be sustained effort on human rights
compliance and investment in broader political efforts
to address the underlying causes of conflict.
In conclusion, we know the gravity of the challenges
faced by the G-5 Sahel countries. For our part, we are
proud to be supporting efforts to stabilize the region,
including through our deployment in MINUSMA. We

21-3347011/17

S/PV.8903

Peace and security in Africa

remain committed to helping to address the Sahel’s
challenges, not only militarily, but also through a greater
focus on stabilization, governance and development.
We look forward to continuing constructive discussions
with all partners in the interests of the long-term peace,
stability and development of the region.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank the briefers for
their overviews on the latest developments in the Sahel
region and on the operationalization of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) Joint Force.
Estonia continues to be extremely concerned about
the volatile and deteriorating security situation in the
Sahel region despite ongoing efforts by the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force and the international security forces. The
most affected by that instability are civilians. Estonia
condemns in the strongest terms all attacks against
civilians, including the recent attack in the Niger’s
Tillabéri region, which left 69 people dead.
Restoring an effective and credible State presence
across the territories of the States of the region is a
key element in ensuring the protection of civilians.
It is important to continue efforts to re-establish
not only the security presence, but also police and
judicial institutions.
The fight against terrorism and violent extremism
in the Sahel can succeed only if it is a truly joint effort
by the national, regional and international security
forces. Estonia commends the work of the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States in supporting the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. We are
encouraged by the efforts of G-5 Sahel Joint Force
to enhance its internal coordination, and we call for
further concrete steps to clarify the command lines and
share relevant information in a more effective manner.
The question of how to organize effective
international support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
remains at the centre of our discussions. It is positive
that the European Union’s financial support has
allowed the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
to provide operational and logistical support to the
Joint Force. Moreover, Estonia fully acknowledges
calls by the region’s States to ensure more predictable
and sustainable funding for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
We have taken note of the support options presented
in the Secretary-General’s letter of 8 October
(S/2021/850), including the proposed dedicated United
Nations support office for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
12/17

12/11/2021

We believe that the time is ripe for the Security Council
to begin considerations on how to best mandate that
support model.
An integral part of all counter-terrorist efforts is
compliance with the human rights and international
humanitarian law principles. Estonia remains
concerned about the continued reports of human
rights violations allegedly committed by the security
forces during counter-terrorist activities. While we
welcome the timely announcements of the conduct of
investigations by the Joint Force and the region’s States,
we strongly encourage that all such investigations
be conducted thoroughly and fully. It is essential to
investigate all human rights violations and abuses and
to hold the perpetrators, regardless of their status,
fully accountable.
The Sahel region faces a number of challenges.
While military efforts are often at the forefront, it
is crucial to address the underlying issues that often
exacerbate the existing grievances. We must continue to
take into account the negative effects of climate change
in the Sahel. There needs to be a constant focus on the
empowerment of women to ensure their full, equal
and meaningful participation in all aspects of society.
In that connection, we are grateful for the testimony
provided by Ms. Fatimata Sinaré earlier in the meeting.
Finally, I would like to reiterate Estonia’s
commitment to achieving security and stability in
the Sahel region. We will continue our contributions
through personnel to MINUSMA, the French-led
Operation Barkhane, the Task Force Takuba and the
European Union (EU) Training Mission in Mali and
financial support to the EU Trust Fund for Africa.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland) (spoke in French):
I would like to begin by reiterating the expression of
condolences by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Ireland to the victims and families who were affected
by the heinous attack in the Niger last week. That
incident highlights the urgent need for enhanced efforts
to protect civilians across the Sahel. I would like to
thank Mr. Lacroix and Ms. Sinaré for their briefings
this morning. I particularly welcome the presence of
Ambassador Baroud at this meeting.
Regional cooperation is essential to achieving
peace and security in the Sahel. We recognize the
continued efforts of the States of the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) in promoting peace and security
in the region, supported by contributions from the
21-33470

12/11/2021

Peace and security in Africa

European Union. We take note of reports of improved
protection of civilians in the cross-border region. Given
the high number of civilian deaths, we encourage
further work in that regard. We welcome the options
proposed by the Secretary-General to support the G-5
Sahel Joint Force. The sustainability of the Joint Force
depends on sustainable and predictable funding. We
look forward to working constructively in the Council
to find a solution. In that regard, the voices of the G-5
Sahel member States are vital. A shared vision for the
future of the Sahel, and of the Joint Force itself, is an
integral part of meaningful progress.
(spoke in English)
Military action alone will never be enough
to end insecurity in the Sahel. The root causes of
instability must be addressed through a holistic and
integrated approach.
During the Security Council’s recent visit to the
region, we met with political and civil society leaders
and heard first-hand how conflict is exacerbating
the humanitarian crisis in the Sahel. That crisis is
compounded by multiple challenges, including climate
change and food insecurity. We know that millions of
ordinary Sahelians have been forced to flee their homes.
Security incidents, attacks and kidnappings are a tragic
daily reality for civilians in the region. Access to basic
social services, livelihoods and assistance remains a
critical challenge.
As we heard today in Ms. Sinaré’s eloquent
testimony, women in the Sahel face many difficult
challenges, from underrepresentation at the official and
political levels to the ongoing and increasing risks of
sexual and gender-based violence. We salute the efforts
of civil society and, indeed, the Economic Community
of West African States in working to address such
challenges, which we know are of constant and
daily concern.
We also raise additional concern in relation to
the closure of schools, which undermines educational
opportunities for an entire generation of children in
the region. In particular and depressingly, a whole
generation of young girls are being deprived of the
opportunities they need so as to grow into the educated
young women that Ms. Sinaré spoke of who can support
their societies, not just at the community level but also
at higher and official levels, in addressing challenges.

S/PV. 8903

A strategically focused and operationally
effective G-5 Sahel Joint Force has a key role to play.
Protection of civilians, respect for the rule of law,
human rights and international humanitarian law are
essential to achieving sustainable peace. Ensuring
and demonstrating the safety of civilians is vital in
rebuilding trust between populations and national
and regional security forces. The greater inclusion of
women, including at senior levels, can significantly
enhance the effectiveness of those operations. More
must be done to improve women’s representation within
the Joint Force at all levels.
We welcome progress made by the Joint Force
in integrating human rights into its structures and
operations. If not underpinned by human rights, counterterrorism and peacebuilding efforts are ineffective
at best and counterproductive at worst. I commend
the G-5 Sahel member States for their efforts in that
regard and thank the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights for its support.
That work is imperative to the future of the Force;
so, too, is accountability. We encourage the Force to
increase efforts to gather and share information on the
impact of operations and, crucially, to differentiate
national operations from those of the Joint Force.
Adherence to the human rights due diligence policy is
vital. The continued vigilance of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) in that regard is also welcome.
Ireland remains deeply committed to supporting the
countries of the Sahel in in their efforts. In addition to
our troop contribution to MINUSMA, we will continue
to work bilaterally, through the European Union and
the United Nations, and with partners across the region
to pursue peace and security.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing. I
also listened carefully to Ms. Sinaré’s statement and
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of Chad at this meeting.
According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2021/940), the security situation in the Sahel region
is turbulent, plagued by ever-spreading terrorist forces,
where frequent attacks target countries such as Burkina
Faso, Mali and the Niger. A Security Council delegation
visited Mali and the Niger last month, through which
it was able to further deepen its understanding of the
grim security situation in the region.

21-3347013/17

S/PV.8903

Peace and security in Africa

In recent years, the five Sahelian countries have
proactively strengthened themselves by joining hands
to deepen cooperation and launch several rounds of
counter-terrorism operations, which have played an
important role in eliminating the influence of terrorism
and maintaining stability and security in the region.
China wishes to register its appreciation in that regard.
As the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) faces considerable difficulties in terms of
logistics support, China supports the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) to continuously improve its
logistical support to the Joint Force. According to the
Joint Force’s military action plan, MINUSMA should
formulate corresponding logistics support programme
to secure the needs of the Joint Force as far as possible.
China encourages the European Union to increase
its financial support to the Joint Force. Regarding the
reorganization and downsizing of military deployments
by the relevant countries, it is necessary to strengthen
communication with the countries of the region so as to
avoid the emergence of a security vacuum.
China attaches great importance to the concerns of
the countries of the region regarding funding issues.
China supports the Joint Force in obtaining sustainable
and predictable financial support, as well as in finding
a solution acceptable to all parties as soon as possible
that not only suits the reality of the region and meets
the needs of the Joint Force, but also takes into account
the concerns of all stakeholders. China will continue
to provide financial and material support to the Joint
Force through bilateral channels.
Regional
counter-terrorism
actions
cannot
be separated from an enabling external political
environment. Mali occupies an important position
in cooperation on regional counter-terrorism. The
international community should provide constructive
support for Mali’s political transition while encouraging
all Malian parties to resolve their difficulties through
dialogue; promote preparations for the general elections
in line with the reality of the situation in Mali and
the wishes of the Malian people; and maintain Mali’s
political stability.
The withdrawal of foreign fighters from Libya
should be conducted in an organized and orderly
manner. In that process, all parties concerned should
strengthen information exchange and coordinate their
actions with countries in the Sahel region to prevent
14/17

12/11/2021

the withdrawal from exerting any negative impact on
the situation in the region. As is highlight in the report
of the Secretary-General, the weakening of the State
authority and the displacement of the population in the
region created opportunities for terrorist forces to gain
strength and ground.
The international community should fully realize
that political and military means alone cannot solve
the security challenges facing the Sahel region. It
should focus on helping the countries of the region
to restore State authority; enhance the capacity of
Governments; achieve sustainable development;
enhance social inclusion and cohesion; solve the root
causes of terrorism and extremism; and promote peace
through development.
At the end of this month, China and African
countries will jointly hold the eighth ministerial meeting
of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation. Through
that meeting, China stands ready to increase its support
to the countries of the region in such areas as fighting
the coronavirus disease, post-epidemic reconstruction,
trade and investment, poverty reduction, development
and tackling climate change
China stands ready and willing to work with the
international community to contribute to the long-term
stability of the Sahel region.
Mrs. Tra Phuong Nguyen (Viet Nam): I thank all
the briefers for their insightful briefings and I appreciate
the presence of the Permanent Representative of Chad
at our meeting today.
On the political and security situation, we note
with concern the political incidents in certain areas of
the Sahel region in the past six months. Therefore, we
call on all stakeholders in the countries of the Sahel,
including Mali and Guinea, to exercise utmost restraint
and promote reconciliation through dialogue and
consultation. We stress the need to conclude transitions
in a timely and constructive manner and to ensure the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women and
young people in that process.
The security situation remains of great concern
in the region, especially on the borders between
Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger, where terrorism,
intercommunal violence, extremism and transnational
organized crime are on the rise and threaten the
lives and livelihoods of the people. We condemn all
attacks against civilians, peacekeepers and defence
21-33470

12/11/2021

Peace and security in Africa

and security forces in the regions, including the recent
incident in the Niger.
We support greater commitment to tackling those
challenges. We therefore join other States in reiterating
the importance of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5)
Joint Force’s efforts aimed at combating terrorism and
maintaining peace, security and stability in the region.
The States’ roles require further cooperation and
adequate resources from the United Nations, regional
organizations and the international community, so that
the Joint Force can fulfil its mandate. Furthermore, we
stress the urgent need for the safety of peacekeepers,
including those working for the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). The rise of extremist attacks and
deteriorating security have shown how dangerous the
Mission’s working environment is today.
On humanitarian issues, food insecurity, climate
change, the restricted movement of civilians, denial
of essential services, displacement, intercommunal
conflicts and the coronavirus disease pandemic, inter
alia, have added layers of complexity to the region.
Almost 29 million Sahelians — an increase of 5 million
in comparison to last year — are now in need of
assistance and protection.
In Mali, the pain that local people suffer as a
result of violence and killing is indescribable. It is
therefore compulsory to remove all restrictions of
civilian movements, provide unhindered access for
humanitarian aid and ensure funding and essential
services for vulnerable people in the region. All parties
must comply with international human rights law and
international humanitarian law and protect civilians,
especially women and children.
Finally, we call for a holistic approach to security,
humanitarian and sociodevelopment challenges in
the Sahel, including measures to address the impacts
of climate change. We reiterate our call for greater
focus on social services and sustainable economic
development, as well as the inclusion of women and
youth in those areas.
We emphasize the need for the African Union, the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel,
the Economic Community of West African States,
MINUSMA, and the European Union to collaborate
with the Joint Force in addressing the aforementioned
challenges and promote peace, security and stability in
the region.

S/PV. 8903

Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, Ambassador Baroud
and Ms. Sinaré, for their briefings. It is especially
important that the Security Council continues to hear
from civil society representatives like Ms. Sinaré, so
we thank her.
Like other Council members, the United States is
alarmed by rising violent extremism, intercommunal
violence, the growing humanitarian needs and certain
cases of democratic backsliding in the Sahel. The tragic
attack in the Niger that killed 69 civilians only deepens
that alarm. We join others in offering our condolences
to the delegation of the Niger and to the families of
those who lost loved ones in this horrific attack.
On behalf of my delegation, I want to begin by
thanking our fellow Council members — the Niger,
Kenya and France — for organizing such a successful
Security Council visit to Mali and the Niger. In Mali,
most of us sent a strong message that elections must
occur according to the time frame agreed upon by the
transitional Government and the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), with elections to
be held on 27 February 2022, as previously announced.
In the Niger, the delegation was warmly welcomed by
the highest levels of leadership, including the President,
the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister, and my
delegation looks forward to meeting the President
again under the Niger’s Security Council presidency
next month.
The United States welcomes efforts aimed at
supporting the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel),
to advance stability and development in the region.
We are committed to continuing our strong bilateral
partnership with States members of the G-5 Sahel by
providing equipment, training and advisory support for
critical capability gaps. Reflecting this commitment,
the United States has, since 2017, obligated more than
$588 million to provide security assistance and other
support for countering violent extremism to the five
countries of the G-5 Sahel. We believe this assistance
has helped to strengthen capacity and effectiveness
while supporting efforts to address and protect human
rights. We ask partners to honour their pledges to
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, as well as the individual
militaries, and join us in finding ways to do more with
key Sahelian partners.
One of the main messages the Council took away
from the trip to the region is that G-5 Sahel countries

21-3347015/17

S/PV.8903

Peace and security in Africa

need increased international support. Specifically, the
G-5 Sahel countries have requested help with education,
health, addressing climate change and bilateral security
assistance. We look forward to working with our fellow
Council members to identify additional bilateral and
non-United Nations multilateral options to fill the
critical gaps. Let me be clear: the United States continues
to believe that the United Nations — regardless of the
mechanism — is not an appropriate vehicle to provide
logistical support to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. The
Joint Force is a coalition of security forces mandated
to conduct counter-terrorism operations primarily
within their own borders. It is not a multilateral force
on foreign soil mandated as a peace operation.
Our focus at the Security Council must remain
squarely on political solutions and tying security
responses to effective political strategies. Our
collective efforts in the Sahel must go beyond a military
response, as others have noted, and address problems
with governance.
We continue to support the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) and its mission goals of
supporting Malian authorities in holding elections on
time, implementing the Algiers accord and protecting
civilians. MINUSMA’s principles, goals and exit
strategy are not aligned with an offensive, counterterrorism-mandated operation such as the Joint Force,
nor should they be. The path to lasting stability also lies
in pursuing justice and accountability for human rights
violations and abuses through legitimate efforts to
prevent and investigate such incidents. The G-5 Sahel
Joint Force must fully implement its human rights and
international humanitarian law compliance framework,
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights needs the right resources to this end.
Peaceful and timely transitions of power to
democratically elected Governments in Mali and Chad
are essential to long-term prosperity and stability in
the region. Democratic transitions will also allow
many Governments to resume bilateral and regional
support currently restricted because of military coups.
In Mali, we support the leadership of ECOWAS on the
political transition. We welcome the Security Council’s
continued support for the decision by ECOWAS stating
that the transitional Government in Mali is conditioned
on holding presidential and legislative elections,
as reaffirmed through the Security Council press
statement agreed on 4 November (SC/14687).
16/17

12/11/2021

We also welcome the statement issued by the Heads
of State and Government of ECOWAS on 7 November
regarding the situations in Mali and Guinea. We
are concerned that the transitional Government in
Mali did not present a timetable to ECOWAS by the
end of October, as it had committed to doing. We
call on the transitional Government to publicize an
election timetable to ensure inclusive and transparent
processes in preparing for and holding free and fair
elections, including the full, effective and meaningful
participation of women and youth.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Mexico.
I of course thank the other members of the Council,
Under-Secretary-General LaCroix, the Permanent
Representative of Chad and Ms. Sinaré, for their
briefings this morning.
The Security Council’s visit to the region allowed
us to see the scale of the challenges it faces. At the same
time, it gave us the opportunity to see the progress
that can be achieved when international cooperation
is combined with strong governance and democratic
legitimacy, as is the case in the Niger. It is undeniable
that insecurity is its main problem, fuelled by the
growing activity of terrorist groups and confrontations
between various communities over access to resources,
among other problems.
We deplore the increase in the frequency and
lethality of terrorist attacks in the tri-border area, and I
take this opportunity to express our condolences to the
Representative of the Niger for the victims of the 2 and
4 November attacks in the Tillabéri region.
Mexico is convinced that this security problem
requires much more than a military response. We agree
with the various points made at this and past meetings
on the need to address the root causes of the conflicts in
the Sahel. Ms. Sinaré’s briefing has also shown us the
importance of including women as agents of change.
We note with concern that initiatives to strengthen
the civilian component of the regional strategy have
not made significant progress. In that context, my
delegation wishes to highlight two issues.
First, Mexico takes note of the Secretary-General’s
proposals to provide predictable and sustained
support to the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel. In that regard, my country reiterates its
21-33470

12/11/2021

Peace and security in Africa

readiness to participate constructively in discussions
to respond to the legitimate needs of the countries of
the region and particularly, those of the Joint Force.
We do not understand the reservations expressed in
that connection. If all terrorist acts indeed threats to
international peace and security, as established in
resolutions 1368 (2001) and 1373 (2001), the United
Nations has a role to play in addition to bilateral efforts.
Mexico insists that, in any future negotiation on
this issue, United Nations support for the Joint Force
must be contingent upon political assurances from the
Member States, in return, with two objectives.
First, any assistance lent to the Joint Force must
be utilized in a manner that is fully compliant with
the Charter of the United Nations, international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
It is critical that the members of the Joint Force receive
training in that regard, as we indicated during the
Council’s visit to the Niger. The same is true for the
members of mechanisms that investigate and ensure
accountability when there are allegations of human
rights violations.
Furthermore, it is essential that the members of the
Joint Force take the necessary political and operational
decisions to strengthen the Force’s multinational
character and align the level of commitment of its
members in order to achieve common objectives.
Moreover, any Council decision concerning the
Joint Force should consider the experience of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali in providing logistical support to

S/PV. 8903

the Joint Force so as to anticipate problems in the
implementation of the Force’s mandate.
The second point I wish to highlight is the need
to give priority support to reforms that contribute to
improving governance in the countries of the region.
For international cooperation in the Sahel to bear
fruit — whether in terms of security or to promote an
ambitious peacebuilding and democratic governance
agenda — the political commitment of national
Governments is indispensable.
Mexico also considers it essential to support the
efforts of the Peacebuilding Commission and the Special
Coordinator for Development in the Sahel to improve
the living conditions of the population. Coordination
among the various actors operating in the Sahel is vital
if we are to reach the 29 million people in the area who
are in need of some kind of assistance or protection.
Finally, my country calls on Mali and Chad to
commit to the restoration of constitutional order, in
accordance with their commitments to the international
community. The Security Council, for its part, must
continue to support the efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States, particularly
in Mali.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

21-3347017/17
