S/PV.7776

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7776th meeting

Friday, 23 September 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. McCully/Van Bohemen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(New Zealand)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Badr
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ndiaye
Mr. Ybañez
Mr. Klimkin/Mr. Fesko
Mr. Sharma
Mr. Kerry
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-29685 (E)
*1629685*

S/PV.7776

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Nuclear non-proliferation and
nuclear disarmament
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Foreign Ministers and other representatives present in
the Security Council Chamber. Their presence today
underscores the importance of the subject matter under
discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Andorra, Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cabo
Verde, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Finland, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Israel,
Italy, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, the
Federated States of Micronesia, Monaco, Mongolia,
Morocco, the Netherlands, Norway, Palau, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden and Turkey to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
to participate in this meeting: Mr. Kim Won-soo,
Under Secretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, and Mr. Lassina Zerbo, Executive
Secretary of the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2016/800, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Andorra, Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
the Federated States of Micronesia, Monaco, Mongolia,
Morocco, the Netherlands, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America.
2/14

23/09/2016

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. John Kerry,
Secretary of State of the United States of America.
Mr. Kerry (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. Twenty
years ago, President Bill Clinton entered the General
Assembly with a pen in hand, the pen that he had used
to sign the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
(CTBT), the same pen used by President John F.
Kennedy decades earlier to bring the Limited Test-Ban
Treaty into life. At the time, President Clinton declared
the Treaty would be yet another essential step towards a
century in which the roles and risks of nuclear weapons
could be further reduced and ultimately eliminated.
Today, our countries have an opportunity to vote
once again to sign onto and to reaffirm the CTBT’s
promise of a safer, more secure and more peaceful
planet. The draft resolution (S/2016/800) that we have
an opportunity to adopt this morning is a strong and
necessary statement of our principles and promises
as a global community. It reaffirms the de facto
norm — I emphasize, a norm — in the world today
against nuclear testing. It acknowledges the legitimate
interests of States that fully and faithfully renounce
nuclear weapons to receive assurances against the
use of the threat of the use of nuclear weapons, and
that those assurances will be upheld. It reinforces the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and its disarmament goals. It builds support for the
international efforts to strengthen verification and
monitoring systems. And it encourages nations to make
the necessary preparations for the day when the Treaty
enters into force.
I want to emphasize that the draft resolution does
not impose a legal prohibition on testing, nor does
it compel any Government to adopt new reporting
requirements. But it does reinforce the core purposes
and objectives of the CTBT itself, that is, to diminish
our reliance on nuclear devices, to reduce competition
among nuclear Powers and to promote responsible
disarmament.
Next month in Reykjavik, the thirtieth anniversary
of the Gorbachev-Reagan meeting will be celebrated
and remembered, and I want everybody to think about
where we were. I grew up in a world of hiding under
my desk in school and being told to take cover and
train for the possibility of a nuclear war — none of
16-29685

23/09/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7776

which would have done any good, as we know. I can
remember years in the Senate when I wanted to be on
the arms control observer group, with luminaries such
as Pat Moynihan and Ted Kennedy and John Warner
and Sam Nunn, people who worked a lifetime to move
towards responsible efforts here. Throughout the years,
we watched as the United States and the former Soviet
Union engaged in the arms race — tit for tat, each
doing something that led the other to feel they had to
respond — until we had 50,000 warheads facing each
other, until that moment of Reykjavik, when the two
Presidents came out and said, “This is insanity; we
have to move in a different direction”.

Today, this morning, is an affirmation of our
willingness to make that clear, to give that answer, to
take a step that says we will not lose our commitment,
we will remain committed to moving in the direction
of ending the threat of nuclear war. Today is also a
reminder of the value of the CTBT. The actions of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and our response
demonstrate the effectiveness of the International
Monitoring system, the International Data Centre and
the broader verification and detection regime. This
entire episode has offered a stark reminder of why the
infrastructure of the Treaty is so vital and why adopting
this draft resolution is so important.

Ever since then, that is exactly what the world has
been doing. We have moved in a different direction.
From 50,000 warheads we are now down to about
1,550, and we have proposed to move even further
down. Brilliant people have spent a lifetime looking at
this — former Secretary of Defense Jim Schlesinger,
former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, Bill Perry
and Sam Nunn — people whom one would not expect
to see talking about the possibility of a world without
nuclear weapons. Most recently, the United States and
Iran spent two long years negotiating what everybody
thought was the improbable. Two nations that had not
talked to each other since 1979 began a conversation in
the room right in back of the Chamber, the first time I
came here for the General Assembly. We turned that
into a nation actually giving up a nuclear programme
and making it clear to the world it was willing to move
away from the path of a nuclear weapon in order to
make the world safer.

Our affirmative vote here is a sign of our
unwavering commitment to a safer world in which
nuclear technology is used solely for peaceful purposes
and the risk of nuclear conflict is no more.

Two decades after that process began, therefore,
there may be some who question the value of pursuing
this Treaty or investing in its adoption, because the
world has changed dramatically. Almost every member
of the United Nations has now renounced the option of
testing, and responsible Governments everywhere are
committed to reducing the dangers that are posed by
nuclear materials and nuclear weapons. Yet we have
been reminded in recent weeks of the absolute necessity
of supporting the CTBT. North Korea’s latest nuclear
test is a challenge to the Security Council’s leadership.
It is a challenge to the norm that I just articulated.
It is a challenge and a direct threat to international
stability and peace. It is a dangerous and reckless act of
provocation that we have to summon a determined and
effective answer to.

Right now, the United States Government is
engaged in a process with the Senate, where we have
many new members who have not previously been
part of this debate, in which we are beginning to
literally explain to and educate those members about
what the advances in technology do for us. In today’s
modern world of virtual capacity, computerization
and artificial intelligence, we do not need to blow up
weapons to know what we can do. We have the ability
to do this, and I would simply like to say to everyone
in the Chamber that I can think of few greater gifts
that we and our generation could give to the next than
an affirmation that we will continue to move away
from the possibilities of nuclear weaponry. Our action
today can show people everywhere that a world without
nuclear weapons might actually be possible, and that we
are going to do everything responsible in our capacity
to make that day a reality.
The President: I now call on His Excellency
Mr. Pavlo Klimkin, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Ukraine.
Mr. Klimkin (Ukraine): The Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) process is of
course a cornerstone of global security and, as one
of its staunch supporters, we welcome the Security
Council’s initiative in adopting today’s draft resolution
(S/2016/800), aimed at encouraging continuing
progress towards the Treaty’s entry into force. That
is fundamental, and we all understand that there are
a number of challenges involved, such as those just
mentioned by Secretary Kerry regarding the fact

16-296853/14

S/PV.7776

Maintenance of international peace and security

23/09/2016

that North Korea continues to be able to conduct
nuclear tests. But we also understand — and my own
diplomatic career began precisely in this area of nuclear
disarmament — how important it is that we strengthen
the entire non-proliferation regime.

Mr. Badr (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Contrary to our
usual rule, I will deliver my statement in English, owing
to the technical nature of the topic under discussion
and also so that we can be sure, in view of its vital
importance, that our message is accurately conveyed.

In drafting today’s resolution, we decided to
include the issue of security guarantees, which has
been the subject of discussion within the CTBT process
for a long time. I would like to recall in that regard that
the Final Document of the 2010 Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons included a clear clause on the
necessity for fully respecting all existing commitments
with regard to security assurances. Since today’s
draft resolution mentions security assurances given
in 1995, it is vitally important to keep in mind that
we also have other assurances, such as those in the
Budapest Memorandum, signed in December 1994,
which included very clear obligations for the three
nuclear States concerned regarding respect for the
independence, sovereignty and existing borders of
Ukraine. The paragraph following that part obliged all
those States to affirm

(spoke in English)

“their obligation to refrain from the threat or use
of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of Ukraine, and that none of their
weapons will ever be used against Ukraine”.
The primary breach of that security assurance
by a particular country — namely, the Russian
Federation — raises two basic issues. One, of course,
is whether we can trust the security assurances that are
mentioned in today’s draft resolution; the issue of trust
as it relates to the whole non-proliferation regime is
also of fundamental importance. The second is whether
those security guarantees are sufficient to enable us to
achieve real progress towards nuclear disarmament. I
would therefore like to urge the Security Council to
look further down the road of the process of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and all
our related efforts, and to once again remind everyone
of the absolute necessity and crucial importance of
respect for all existing commitments with regard to
security assurances. Any breach of such security
assurances should be seen as a fundamental challenge
for all of us.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Hesham
Badr, Vice-Minister for Multilateral Relations and
International Security of Egypt.
4/14

Egypt’s commitment to the nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation regime is unwavering. For
decades, nuclear disarmament has been a top priority
of our foreign policy, and it continues to be a significant
one for the members of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries. Our interest is founded in our long-standing
belief that nuclear weapons present a grave threat to
international peace and security and that collective
global action is needed to eliminate them.
It is in that context that I wish to express our
discontent and dissatisfaction with today’s draft
resolution (S/2016/800) on the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty (CTBT). It is seriously flawed and
does not deserve the Security Council’s attention. Its
contribution to the nuclear disarmament regime is
minimal and ineffective. Rather than strengthening that
regime, the draft resolution squanders an opportunity
to emphasize how urgent it is that we advance nuclear
disarmament. We regret that it was introduced without
incorporating several essential amendments suggested
by my delegation. I would like to address six specific
concerns that we have about the draft resolution.
The first is the fact that the Security Council is not
the appropriate forum for addressing the CTBT in the
way the draft resolution attempts to do. Developments
and progress related to the Treaty are regularly examined
by the Preparatory Commission and the Provisional
Technical Secretariat. The Council’s intrusion into
the dynamics and technicalities of the CTBT creates
unnecessary duality and generates an atmosphere that
is not conducive to inclusive deliberations. All States
parties and signatories to the CTBT should be fully
engaged in any discussion of relevance both to it and
to its technical bodies and verification regime. Such
discussion should not be limited to members of the
Security Council.
Secondly, the draft resolution fails to highlight
the centrality of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) to the nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation regime. Despite a modest
reference to it in the preamble to the draft resolution,
the NPT is completely overlooked in its operative
16-29685

23/09/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

paragraphs, despite being the cornerstone of the global
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime. It is
surprising that, while the draft resolution encourages
promotion of the CTBT’s universality, it makes no
reference whatever to the importance of achieving
universality for the NPT. What is the reason for the
eagerness about the former and complete silence about
the latter? We call on all NPT member States to promote
the universality of the NPT, promptly and actively.
As the key foundation of the nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation regime, the NPT deserves
greater prominence.
Thirdly, it is unusual, if not remarkable, that a draft
resolution dealing with the CTBT fails to adequately
address the urgency of concrete steps towards achieving
nuclear disarmament. While nuclear testing should
certainly be ceased in its entirety, as the Treaty clearly
advocates, the international community has a much
more pressing obligation and responsibility to advance
nuclear disarmament. If the Council is genuinely
concerned about the perils of nuclear weapons and
their potential use or testing, it would only be logically
coherent to treat the cause and not just the symptom.
By exclusively addressing nuclear testing in this draft
resolution, the Council bypasses the central point that
the continued possession of nuclear weapons in itself,
and the constant prolongation by those that possess
them to engage in meaningful disarmament, is what
challenges, if not threatens, global stability.
This draft resolution, inappropriately, makes no
reference to the obligation stipulated in article VI of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
that calls on nuclear-weapon States to achieve nuclear
disarmament. It turns a blind eye to the outcome
documents of the NPT Review Conferences of 1995,
2000 and 2010, including the 13 practical steps. In fact,
the draft resolution does not adequately respond to the
CTBT’s own preambular section, which stressed the
“need for continued systematic and progressive
efforts to reduce nuclear weapons globally, with the
ultimate goal of eliminating those weapons, and of
general and complete disarmament under strict and
effective international control”.
Nuclear disarmament therefore should have been
the priority in this draft resolution. It should have
expressed its unequivocal rejection of the modernization
of stockpiles of nuclear weapons by nuclear-weapon
States and the role they devote to nuclear weapons in

S/PV.7776

their strategic doctrines. Let me take this opportunity,
therefore, to categorically reject the notion put forth
by some States that nuclear stockpile maintenance
is consistent with NPT objectives. It is not. The
maintenance and modernization of nuclear weapons
runs contrary to the legal obligation and spirit of the
NPT, which explicitly calls for effective measures
relating to nuclear disarmament and the cessation of
the nuclear arms race. The total elimination of nuclear
weapons is the only guarantee against the use or threat
of use of these weapons.
Consequently, the fact that nuclear disarmament is
practically absent from this draft resolution severely
undermines its credibility and erodes its effectiveness.
It sends the wrong message to the international
community, that the Security Council is selective,
biased and engaged in a cherry-picking approach
when it comes to the global nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation regime. The message this
draft resolution sends is: Testing no, possession and
modernization of stockpiles yes.
Fourthly, this draft resolution inequitably and
unreasonably puts those that possess nuclear weapons
with those that do not on an equal footing. It calls on
States to refrain from conducting any nuclear-weapon
test explosions and urges all States that have either
not signed or not ratified the CTBT, particularly the
eight remaining annex 2 States, to do so without delay.
The draft resolution ought to have placed special
responsibility on nuclear-weapon States and States
non-party to the NPT. To equate States that are party to
the NPT with those that are not, while simultaneously
calling on both categories of States to refrain from
nuclear testing, is an unconvincing argument.
Rationally, the onus rests chiefly on those States that
actually possess the capability to conduct nuclear tests.
Fifthly, the draft resolution’s intrusive nature in the
work of the Preparatory Commission and the Provisional
Technical Secretariat is counterproductive. The
Secretariat is, and should remain, a State-driven body
that should solely determine its direction and preserve
its prerogative to take decisions independently, without
external interference. The Security Council should not
be in a position to meddle in the work of the Secretariat
and intrude in the practice of reporting its conduct. It
is up to the Preparatory Commission to decide what is
conducive and favourable to its work, in accordance
with the Organization’s priorities and aspirations of its
member States. The draft resolution sets an unwelcome

16-296855/14

S/PV.7776

Maintenance of international peace and security

precedent and may be perceived as an encroachment
by the Security Council on the independent standing of
international organizations and treaty bodies, dictating
certain procedures and measures to be undertaken,
despite not being endorsed by the collective will of its
member States.
Sixthly, progress pertaining to the verification
regime of the CTBT falls within the prerogative
of the Preparatory Commission. According to the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization,
85 per cent of the verification regime has been
successfully provisionally set up. Progress in all three
pillars of the regime — namely, the International
Monitoring System, the International Data Center and
on-site inspection — is noted. The provisional nature
of that regime should be maintained, in accordance
with the Treaty provisions, and the official operational
status launched upon the Treaty’s entry into force.
The draft resolution also reflects a puzzling
dilemma. While some States express enthusiasm
here in the Council about the urgency of completing
the verification regime, they contradictorily do not
shoulder their responsibilities by ratifying the CTBT,
and their legislative branches repeatedly refuse to ratify
the Treaty, thereby precluding the possibility that the
verification regime would come to fruition. We hope
that there is some explanation for this dichotomous
behaviour and contradictory message.
Egypt was among the first countries that negotiated
and signed the CTBT. We fully support the purpose
and objectives of the Treaty. We seek a world free of
nuclear weapons, including nuclear testing. We swiftly
and unequivocally condemn those that conduct nuclear
tests. And we remain committed to the universality of
the NPT and the establishment of a zone free of nuclear
weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction in
the Middle East. Egypt has been, and will continue to be,
a staunch advocate of a robust nuclear non-proliferation
regime that is geared towards the total elimination of
nuclear weapons.
The President: I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, China, France, Japan, Malaysia, New
Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
6/14

23/09/2016

Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Egypt
The President: There were 14 votes in favour, none
against and 1 abstention. The draft resolution has been
adopted as resolution 2310 (2016).
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
I call on His Excellency Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Senegalese abroad of
the Republic of Senegal.
Mr. Ndiaye (Senegal) (spoke in French): We are
gathered here again to express our commitment to
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty 20 years
after it was opened for signature here in New York on
24 September 1996. The adoption of the Treaty was the
result of grave concerns over an alarming nuclear arms
race and an attempt to save the world from the terror that
loomed over it. Over 2,000 nuclear tests were carried
out between 1945 and 1996. Twenty years after the
signing of that instrument, that number has drastically
decreased to nine, which is still disconcerting, but
promising, in our efforts to achieve the desired goal.
According to the Treaty, States parties pledged to
refrain from all tests and nuclear explosions, whether for
peaceful or military purposes and regardless of where
they were conducted — in the atmosphe, underground,
in outer space or under. Nonetheless, in spite of its
scope and, in particular, its importance, the Treaty has
not yet entered into force because of an insufficient
number of ratifications by the annex 2 States. To date,
166 States are parties to the Treaty, including 36 of the
44 listed in the annex, whose ratifications are required
for the Treaty to be enter into force. That shows the
importance of resolution 2310 (2016), which the
Council just dopted, with the support of the Senegalese
delegation, to celebrate the twentieth anniversary of
such an important instrument. I thank the American
delegation for having submitted the present resolution
and for leading the consultations that led to its adoption.
Because of its commitment to the ideal of a world
free of nuclear weapons, Senegal has committed to
16-29685

23/09/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

the goal of making this historic moment the start
of a new era, marked by a renewal of the pledge to
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation. That is why
the Senegalese delegation commends the importance
given to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) as the cornerstone of the nuclear
non-proliferation regime and the crucial foundation for
the pursuit of nuclear disarmament. The United Nations
can never state it enough: the main objective is not just
non-proliferation but nuclear disarmament, pursuant to
article VI of the NPT. Until that goal is achieved, it
is crucial, if not necessary, to continue to strengthen,
on theo ne hand, the commitment of the non-nuclear
States to non-proliferation and, on the other hand, the
determination of those who possess such weapons
to adhere to negative security assurances. Senegal
therefore implores all of the countries that have not
yet expressed their consent to be bound by the Treaty,
in particular annex 2 States, to take the appropriate
measures in that regard to build a safer world.
Resolution 2310 (2016) takes notes of the joint
ministerial statement on the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty drafted by the permanent members
of the Security Council, which highlights their
commitment to nuclear disarmament and the entry into
force of the Treaty and reaffirms the moratorium on
nuclear-weapon tests and explosions, while awaiting
the entry into force of this instrument.
I wish to reaffirm Senegal’s commitment to
disarmament and to the nuclear non-proliferation
regime, and by extension to the NPT, the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the Treaty of Pelindaba,
which established a nuclear-free-weapon zone in
Africa. I would like to take this opportunity to invite
the States Parties to the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty to honour their obligations, and the States
that are not yet party to the Treaty, namely, the annex 2
States, to step up their ratification efforts for the good
of the entire international community.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Ignacio Ybáñez, Vice-Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Spain.
Mr. Ybáñez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Spain
co-sponsored resolution 2310 (2016) because we
believe that it is an important step on the path to the
universalization of the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty (CTBT). Although the Treaty has not yet
entered into force, it is already a fundamental element

S/PV.7776

of the international disarmament and non-proliferation
regime. I welcome the presence at the Security Council
talbe of Mr. Lassina Zerbo, Executive Secretary of
the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO),
and, of course, that of Under-Secretary-General Kim
Won-soo. We are conveying an excellent message
together as the Council, the Secretariat of the United
Nations and the Preparatory Commission on the
occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the opening
for signature of the CTBT to encourage its entry into
force without further delay.
The Treaty has been signed by 183 States and
ratified by 166 States. Spain ratified the Treaty in 1998.
I would like to implore the States that have not already
done so, in particular the States listed in annex 2, to
ratify or sign the Treaty. This resolution is another step
towards the full de-legitimization by the international
community of nuclear tests, and it contributes to
strengthening the prohibition on nuclear tests as a de
facto international rule. However, the moratorium is
not a replacement for the entry into force of the CTBT,
which is our main aim.
In addition, I would like firmly to condemn the
nuclear tests carried out by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea on 6 January and 9 September, which
were in violation of various Security Council resolutions.
Such tests are a serious threat to international peace
and security and to regional stability.
Lastly, the resolution that we have just adopted must
serve to strengthen the Preparatory Commission of the
CTBTO. With this resolution, the Security Council
acknowledges the maturity of the verification system
set up by the Preparatory Commission and the work of
the Provisional Technical Secretariat in that regard. I
trust that the resolution will give the impetus needed to
complete the International Monitoring System.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Alok Sharma, Member of Parliament
and Minister for Asia and the Pacific of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain an Northern Ireland.
Mr. Sharma (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of the important
resolution 2310 (2016). This year marks the twentieth
anniversary of the opening for signature of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT).
Today’s resolution is both well-timed and an important
contribution to the goals of the Treaty. Today’s call for

16-296857/14

S/PV.7776

Maintenance of international peace and security

the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty is a tangible step towards a safer and more
stable world.
The United Kingdom was one of the first signatories
to the CTBT in 1996 and we ratified it in 1998. We
regret that the Treaty has not yet entered into force,
but further ratifications would demonstrate the global
commitment towards ending nuclear-test explosions.
We welcome the newest ratifications, by Burma and
Swaziland. They joined the 166 States in total to have
done so. Further ratifications would also send a clear
message to the global community that nuclear explosive
testing will not be tolerated.
The entry into force of the Treaty has clear advantages
for all of us. Such benefits include a fully operational
International Monitoring System and an International
Data Centre, as well as the on-site inspection element of
the Treaty. Combined, that would ensure that any State
tempted to conduct a nuclear explosive test would know
that it could not do so without facing detection. It is
worth remembering that, when the Treaty was written,
no one knew if the International Monitoring System
would actually be possible. Today, we know that it is.
All State signatories have equal access to the regular
data it provides, and such monitoring can only improve
as the system continues to grow. It is now 89 per cent
complete. The success of the system depends on the
dedication and collaboration of many countries that
have established stations.
Given the importance of those objectives and
their contribution to effective nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation measures, it is regrettable that
some chose not to vote in favour today. We believe
that it was a well-intentioned and balanced Security
Council resolution and we thank the United States for
introducing it for adoption.
We have come a long way towards ending nuclear
explosive testing. Only one State, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, continues to undertake such
activity. We condemn the recent nuclear test conducted
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which
as well as going against the spirit and purpose of the
Treaty is a direct violation of binding Security Council
resolutions. As the Council agreed only a fortnight ago,
there is now a need to work immediately on further
significant measures in response to provocations
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The United Kingdom will be consulting with our
8/14

23/09/2016

international partners to help deliver a robust response,
making clear to the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea that it must engage constructively with the
international community.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom calls upon
all those States that have not yet done so to ratify the
Treaty, so as to bring it into force and so end explosive
nuclear testing forever.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation is committed to the
implementation of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT), which, as is well-known, our country
ratified as early as 2001. We hope that resolution 2310
(2016), adopted today, will help a maximum number of
States, especially those listed in annex 2 to the CTBT,
sign and ratify the Treaty.
We believe that the moratoriums on nuclear testing,
as important as they are, cannot serve as a full-fledged
replacement for legally binding international norms.
The Treaty, rather than national moratoriums, should
be the benchmark for States’ responsible behaviour.
Unfortunately, the pen that signed the Treaty, President
Bill Clinton’s — which Secretary of State Kerry
mentioned this morning — was not that of President
Barack Obama, and the United States has found itself
unable to ratify the CTBT. We hope that the next
President of the United States will be more zealous in
his desire to see the Treaty ratified.
We would not want the adoption of this resolution
to serve as an unwelcome precedent for the Security
Council’s interference in the remit of other international
structures, or the creation of obligations under an
international treaty for those States that have not joined
that treaty. In this case, we feel we were able to avoid
such a risk. Today, the Council adopted a balanced
resolution that does not clash with the provisions of the
CTBT. It is for that reason that we voted in favour of it.
The fact that the delegation of Ukraine always seems
to step outside the parameters of our discussion at the
Security Council has become an unfortunate tradition,
and we do not intend to yield to such provocations.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): Tomorrow
will mark the twentieth anniversary of the opening for
signature in New York of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty (CTBT). Twenty years ago, in order
to comprehensively ban nuclear-test explosions and
any other nuclear explosions, thereby effectively
16-29685

23/09/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

advancing the process of nuclear non-proliferation
and disarmament and enhancing international peace
and security, the international community negotiated
and concluded the CTBT. Over the past 20 years, the
nuclear-test ban has become a common understanding
of the international community.
Today’s adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 2310 (2016) is of great significance in
commemorating the opening for signature of the
Treaty, reaffirming the purpose of the nuclear-test ban
and pushing for an early entry into force of the Treaty.
China has always stood for the comprehensive
prohibition and total destruction of nuclear weapons.
We have committed not to be the first-users of nuclear
weapons and we have committed unconditionally
not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against
non-nuclear-weapon States and nuclear-weapon-free
zones.
China was among the first countries to sign the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. We have been
steadfast in maintaining the object and purpose of the
Treaty and in abiding by our nuclear-test moratorium
commitment. We will continue to work with all sides
to push for the early entry into force of the Treaty and
make unremitting efforts for the realization of the
comprehensive prohibition and total destruction of
nuclear weapons.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption today of resolution 2310 (2016),
which we co-sponsored, and thanks the United States
for having sponsored it as well.
The resolution urges all States that have not done so
to sign and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT) to ensure its entry into force as soon
as possible. It reaffirms the importance of nucleartesting moratoriums and urges all States to refrain from
conducting any type of nuclear explosion.
The CTBT is an essential step in the gradual
implementation of the nuclear-disarmament process,
and its entry into force is France’s foremost priority
in this area. The CTBT and national moratoriums are
fundamental instruments for nuclear non-proliferation
and international security. Its importance is all the
clearer in the context of the serious and repeated acts
committed by North Korea, which carried out a fifth
nuclear test earlier this month. France and the Security

S/PV.7776

Council condemned these provocations, which are very
serious ones, with the utmost firmness.
It is crucial that all States live up to their
responsibilities today by heeding our call for the
universalization of the CTBT, as set forth in the
resolution we have just adopted. This is especially true
for those States whose signature and ratification are
necessary for the entry into force of the Treaty.
France was among the first States to sign the
CTBT, in September 1996, and to ratify it, in 1998.
As a responsible nuclear Power, we have taken strong
and exemplary steps, such as the dismantling of our
nuclear-testing site in the Pacific Ocean and putting
an end to our production of plutonium and uranium for
nuclear weapons.
We align ourselves all States members of the
Security Council in sending this message of mobilization
for a comprehensive ban on nuclear testing. Such a
prohibition has become an example of responsible
behaviour at the international level. Only one State has
conducted nuclear testing in the twenty-first century,
and its behaviour is unanimously condemned at every
opportunity.
On the twentieth anniversary of the Treaty, France
wishes to reiterate its resolute commitment to the entry
into force of the CTBT as soon as possible. With this
resolution, the responsibility of every State is engaged
today more than ever.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): The Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty (CTBT) is an important pillar of the
nuclear-disarmament regime. Japan is playing a leading
role as a co-facilitator of the early entry into force of
the CTBT.
Japan welcomes the adoption of resolution 2310
(2016), which calls upon all States to refrain from
conducting any nuclear tests. We believe that this will
boost momentum towards nuclear disarmament as well
as the early entry into force of the Treaty.
This resolution clearly demonstrates the collective
desire of the international community to promote the
nuclear-test ban. Japan appreciates the leadership of
the United States on this resolution and is happy to be
a sponsor.
North Korea has conducted its second nuclear
test in a single year. These nuclear tests by North
Korea are flagrant and unacceptable violations of

16-296859/14

S/PV.7776

Maintenance of international peace and security

the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2270 (2016), and pose a serious challenge to
the global disarmament and non-proliferation regimes.
Japan strongly condemns the tests by North Korea
and continues to demand that North Korea stop these
provocations and immediately comply with the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
The Security Council has already agreed to begin
work immediately on appropriate measures, under
Article 41 of the Charter of the United Nations, for a
Security Council draft resolution. Japan looks forward
to closely working with other Council members to that
end.
In conclusion, Japan reiterates its commitment to
working with the relevant countries on the early entry
into force of the CTBT.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela voted in favour of resolution 2310 (2016),
pertaining to the twentieth anniversary of the opening
for signature of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT), because we believe it to be a positive
initiative for making progress towards the priority
objective of nuclear disarmament and for countering
the threat posed by the existence of nuclear weapons
and their possible use, which would have devastating
consequences for humankind.
Although the Security Council has spoken on this
matter today, we believe that it is up to the Preparatory
Commission and the Provisional Technical Secretariat
of the CTBT to address this important matter in line
with their mandates.
The elimination of nuclear weapons requires
the joint efforts of the States Members of the United
Nations to ensure the effective implementation of
multilateral commitments leading to the elimination
of nuclear arsenals, in line with the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, to which my
country is a State party.
Although we welcome the resolution’s contribution
in the area of peace and security, we would have
liked the text to include more categorical language
with regard to the commitment that States possessing
nuclear weapons should assume in order to eliminate
those arsenals. We also believe that the mention in the
resolution of the joint statement by the five permanent
10/14

23/09/2016

members of the Council dilutes the commitment of the
nuclear-weapon Powers when it comes to the goal of
disarmament and adhering to the provisions of the NPT
and the CTBT.
On the twentieth anniversary of the CTBT, we would
like to stress its contribution to nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation. In that regard, we urge the eight
remaining annex 2 States, whose ratifications are
needed for its entry into force, to sign or ratify this
legal instrument without further delay.
My delegation reiterates that the use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons is a violation of the Charter of
the United Nation and a crime against humanity. It is
also a violation of international law and international
humanitarian law, as was expressed by the International
Court of Justice in its 1996 advisory opinion on
the Legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons
(A/51/218, annex).
In that regard, we call on all States to refrain
from carrying out nuclear tests, including sub-critical
experiments and those carried out via simulation, with
the aim of developing and improving nuclear weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction. We believe
that such actions are detrimental to the objectives of
disarmament, the nuclear non-proliferation regime and
the provisions of the NPT and CTBT, as they weaken the
impact of those instruments as disarmament measures.
The Latin American region has shown its decisive
support for the CTBT, as can be seen in the special
declaration, issued in connection with the twentieth
anniversary of the opening for signature of the CTBT,
adopted by the Heads of State of the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC) at their
Summit held in Quito in January. My country is also
party to the Treaty of Tlatelolco for the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America, which established
the first nuclear-weapon-free zone in a densely
populated area. In addition to those achievements, I
would mention the declaration of the second CELAC
Summit held in Havana, in January 2014, which
declared Latin America and the Caribbean as a zone
of peace.
We continue to encourage the international
community to redouble efforts to give effect to
the commitment agreed to at the 1995 Review and
Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which was
reaffirmed at subseqeunt conferences, with regard to
16-29685

23/09/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East. That would be a measure of particular
importance for peace and security in that troubled
region.
In that context, we also need concrete measures
on disarmament and non proliferation on the part of
States that possess nuclear weapons, in line with the
obligations incumbent upon them under article VI of
the NPT and measures adopted at successive NPT
Review Conferences since 2000.
We reiterate the call for the negotiation and
conclusion of universal legally binding instrument on
unconditional security guarantees to all non-nuclearweapon States, with a view to achieving the complete
elimination of this category of weapons of mass
destruction, irrespective of its type or geographical
location.
Finally, once again, we urge States that have not
yet done to sign or ratify the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty, the only viable legal instrument for
prohibiting nuclear tests.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): The Republic of
Angola very much welcomes and is satisfied with the
adoption of resolution 2310 (2016) this morning.
Having signed the Comprehensive Nuclear TestBan Treaty right after the conclusion of the Treaty
negotiations, Angola ratified it only in 2015 due to the
military conflict with apartheid South Africa, that, as
is known, disposed of a nuclear arsenal. After the end
of apartheid, South Africa took the wise decision to
give up its nuclear arsenal. By doing so, it contributed
decisively in materializing the African position
enshrined in the Treaty of Pelindaba, which made
Africa a nuclear-weapon-free zone.
The adoption of today’s resolution takes place
just a few days after the Security Council considered
the question of nuclear proliferation on the Korean
Peninsula. By adopting resolution 2310 (2016), the
Council is taking a comprehensive stand on the issue of
nuclear tests. We would like to make three comments
on the issue.
First, resolution 2310 (2016) makes real sense
if it represents an effective contribution to the
universalization of the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty through its ratification by all Members of the
United Nations and the entire international community.

S/PV.7776

Secondly, the resolution makes full sense in the
case the Treaty constitutes an effective measure of
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, thereby
contributing to the attainment of a nuclear-weapon-free
world. More than instruments of war, nuclear weapons
are instruments of annihilation, since their objective
is basically the destruction of human lives and of the
means of human existence, without a real military
purpose.
Yesterday in the General Assembly debate (see
A/71/PV.15) we heard very poignant testimony by the
President of the Marshall Islands about the tragic human
and environmental consequences for the South Pacific
region caused by the nuclear tests that took place in the
region some decades ago.
Thirdly, Angola voted in favour of this resolution as
a singn of its clear stance against nuclear proliferation.
We would welcome the further adoption by the Security
Council of clear measures, without double standards, to
condemn nuclear testsa in the different regions where
we still see the question of proliferation prevailing. We
believe that, with double standards and without our
clear stance, we would be weakening the resolution we
have just adopted this morning.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Today, the Security
Council delivers on its commitment to commemorate
the twentieth anniversary of the opening for signature
of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT)
on 24 September 1996. Malaysia wishes to convey its
appreciation to delegations and contributors involved in
negotiating the text for their constructive engagement
and tremendous work in that regard. We remain hopeful
that resolution 2310 (2016) is a positive move, from the
standpoint of the Council, to encourage the early entry
into force of the CTBT. In that context, Malaysia voted
in favour of the resolution.
It must also be emphasized that our commitment
and that of the international community towards
general and complete disarmament can be realized only
through the entry into force of the Treaty. We wish to
put on record that, while we need to see incrementally
positive progress to ensure that the CTBT enters into
force, we iterate that these measures do not have the
same permanent and legally binding effect to end
nuclear-weapon testing and all other nuclear explosions.
My delegation notes with serious concern that the
CTBT has yet to enter into force. As we celebrate two
decades since the Treaty was opened for signature in

16-2968511/14

S/PV.7776

Maintenance of international peace and security

1996, we firmly believe that more could be done to
facilitate the entry into force of the Treaty, including
maintaining all existing moratoriums on nuclearweapon-test explosions.
As the CTBT contains no provisions that commit
the nuclear-weapon States and States with nuclearweapon capabilities to total nuclear disarmament, the
call enshrined in the Treaty cannot be disregarded and
needs to be further recognized. My delegation has
some reservations that resolution 2310 (2016) does not
sufficiently recognize that fact.
While we support the spirit and intent of the
commemoration of the CTBT resolution, the resolution
is not a substitute for, nor should it be construed as,
a sufficient effort by all CTBT signatory States,
particularly the nuclear-weapon States. Therefore, it
is crucial that States with nuclear-weapon capabilities
undertake their responsibilities to ratify the Treaty. In
that respect, we urge the annex 2 States to do so at the
earliest possibility.
Our responsibility is henceforth far from complete.
We remain committed to working together in good
faith and with strengthened resolve to facilitate the
implementation of resolution 2310 (2016). While fully
understanding that the text is a product of constructive
negotiations, the fact remains that the challenge ahead
lies in ensuring that there should be no precedent on
referencing documents in Council resolutions that
can be agreed to by only a handful of States. That is
the basis for Malaysia’s position of ensuring such a
resolution secures the broadest support possible, and
that the concerns of all members of the Council are
taken on board in a balanced manner. Otherwise, this
negates the authority and credibility of a resolution that
is meant to provide guidance in our common pursuit of
maintaining international peace and security. In terms
of being constructive, allowing all Council members an
equal opportunity and ample time to carefully review
the provisions of the text would encourage our joint
effort in facilitating implementation.
Malaysia also underscores that it is the responsibility
of all members of the international community to abide
by the obligations outlined in the regime under the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
On that basis, the pursuit of general and complete
nuclear disarmament must remain, first and foremost, a
shared and enduring commitment of all of us here.
12/14

23/09/2016

Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay voted in favour of resolution 2310 (2016)
because of the intrinsic importance of the subject and
because we believe in the need to work towards the
entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT). The CTBT, whose entry into force we
encourage today, is a keystone of nuclear disarmament
and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. As such,
it will contribute to strengthening international peace
and security in addition to helping bring about a safer
world.
Promoting the universality and rapid entry into
force of the CTBT, which has been open for signature
for 20 years and which today still needs ratification
by the eight States listed in annex 2, is a priority in
order to address the danger posed by nuclear-weapon
tests to the international community. In that regard,
Uruguay once again urges States to ratify the text of
the Treaty, in particular those annex 2 States whose
ratification is required for the Treaty’s entry into force.
We would encourage them to take this initiative and
ensure the appropriate ratification of the Treaty as soon
as possible. The greatest responsibility for the entry
into force of the Treaty falls on the shoulders of those
States possessing nuclear weapons.
Uruguay, as a country commited to strengthening
the disarmament and non-proliferation system,
advocates for a world that is free of nuclear weapons.
The mere existence of nuclear weapons is itself a threat
to peace and security in the world, and their total
elimination is the only guarantee that they will not be
used.
This meeting is also an opportunity for us to
remember the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons.
This is something that has been examined at various
international conferences, where it has been made clear
that there are limitations in terms of the prevention
of the use of nuclear weapons and that we are truly
defenceless, no matter whether they are used offensively
or accidentally. The humanitarian consequences of
destruction with these weapons is something that should
lead to an express and immediate ban, and for this
reason we appeal for the fulfilment and implementation
of all of the commitments undertaken in the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the Permanent Representative of New
Zealand.
16-29685

23/09/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Anniversaries of important events are rarely
straightforward celebrations. That is certainly the
case for today’s anniversary marking 20 years since
the adoption of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT). The Treaty’s adoption, in this building
two decades ago, occasioned considerable euphoria.
Something that had seemed impossible — because it
had been so strongly opposed by a number of significant
countries until just a few years before — was now a
done deal. Like other long-term supporters of nuclear
disarmament, New Zealand believed something of real
significance had been achieved.
Prior to the Treaty’s adoption, New Zealand had
vigorously pursued the objective of a nuclear-test-ban
treaty for more than three decades. Twice, with support
from others in the Pacific region, New Zealand had
even gone to the International Court of Justice in an
effort to stop the nuclear testing, which had inflamed
our region, damaged the Pacific environment and
caused deep tensions with some of our oldest friends
and allies. Largely in response to testing in our region,
the countries of the South Pacific had also adopted and
brought into force the South Pacific Nuclear-Free-Zone
Treaty.
For us, and for the Pacific region, the banning of all
nuclear test explosions was the culmination of a longsought-after goal. For New Zealand, therefore, there
is real cause to remember and celebrate that historic
moment in 1996 when the CTBT was adopted. However,
as others know only too well, there is cause, too, for
deep disappointment that 20 years later the Treaty is
still not in force.
New Zealand supported the initiative by the United
States to create new momentum for the Treaty’s entry
into force and voted in favour of today’s resolution 2310
(2016). We join others in calling upon all States that
have not yet signed and ratified the Treaty — especially
the remaining eight States whose ratification is needed
for entry into force — to do so as soon as possible. Until
they do, we will not, as a matter of international treaty
law, have closed the door on nuclear testing.
A strong international norm against testing has been
created by the Treaty. That norm is being complied with
by all States except the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. North Korea’s repeated nuclear tests are an
affront to the international community’s commitment,
through the CTBT and the ongoing moratoriums against
testing, to end the era of nuclear tests, as well as blatant

S/PV.7776

violations of the resolutions of the Security Council and
of that country’s commitments under the Charter of the
United Nations.
While the CTBT is an important instrument in
its own right, it is important to remember, as others
have noted today, that it sits within a wider nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation context. That context
would have been better reflected in today’s resolution
2310 (2016) had the draft contained stronger language
on the need for progress on nuclear disarmament, as
New Zealand and others had proposed.
New Zealand also shares the reservations of other
Council members about the reference in the resolution
to the joint statement by five nuclear-weapon States
that are also permanent members of the Council. While
recognizing the value of the commitments in the joint
statement, we are uncomfortable with the Council being
used to validate the perspectives of any sub-group
of Council members, whether they be permanent or
elected, nuclear-weapon-holding or non-nuclear-free.
While we must continue to call for States to join
the Treaty, after 20 years we also recognize that simply
restating commitments to the entry into force of the
CTBT is hardly progress towards nuclear disarmament.
That is particularly true in the light of the modernization
programmes that are under way in all States that possess
nuclear weapons and which cut across the contribution
that the CTBT can make to nuclear disarmament. For as
long as some States retain nuclear weapons, and declare
them to be essential for national security, others will
seek them. That highlights the mutually reinforcing
nature of nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear
disarmament. The neglect of one will set back the other.
New Zealand looks forward to working with the
wider United Nations membership during the current
session of the General Assembly both to promote
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and to
reinvigorate efforts towards nuclear disarmament in
line with the long-standing commitments set out in the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The representative of Ukraine has asked for the
floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Fesko (Ukraine): I will be very brief. I would
like to make a point of clarification for everyone’s
benefit.

16-2968513/14

S/PV.7776

Maintenance of international peace and security

As we are discussing the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty, which constitutes an integral part of the
global security infrastructure, we are convinced that,
if any part or element of that structure is damaged or
violated, as it was, it reflects negatively on the stability
of the global security architecture. We therefore see a

14/14

23/09/2016

very clear link between what my Minister has just said
and today’s topic of discussion. If some fail to see that
linkage, it only demonstrates a selective approach to
matters of global security.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

16-29685
