S/2017/904

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 October 2017
Original: English

Letter dated 26 October 2017 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey herewith the seventh report of the Organisation
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (see annex).
I should be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be brought to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

17-18978 (E)

011117

*1718978*

S/2017/904

Annex
Letter dated 26 October 2017 from the Leadership Panel of the
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
addressed to the Secretary-General
The Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism has the honour to transmit its seventh report pursuant
to Security Council resolutions 2235 (2015) and 2319 (2016) (see enclosure).
(Signed) Edmond Mulet
Head
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
(Signed) Judy Cheng-Hopkins
Leadership Panel
(Signed) Stefan Mogl
Leadership Panel

2/33

17-18978

S/2017/904

Enclosure
Seventh report of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
I.

Introduction
1.
The seventh report of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW)-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism is submitted
pursuant to Security Council resolutions 2235 (2015) and 2319 (2016). It covers the
period from 23 June 2017, when the sixth report of the Mechanism (see S/2017/552)
was submitted to the Council, to 25 October 2017.

II.

Background
2.
As set forth in resolutions 2235 (2015) and 2319 (2016), the mandate of the
Mechanism is to identify, to the greatest extent feasible, individuals, entities, groups
or Governments who were perpetrators, organizers, sponsors or otherwise involved
in the use of chemicals as weapons, including chlorine or any other toxic chemical,
in the Syrian Arab Republic where the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic determines or has determined that a specific incident in that country
involved or likely involved the use of chemicals as weapons, including chlorine or
any other toxic chemical. In accordance with resolution 2319 (2016), the mandate of
the Mechanism will come to an end on 16 November 2017.
3.
The Mechanism consists of an independent three-member panel together with
a core staff of professionals selected on the basis of their expertise, taking into
account geographical diversity and the equal participation of women and men. The
Mechanism is headed by an Assistant Secretary-General, Edmond Mulet, with
overall responsibility, and two deputies with responsibilities for inves tigative and
political matters, respectively. Those three positions constitute the Leadership Panel
of the Mechanism.
4.
The Head of the Mechanism has continued to be supported by three
components: the Investigative Office, the Political Office and the Pl anning and
Operations Support Office. The Investigative Office is based in The Hague,
Netherlands, and comprises two units: the Information Collection Unit and the
Analysis and Corroboration Unit. The Political Office is based in New York, with a
liaison officer in Damascus, and provides, inter alia, political analysis, legal advice,
liaison, and media and information management support. The Planning and
Operations Support Office is based in New York and provides administrative,
logistical and planning support to the political and investigative components.
5.
While the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic works to
establish the facts surrounding allegations of the use of toxic chemicals for hostile
purposes in the country, it is not mandated to reach conclusions about attributing
responsibility for chemical weapons use. 1 Following a determination by the FactFinding Mission that a specific incident in the Syrian Arab Republic involved or
likely involved the use of chemicals as weapons, the M echanism conducts an
investigation to identify, to the greatest extent feasible, the perpetrators, organizers,
sponsors or those otherwise involved. In conducting its investigation, the
Mechanism relies on findings of the Fact-Finding Mission regarding the use of
chemicals as weapons in each incident and pursues a rigorous independent

__________________
1

17-18978

See S/2014/533, para. 14, and resolution 2235 (2015), eighth preambular para.
3/33

S/2017/904

examination of the available information surrounding such use so as to identify, to
the greatest extent feasible, those responsible.
6.
As indicated in the sixth report of the Mechanism, the position of the
Leadership Panel remains that, if new information is provided regarding the four
cases initially referred to in the third and fourth reports of the Mechanism
(see S/2016/738/Rev.1 and S/2016/888), supplementary investigations may be
undertaken. For the present report, the Mechanism focused on incidents that had
occurred at Umm Hawsh on 15 and 16 September 2016 and at Khan Shaykh un on
4 April 2017.

III.

Methods of work
7.
The Mechanism is committed to the principles of impartiality, objectivity and
independence in carrying out its work. The Mechanism continued to implement its
mandate in accordance with the methods of work outlined in its previous reports,
including in annex I to its third report (see S/2016/738/Rev.1). There are two main
phases of the work of the Mechanism. During the first phase (information collection
and planning for case development), the Mechanism reviews and analyses data,
collects relevant information and creates a preliminary investigation plan. Following
a decision by the Leadership Panel to conduct an in -depth investigation into a
particular incident, the Mechanism requests full access to the information obtained
or prepared by the Fact-Finding Mission.
8.
The second phase (case investigation) commences thereafter, beginning with
the preparation of an in-depth investigation plan, which includes the consideration
of possible scenarios. During this phase, the Mechanism conducts detailed analysis
of the information obtained by the Fact-Finding Mission and collects additional
information from other sources, including its field missions. This work cont inues
until the Mechanism is satisfied that it has gathered and assessed all of the
information and evidence that it can reasonably obtain and, on that basis, presents
its findings to the Security Council.
9.
As an investigative mechanism without judicial powers, the Mechanism cannot
compel the submission of information or documents to it, but relies on the voluntary
cooperation of witnesses and those in possession of relevant information. In
obtaining information and conducting analysis and assessment ther eof, the
Mechanism complied with the relevant terms of reference approved by the Security
Council (see S/2015/669 and S/2015/697) and carried out its work in an independent
and impartial manner. At all times, it was guided by the highest professional
standards.
10. In preparing the investigation plan for each case, the Mechanism outlined a
series of possible scenarios, including those put forward by Member States, b ased
on all available information as to how the incidents might have occurred.
11. In conducting its investigations into the incidents at Umm Hawsh and Khan
Shaykhun, the Mechanism undertook the following key activities: (a) obtaining and
reviewing information and material from the Fact-Finding Mission; (b) collecting
information from open sources; (c) submitting requests to Member States, including
the Syrian Arab Republic, for information; (d) interviewing witnesses, including
during visits to the Syrian Arab Republic, and obtaining photographs, videos,
documents and other materials; (e) obtaining analysis and expert assessments from
several forensic institutes; (f) obtaining satellite imagery and analysis thereof;
(g) obtaining expert analysis in respect of medical effects, munitions and their
delivery methods, aircraft configurations and capabilities, plume dispersion, and
chemistry of toxic agents; (h) obtaining information about weather conditions; and

4/33

17-18978

S/2017/904

(i) attending expert briefings. Upon obtaining the above-mentioned information, the
Mechanism conducted extensive analysis of the information and material that it had
obtained.
12. With a view to identifying those responsible, the investigation was aimed at
establishing, to the greatest extent feasible, the circumstances of the use of the
chemical weapons, including in respect of the following: (a) the precise date and
time of the incident; (b) the impact location; (c) the munition used; (d) the munition
delivery method; and (e) the medical effects and response. In collecting and
analysing the information relating the incidents, the Mechanism prepared a case file
for each incident, documenting the information collected and the analysis performed
in respect of each scenario.
13. Following an invitation by the Syrian Arab Republic to the Head of the
Mechanism on 28 July 2017, and the Government’s agreement that the Mechanism’s
liaison officer should take up his duties in Damascus, members of the Mechanism
made several visits to the Syrian Arab Republic in support of the investigation. The
Head of the Mechanism visited Damascus from 19 to 21 August, and the
Mechanism’s technical teams visited Damascus from 7 to 11 September and Sha‘irat
airbase from 8 to 10 October. Throughout its mandate, the Mechanism worke d
actively to obtain information from Member States, international and
non-governmental organizations, individuals and other relevant entities.
14. The Mechanism did not visit the scenes of the incidents at Umm Hawsh and
Khan Shaykhun. While the Leadership Panel considered that visits to those sites
would have been of value, such value would diminish over time. Furthermore, the
Panel was required to weigh the security risks of such visits against their possible
benefits for the investigation.
15. With respect to Khan Shaykhun, the crater from which the sarin emanated had
been disturbed after the incident and subsequently filled with concrete. Accordingly,
the integrity of the scene had been compromised. The Leadership Panel considered
that the high security risk of a site visit to Khan Shaykhun, which is currently in a
situation of armed conflict and under the control of a listed terrorist organization
(Nusrah Front), outweighed the possible benefits for the investigation. The
Leadership Panel decided to keep the issue under review. Should conditions
improve, and should it be determined that an on-site investigation would produce
valuable new information, a visit could take place in the future. In that context, the
Mechanism recently received an updated security advisory noting changes in the
extent of the control exerted by various groups and additional parties involved,
including increased complexity involving indirect artillery fire and recurrent air
strikes.
16. Similarly, in the case of Umm Hawsh, the passage of time between the
occurrence of the event in mid-September 2016 and the commencement of the
Mechanism’s investigation on 25 May 2017, and the fact that the integrity of the
scene of the incident had not been preserved, called into question the value of such
a visit. Moreover, in the light of the extensive information that the Mechanism had
been able to obtain from witnesses, an on-site visit would have provided little
additional value.
17. The Mechanism also noted that it would have been difficult to visit any of
these sites without putting at risk persons who cooperated with it. Nevertheless, the
Leadership Panel considered that the Mechanism had gathered sufficient
information to come to a conclusion in both cases.
18. The Mechanism conducted interviews with more than 30 victims and
witnesses who had been present at Umm Hawsh and Khan Shaykhun at the relevant
17-18978

5/33

S/2017/904

times, in addition to those interviewed by the Fact-Finding Mission. Regarding
Umm Hawsh, these included victims of the attack, journalists who had been present
in the immediate aftermath of the attack, doctors who had treated victims, and
military commanders. Regarding the incident at Khan Shaykhun, witnesses included
residents, personnel from Sha‘irat airbase, government officials, doctors who had
treated victims, rescue personnel and commanders of non-State armed groups.
19. The Mechanism obtained information regarding the physical characteristics of
the sites through satellite imagery taken both before and after the incidents, the
analysis of which assisted the Mechanism in determining the timing and precise
location of the events being investigated. Moreover, the Mechanism collected
numerous photographs and videos relating to the incidents both directly from
witnesses and from other sources, including the Syrian Arab Republic. Those
images and videos depict impact locations; impact effects, such as plumes and
building damage; casualties; and munition remnants. The Mechanism obtained
forensic analysis of more than 250 videos and photographs, inc luding to determine
their authenticity and the times and places at which they had been taken.
20. Given that a significant amount of the information collected by the Mechanism
was available only in Arabic, including a large volume of medical records,
interviews, logbooks and videos (more than 435 files), the Mechanism employed its
own translators and established quality control measures in order to translate the
materials into English so that they could be used by its investigators.
21. The Mechanism corroborated information considered important to its
investigations and made assessments only on the basis of credible and reliable
information. In that regard, identifying circular reporting was important in order to
ensure that the corroboration was based on independent sources of information.
22. The Mechanism engaged several internationally recognized forensic and
specialist defence institutes as well as OPCW -designated laboratories, considered to
have established expertise and a record of outstanding perfo rmance, to provide
forensic and expert support for the investigation. The forensic institutes and OPCW designated laboratories are accredited in accordance with the International
Organization for Standardization standard relating to a broad spectrum of lab oratory
work (ISO 17025). They were engaged by the Mechanism to authenticate
photographs and video footage; to verify the times and places at which the
photographs and footage had been taken; and to provide independent expert
assessments and simulations with respect to items depicted, as well as chemical
synthesis and analysis. The Mechanism also consulted with several internationally
recognized experts in energetic materials and the medical effects of chemical
warfare agents.
23. With regard to Umm Hawsh, expert analysis was provided in respect of the
impact location; the munition used, its trajectory and its likely delivery method; and
the medical effects on the victims. Regarding Khan Shaykhun, expert analysis was
provided with respect to the nature of the plumes resulting from explosions; the
characteristics of the crater and their likely cause; the remnants of the munitions;
the dispersion of sarin; the explosives used and their delivery methods; and the
medical effects and their treatment. In-depth expert analysis was also provided with
respect to the chemistry of sarin.
Leadership Panel’s assessment of the cases
24. The Leadership Panel reviewed the case files that had been prepared regarding
the incidents, in which the Mechanism had carefully pieced together all available
information to determine the evidence obtained in respect of the essential elements

6/33

17-18978

S/2017/904

of the cases. The results of the respective investigations were assessed according to
the criteria of credibility and reliability.
25. The Leadership Panel determined that, in order to identify those responsible
for the use of chemical weapons on the dates and at the times of the two incidents in
which, according to the determination of the Fact-Finding Mission, such use had
occurred, a finding must be made in accordance with the standards of evidence
described in the first report of the Mechanism (see S/2016/142). The Panel also
determined that it must be satisfied that the information used as the basi s for its
findings was credible and reliable and that each significant element was
corroborated by information from independent sources, including forensic institutes
and independent scientific experts.

IV.

Assessment, findings and conclusion

A.

Cases under investigation
26. Umm Hawsh. On 4 May 2017, the Secretary-General transmitted to the
President of the Security Council the report entitled “Report of the OPCW FactFinding Mission in Syria regarding the incident of 16 September 2016, as reported
in the note verbale of the Syrian Arab Republic, number 113, dated 29 November
2016” (see S/2017/400). In the section of that report entitled “Conclusions”, the
Fact-Finding Mission confirmed that the two female casualties reported to have
been involved in the incident in Umm Hawsh of 16 September 2016 had been
exposed to sulfur mustard.
27. Khan Shaykhun. Further to a status update by the Fact-Finding Mission
regarding a reported incident in Khan Shaykhun on 4 April 2017 (see S/2017/440),
on 30 June 2017 the Secretary-General transmitted to the President of the Security
Council the document entitled “Report of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria
regarding an alleged incident in Khan Shaykhun, Syrian Arab Republic, April 2017”
(see S/2017/567). On the basis of its work, the Fact-Finding Mission had concluded
that a large number of people, some of whom had died, had been exposed to sarin or
a sarin-like substance, and that such a release could only be determined to have
been the use of sarin as a chemical weapon.

B.

Leadership Panel’s assessments and findings
28. The following summarizes the work of the Mechanism and the assessment and
findings of the Leadership Panel.
29. Full descriptions of the Mechanism’s investigations into the incidents at Umm
Hawsh and Khan Shaykhun are contained in annexes I and II, respectively.
Umm Hawsh
30. In conducting its comprehensive investigation into the case, the Mechanism
used as a starting point the information and materials collected and prepared by the
Fact-Finding Mission. It interviewed 10 witnesses in addition to those questioned by
the Fact-Finding Mission and again interviewed the two victims. It also collected
and reviewed significant amounts of additional material, including videos,
photographs, satellite imagery and medical records. Furthermore, the Mechanism
obtained independent expert assessments and analysis regarding the munitions used
and their trajectory, as well as the medical effects on the victims and the treatment
administered to them.
31. The Mechanism determined that the incident affecting the two victims had
occurred on 15 September 2016 at approximately 1500 to 1600 hours. The

17-18978

7/33

S/2017/904

Mechanism made this finding on the basis of the following: medical records
indicating that the victims had been admitted to Afrin Hospital on 16 September
2016, approximately 23 hours after their exposure to the chemical agent; witness
interviews; and the determination of medical experts that the blisters of the victims
would have been at least 12 hours old at the time of their initial hospitalization.
32. On the basis of further witness statements, satellite imagery and verified
footage from the above-mentioned news crew, the Mechanism found that a second
incident involving the use of chemical weapons had occurred on the following day,
16 September 2016, when a mortar shell had been lodged into the pavement
between 1315 and 1500 hours.
33. On the basis of witness interviews, the Mechanism determined that a number
of people in addition to the two victims interviewed by the Fact-Finding Mission
might have been affected by sulfur mustard and in need of medical attention. Their
symptoms ranged from slight to severe, with the two victims still suffering from the
consequences to date. The Mechanism identified and interviewed only the two
victims.
34. Regarding the make and origin of the mortar shells, forensic analysis
determined that the mortar shell recovered from the pavement was of an improvised
or makeshift origin. On the basis of witness descriptions and a comparative analysis
of photographs of the mortar shells, experts determined the munition recovered
from the house to be of the same type as the one found in the pavement.
35. The forensic institutes and individual experts determined the range of the
mortar shells to be from 1 to 2 km. The delivery trajectory of the mortar shell found
in the pavement was determined to have originated from a point somewhere to the
east or south-east of the village. It was difficult to arrive at a precise determination
as to the trajectory of the mortar shell that had hit the house. However, on the basis
of the assessed trajectory of the mortar shell that had damaged the wall of the house,
combined with that of the munition found in the pavement, forensic analysis
indicated that the most likely launch point had been somewhere to the east or southeast of the village.
36. With respect to identifying those responsible, the Leadership Panel has
determined that there is sufficient credible and reliable evidence of the following:
(a) The trajectory of the mortar shell found in the pavement was determined
to have originated from a point somewhere to the east or south -east of the village.
The damage to the victim’s house indicated that the mortar shell that had caused it
had originated from a point south-east of the village;
(b) Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) was fighting against the
Syrian Democratic Forces from the outskirts of Umm Hawsh on 15 and
16 September 2016;
(c) ISIL was positioned along three sides of Umm Hawsh, specifically to the
east of the village (the assessed origin of the chemical mortar shells);
(d) Owing to the limited range (1 to 2 km) of the mortar shells, only ISIL
and the Syrian Democratic Forces were within striking distance of the impact
locations;
(e) As the Syrian Democratic Forces and ISIL were in active combat and
witness statements and forensic analysis support the conclusion that the mortar
shells came from the direction of ISIL-held areas, it is very unlikely that the Syrian
Democratic Forces are responsible for the incident;

8/33

17-18978

S/2017/904

(f) Unlike ISIL, which was found by the Mechanism to have used sulfur
mustard in Marea in August 2015 (see S/2016/738/Rev.1), there is no evidence that
the Syrian Democratic Forces have used sulfur mustard in the past.
On the basis of the foregoing, the Leadership Panel is confident that ISIL is
responsible for the use of sulfur mustard at Umm Hawsh on 15 and 16 September
2016. The findings of the Leadership Panel regarding the evidence i n this case are
based on the information set forth in detail in annex I.
Khan Shaykhun
37. Using the findings of the Fact-Finding Mission as a starting point, the
Mechanism conducted a comprehensive investigation into the release of sarin at
Khan Shaykhun on 4 April 2017. The Mechanism interviewed 17 witnesses in
addition to those interviewed by the Fact-Finding Mission and collected and
reviewed material not obtained by the Fact-Finding Mission. The Mechanism
obtained substantial information on activities of the Syrian Arab Air Force on
4 April 2017.
38. The Mechanism examined eight possible scenarios regarding how the incident
had occurred. On the basis of the information obtained, the following two scenarios
were further investigated: (a) sarin had been released through an aerial bomb; or
(b) sarin had been released through the explosion of an improvised explosive device
placed on the ground. A third scenario with two alternatives was also investigated,
neither of which was found to be linked to the release of sarin.
39. The Mechanism determined that sarin had been released from the location of a
crater in the northern part of Khan Shaykhun between 0630 and 0700 hours on
4 April 2017.
40. On the basis of their review of photographs, videos and satellite images, the
forensic institutes and individual experts engaged by the Mechanism determined
that the crater had most likely been caused by a heavy object travelling at high
velocity, such as an aerial bomb with a small explosive charge. Examining the
munition remnants observed inside the crater, the institutes and experts concluded
that the remnants were pieces of a thin-walled munition from 300 to 500 mm in
diameter and were likely from an aerial bomb.
41. The Mechanism also examined whether an improvised explosive device could
have caused the crater. While that possibility could not be completely ruled out, the
experts determined that that scenario was less likely, because an improvised
explosive device would have caused more damage to the surroundi ngs than had
been observed at the scene. Furthermore, no witnesses had reported the placement
or explosion of an improvised explosive device from the ground.
42. The Mechanism received information about the operation of Syrian Arab Air
Force aircraft in the area of Khan Shaykhun indicating that such aircraft may have
been in a position to launch aerial bombs in the vicinity. At the same time, however,
Syrian Arab Air Force flight records and other records provided by the Syrian Arab
Republic make no mention of Khan Shaykhun on 4 April 2017. Furthermore, a
representative of the Syrian Arab Air Force stated to the Mechanism that no Syrian
Arab Air Force aircraft had attacked Khan Shaykhun on 4 April 2017.
43. The Mechanism received conflicting information about the deployment of
aircraft in Khan Shaykhun that morning. On 6 and 13 April 2017, the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic had made public statements that the Syrian Arab Air
Force had bombed Khan Shaykhun with conventional bombs at approximately 1130
to 1200 hours. Furthermore, the Mechanism obtained original video footage from
two separate witnesses that showed four plumes caused by explosives across Khan
17-18978

9/33

S/2017/904

Shaykhun. The footage was confirmed by forensic analysis to be authentic and to
have been filmed in Khan Shaykhun between 0642 and 0652 hours on 4 April 2017.
44. The Mechanism examined the nature of the rescue and health-care operations
following the mass casualty situation caused by the release of sarin in Khan
Shaykhun. At present, the Mechanism cannot verify the total number of persons
who either died or were injured as a result of the attack, but concludes, on the basis
of its interviews with victims and medical personnel, its review of medical records
and its consultations with medical experts whom it has engaged, that the response to
the incident largely correlated to the reported number of casualties and victims.
45. The Mechanism commissioned an in-depth laboratory study of the origin of
the precursor chemical methylphosphonyl difluoride (DF) used to produce the
binary sarin released in Khan Shaykhun. The study revealed that the sarin had most
likely been made with the precursor DF from the original stock from the Syrian
Arab Republic. An initial screening of reports concerning previous incidents of the
release of sarin in the Syrian Arab Republic showed that some “marker chemicals”
appeared to be present in environmental samples. This would warrant fu rther study.
This finding relates only to the origin of the DF used as a precursor, not to those
responsible for the dissemination of sarin.
46. With respect to identifying those responsible, the Leadership Panel has
determined that the information that it has obtained constitutes sufficient credible
and reliable evidence of the following:
(a) Aircraft dropped munitions over Khan Shaykhun between 0630 and 0700
hours on 4 April 2017;
(b) An aircraft of the Syrian Arab Republic was in the immediate vicinit y of
Khan Shaykhun between 0630 and 0700 hours on 4 April 2017;
(c) The crater from which the sarin emanated was created on the morning of
4 April 2017;
(d)
velocity;

The crater was caused by the impact of an aerial bomb travelling at high

(e) A large number of people were affected by sarin between 0630 and 0700
hours on the morning of 4 April 2017;
(f) The number of persons affected by the release of sarin on 4 April 2017,
and the fact that sarin reportedly continued to be present at the site of the cr ater
10 days after the incident, indicate that a large amount of sarin was likely released,
which is consistent with its being dispersed through a chemical aerial bomb;
(g) The symptoms of victims and their medical treatment, as well as the
scale of the incident, are consistent with a large-scale intoxication of sarin;
(h) The sarin identified in the samples taken from Khan Shaykhun was found
to have most likely been made with a precursor (DF) from the original stockpile of
the Syrian Arab Republic;
(i) The irregularities described in annex II are not of such a nature as to call
into question the aforementioned findings.
On the basis of the foregoing, the Leadership Panel is confident that the Syrian Arab
Republic is responsible for the release of sarin at Khan Shaykhun on 4 April 2017.
The findings of the Leadership Panel regarding the evidence in this case are based
on the information set forth in detail in annex II.

10/33

17-18978

S/2017/904

V.

Other activities

A.

Interaction with Member States and the Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons
Syrian Arab Republic
47. In accordance with resolution 2235 (2015), the Syrian Arab Republic, and all
parties in that country, are to fully cooperate with the Mechanism, including by
providing full access to all locations, individuals and materials in the Syrian Arab
Republic that the Mechanism deems relevant to its investigation. The Syrian Arab
Republic engaged constructively with the Mechanism and demonstrated its
commitment to cooperating with the Mechanism and facilitating its requests for
access to information and witnesses. The Mechanism maintained regular contact
with the relevant authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic.
48. The Mechanism engaged with the Syrian Arab Republic for planning purposes,
including by requesting that a liaison officer be based in Damascus. The Mechanism
received a positive response to that request on 11 July 2017 and thereafter
commenced planning to visit the country.
49. In letters dated 5 and 19 July 2017, the Head of the Mechanism requested that
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic provide official records regarding
arrangements and movements at Sha‘irat airbase with respect to 4 April 2017.
50. During the first visit to Damascus by members of the Leadership Panel, from
19 to 21 August 2017, the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic provided all
materials requested by the Mechanism. During that mission, the Head of the
Mechanism met with representatives of the Government, including the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates and members of the armed forces.
51. During the Mechanism’s second visit to Damascus, from 7 to 11 September
2017, a technical team of the Mechanism conducted witness interviews, collected
information and met with representatives of the Government, including officials
from the Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre.
52. During its third visit, from 8 to 10 October 2017, the Mechanism went to
Sha‘irat airbase. After having received information provided by the Syrian Arab
Republic during its first and second visits to Damascus, the Mechanism considered
that such a visit would be of value to its investigation into the incident at Khan
Shaykhun. The technical visit had the following objectives: (a) to verify the
authenticity of the logbooks and flight operations records from 4 April 2017; (b) to
review entry and exit logs and interview responsible personnel; (c) to photograph
the types of munitions flown on 4 April 2017 in accordance with the logs received;
and (d) to photograph the mechanisms for attaching such munitions onto Sukhoi
Su-22 aircraft. Collecting samples at the airbase was not an objective of the visit;
the Mechanism had determined that doing so would not advance the investigation.
The Mechanism considered that if a single chemical munition had been flown from
the airbase, there was little chance of finding any trace of sarin or its degradation
products at an airbase of that size without specific information as to where to collect
samples.
53. In addition to carrying out those visits to the Syrian Arab Republic, the
Leadership Panel held regular meetings with representatives of the S yrian Arab
Republic in New York.
54. As stated in the fourth, fifth and sixth reports of the Mechanism
(see S/2016/888, S/2017/131 and S/2017/552), on 10 October 2016 the Syrian Arab
Republic notified the Mechanism that the Syrian national committee had opened an

17-18978

11/33

S/2017/904

internal investigation, which included flight plans and air operations. To date, the
Syrian Arab Republic has not provided the Mechanism with the outcomes of the
investigation.
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
55. The Mechanism’s investigation initially commenced with a comprehensive
review and analysis of all the information collected and prepared by the FactFinding Mission regarding the two cases. This comprised 2,554 files, which
included documents, video interviews, audio recordings, photographs and laboratory
results.
56. OPCW provided the Mechanism with three technical experts who were
deployed with the Mechanism’s technical team to visit Sha‘irat airbase. The experts
provided the Mechanism with additional specialized skills, including to ensure the
safety of the operation.
57. OPCW also provided invaluable support through its labor atory and its
designated laboratory network.
58. The Leadership Panel was in regular contact with the Director -General of
OPCW both from New York and in The Hague. Moreover, the Mechanism interacted
with OPCW on a frequent basis throughout the Mechanism’s mandate.
Information from Member States
59. The Leadership Panel sent formal requests for information to Member States,
including the Syrian Arab Republic, members of the Security Council and countries
in the region, on three occasions. The requests for information were sent on 15 June
2017, regarding the case at Umm Hawsh; on 5 July 2017, regarding the case at Khan
Shaykhun; and on 30 August 2017, regarding both cases. The Mechanism also sent
tailored follow-up requests regarding both cases to a number of Member States that
had responded to the initial requests.
60. Twelve Member States provided case-specific information, which was
subjected to the same rigorous review and analysis as other information gathered.
The Mechanism always sought to collect additional material from at least one other
independent source for corroboration purposes.
61. Throughout the reporting period, the Leadership Panel met with Member
States, including members of the Security Council. This was also an opportunity to
brief Member States on the general status of the work of the Mechanism and to
engage with regional States. In addition, members of the Leadership Panel visited
the capitals of four Member States, including the Syrian Arab Republic, at their
invitation, to be briefed on specific aspects of the two cases.
Allegations from Member States
62. Since the issuance of its sixth report on 28 June 2017, the Mechanism has
formally received 15 allegations related to non-State actors’ acquisition, possession
or transfer of, or intent to use, chemical weapons or toxic che micals. Two
allegations specifically referred to ISIL. Thirteen allegations also included the
acquisition of missiles and rockets fitted with toxic chemicals by non -State actors,
including seven allegations involving the Nusrah Front. Those allegations wer e
shared with OPCW.

12/33

17-18978

S/2017/904

B.

Consultation with United Nations counter-terrorism and non-proliferation bodies
63. In fulfilling its mandate, the Mechanism consulted appropriate United Nations
counter-terrorism and non-proliferation bodies to exchange information, as
encouraged in resolution 2319 (2016), including with the experts of those bodies.

C.

Information management
64. The Mechanism took measures to ensure that its personnel complied with the
confidentiality and security protection requirements set out in the memorandum of
understanding concluded between the Mechanism and OPCW on 26 November
2015, concerning the provision of access to and the storage and handling of
information.
65. All personnel and all other individuals and entities with whom the Mechanism
engaged were also required to enter into confidentiality undertakings.
66. The Mechanism followed standard operating procedures and guidelines on
information management (see S/2016/888, annex), as well as on the conduct of
interviews and the collection of evidence and information, including chain -ofcustody forms. In addition, the Mechanism applied the Secretary-General’s bulletin
on information sensitivity, classification and handling ( ST/SGB/2007/6) in relation
to the information collected and produced by the Mechanism. Fu rthermore, relevant
sections of the Secretary-General’s bulletin on record-keeping and the management
of United Nations archives (ST/SGB/2007/5), concerning the creation, management
and disposition of records, were applied by the Mechanism.

VI.

Challenges, risks and constraints
67. While the Mechanism actively collected information relevant to its
investigations from a range of sources, it also depended on Member States to assist
by providing quality information in a timely manner.
68. The conditions for receiving information in a highly sensitive political
environment with complex security considerations made the investigation extremely
challenging. On-site visits were subject to high security risks. Moreover, as an
investigative body without judicial powers, the Mechanism relied on the voluntary
cooperation of witnesses, was required to meet strict standards of confidentiality in
all its operations, and was to ensure the safety of witnesses without an y means of
witness protection.

VII.

Way forward
69. The Leadership Panel understands that several additional cases are currently
subject to fact-finding missions. On the basis of its recent work, the Leadership
Panel commends the continued scientific progress and development that have
provided invaluable support for complex investigations of this nature. In that regard,
it is important to maintain and enhance a network of internationally recognized
experts on these issues.
70. The Leadership Panel notes that the investigations conducted during the
reporting period provided a series of important lessons for future investigations of
this nature, which should be captured by conducting a comprehensive lessons learned exercise.

17-18978

13/33

S/2017/904

71. It is vital that the international community maintain an effective investigative
capacity to rapidly respond to any future use of chemical weapons, including acts of
chemical terrorism.

VIII.

Concluding remarks
72. The Leadership Panel is deeply concerned by the finding of the Fact-Finding
Mission that chemical weapons — sulfur mustard and sarin — were used. The Panel
expresses its shock and dismay at the existence and use of these weapons in the
Syrian Arab Republic, and its deep sympathy to those affected by them. The Pan el
encourages the international community not only to make united efforts to ensure
that such use will not be repeated, but also to provide assistance to those affected.
73. The continuing use of chemical weapons, including by non -State actors, is
deeply disturbing. If such use, notwithstanding its prohibition by the international
community, is not stopped now, a lack of consequences will surely encourage others
to follow, not only in the Syrian Arab Republic, but also elsewhere. This is the time
to bring these acts to an end.
74. The Leadership Panel wishes to give recognition to the professionalism,
dedication and sacrifice of its staff, and to express its deep appreciation for all their
work and commitment during the reporting period.
75. The Leadership Panel extends its appreciation for the support received from
the United Nations Secretariat, in particular the Office for Disarmament Affairs, and
from OPCW, which provided invaluable technical and logistical support to the
Mechanism.

14/33

17-18978

S/2017/904

Annex I
Umm Hawsh
I.

Findings of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons Fact-Finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic
1.
On the basis of interviews conducted with witnesses, including a visit to the
Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre in Barzah to conduct physical
examinations of items related to the reported incidents, the documents reviewed and
the results of blood sample analyses, the Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Fact-Finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic
confirmed that the two female casualties reported to have been involved in the
incidents in Umm Hawsh on 15 and 16 September 2016 had been exposed to sulfur
mustard. Furthermore, the Fact-Finding Mission stated that it had conducted a
thorough technical weapon exploitation on a 217-mm-calibre mortar. Supported by
the results of laboratory analyses, the Fact-Finding Mission determined that that
mortar shell contained sulfur mustard.

II.

Investigation by the Mechanism
2.
The Mechanism formulated possible scenarios to ensure that it approached the
investigation comprehensively and in an objective and impartial manner. While the
Mechanism sought to collect and analyse as much information as possible in
connection with each scenario, by the end of the investigation most of the
information obtained supported one scenario: that sulfur mustard munitions, one of
which had caused the exposure of the victims, had been fired on Umm Hawsh by an
actor.
Background
3.
Umm Hawsh (also known as Um Hosh) is a village in Aleppo Governorate
(Marea subdistrict, I‘zaz District). It is located at coordinates 36°24′51.12″N,
37°12′38.16″E, in the midst of a triangle of three larger cities: Aleppo, I‘zaz and
Bab. Umm Hawsh is approximately 23 km north-east of Aleppo city and 35 km
south of the Bab al-Salam border crossing with Turkey. It is located in a fork
between two motorways to the north of Aleppo, that is, east of the M214 and west
of the M20 motorways.
4.
In 2004, the population of Umm Hawsh, according to Syrian census data from
that year, was 3,542. At the time of the incidents in September 2016, the population
of Umm Hawsh was estimated to be 728.
5.
Umm Hawsh and the surrounding area fell under the control of Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) on 9 August 2015. It was taken over by the Syrian
Democratic Forces on 30 August 2016. Additional non-State armed groups were
present approximately 8 km to the north of Umm Hawsh, in Marea. The forces of
the Syrian Arab Republic and its allies were not present in Umm Hawsh at the time
of the incidents; the closest that they appear to have been was 8.7 km away in
Misqan. By the time of the sulfur mustard incident, the front-line and conflict
dynamics had not changed since Umm Hawsh had been captured by the Syrian
Democratic Forces on 30 August 2016. At that time, ISIL remained from 600 to 800
m east and 1 km north of the village, with an additional presence to the south of the
village.

17-18978

15/33

S/2017/904

Date and time
6.
The incident leading to the exposure of the victims to sulfur mustard has been
determined to have occurred at a house in Umm Hawsh at approximately 1500 to
1600 hours on Thursday, 15 September 2016. The Mechanism based that finding on
the following: medical records indicating that the victims had been admitted to
Afrin Hospital on 16 September 2016, approximately 23 hours after their exposure
to the chemical agent; witness interviews; and the assessment of medical experts
that the blisters of the victims would have been at least 12 hours old at the time of
their initial hospitalization.
7.
The Mechanism found that the following day, Friday, 16 September, a mortar
shell had been lodged in a pavement in the village at approximately 1315 to 1500
hours. That assessment is based on verified media footage, witness statements and
analysis of satellite imagery.
Impact location
8.
The Mechanism determined the location of the house 1 struck by a mortar shell
through a variety of means. One of the victims, who live d in the house, identified
the location on the basis of photographs presented during an interview with the
Mechanism. The photographs included images of the house, the street and the
village. Moreover, the information regarding the location of the house wa s
corroborated through forensic analysis, the statements of several other witnesses, a
review of satellite imagery and the findings of the Fact-Finding Mission. The
identification of the location was also supported by original videos provided to the
Mechanism showing damage to the house.
9.
The mortar shell in the pavement was determined to be located at
approximately 36°24′43.29″N, 37°12′31.16″E. The identification of the location was
based on forensic analysis of video footage taken by news crews who fil med the
munition still protruding from the pavement. The finding regarding the location of
the mortar shell in the pavement was corroborated through analysis of satellite
imagery, the statements of three witnesses and the findings of the Fact-Finding
Mission and the chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear defence team of the
Russian Federation.
Munition analysis
10. Several witnesses interviewed by the Mechanism confirmed that a mortar shell
or a munition had hit the house of one of the two vict ims. The mortar shell had not
been recovered, as the owner of the house had thrown it away sometime after the
incident. However, a news crew had photographed a damaged mortar shell the
following day and provided images to the Mechanism. The owner of the ho use
identified the mortar shell from photographs taken by the news crew. A forensic
institute and an expert engaged by the Mechanism who specializes in energetic
materials stated that the mortar shell that had hit the house was very likely the same
type as the mortar shell found in the pavement. A defence research institute, a
forensic institute and an expert consultant, all engaged by the Mechanism, observed
that the mortar shell recovered from the pavement was of poor production quality.
After the munition had hit the house, five witnesses described qualities, such as
smell, indicating that the mortar shell contained sulfur mustard.
__________________
1

16/33

While the Mechanism obtained the geographical coordinates of the house damaged by the mortar,
its location is not included in the present report as a result of concern for the safety and security
of the victims.
17-18978

S/2017/904

11. With respect to the origin of the mortar shells, experts in energetic materials
noted that the mortar shell recovered from the pavement had an appearance similar
to those made through makeshift large-scale production methods. The Fact-Finding
Mission established that the munition found in the pavement was a 217 -mm-calibre
mortar shell. Mortars fitting 217-mm-calibre mortar shells are easily produced from
available high-quality steel tubing. The range of such munitions is from 1 to 2 km.
On the basis of the limited information available, a defence research institute
commissioned by the Mechanism concluded that it was impossib le to identify the
manufacturer(s) of the munitions.
12. Regarding the characteristics of the munition that had caused damage to the
house, an expert in energetic materials noted that, on the basis of a review of
photographs and video footage, the damage was consistent with having been caused
by a mortar shell fired from a mortar with a calibre of approximately 220 mm.
According to the Fact-Finding Mission, the mortar shell in the pavement contained
sulfur mustard. The pavement was not seriously damaged, a nd there was likely
residual contamination from the leaking munition. A forensic institute observed that
the lack of a major explosion suggested that these mortar shells were designed to
carry a chemical agent. Regarding the penetration of the pavement by the mortar
shell, two experts in energetic materials observed that it had occurred with little sign
of damage to either the mortar shell or the pavement itself. Both experts tried to find
an explanation, with one noting that there was little resistance in the pavement
because of an observed pre-existing cavity, which the mortar shell had penetrated.
13. With respect to the range of the mortar shells, forensic institutes and experts
commissioned by the Mechanism determined the distance from where they had be en
launched to the impact site to be from 1 to 2 km. They also noted that the range and
accuracy of homemade mortar shells are imprecise and depend on a number of
variables, including the amount of explosive powder used.
14. In addition, the same experts determined the trajectory of the mortar shell
found in the pavement to have originated from a point to the east or south -east of
the village. Witnesses confirmed that it had originated from the eastern side of Umm
Hawsh. The assessed trajectory of the mortar shell that had struck the house was
less precise, as it was based on the damage caused to the wall of the house. That
trajectory was determined to be an arc from due east to nearly due west, with its
subjective central line originating from the south-east.
Medical effects and response
15. When interviewed by the Mechanism, the victim stated that, upon finding the
house had been damaged by the mortar shell, she had commenced cleaning the
house with her bare hands using laundry detergent. She later a sked a neighbour to
help. Both cleaned for approximately four hours, until after the Maghrib call to
prayer. The owner of the house reported becoming sick at about that time, including
experiencing visual impairment. She took a shower, and later felt dizzy and
vomited. The following morning, members of the Syrian Democratic Forces took
the victim to Tall Rif‘at Hospice; however, no doctors were available at the time.
Later that day, they went to Afrin Hospital, where the victim lost consciousness. A
week later, the victim awakened with bandaged hands. She was subsequently
admitted to a hospital in Damascus. The neighbour who helped to clean the house
also became sick and went to the hospital.
16. The Mechanism also interviewed the victim’s neighbour, who stated that she
had tried to clean the “oil” away using water and laundry detergent. At the start of
the cleaning process, the victim could smell the chemical, but then grew somewhat
accustomed to it. She went home to take a shower and later became dizzy and could
17-18978

17/33

S/2017/904

not eat or drink. After going to a relative’s house, the victim fell to the ground and
began to vomit, before losing consciousness. By the next morning, she could no
longer see and was transported to a hospital by relatives. They first went to Ahras
Medical Centre, where the victim was treated. By that time, her whole body had
become swollen and had developed blisters. By 1000 to 1100 hours, the victim had
been taken to Afrin Hospital, where she stayed for 20 days. Still in poor condition,
the victim then went to Kafr Naya Hospice and later to a hospital in Damascus. The
victim could not speak, and her chest felt tight for a month.
17. Several sources indicate that other civilians and three fighters from non -State
armed groups were also affected by the chemical incident. This information is only
partially corroborated by one witness, who stated that Afrin Hospital had received
one male adult and two children with mild symptoms as ambulant patients on
16 September 2016. Another witness suggested that a number of children had also
been affected and taken to the hospital. This could not be corroborated by the
Mechanism. Another witness insisted that the hospital had not received additional
patients with similar symptoms, but only those two cases.
18. An additional witness indicated to the Mechanism that a relative had cleaned
the furniture contaminated with sulfur mustard and, as a result, had developed minor
symptoms on the fingers.
19. While a number of other people may have been affected by the sul fur mustard
incident and needed medical attention, only two of them were identified and
interviewed by the Mechanism. The victims’ symptoms included large blisters on
their upper and lower limbs and faces; they continue to suffer from the
consequences of sulfur mustard exposure to date. Clinical toxicologists engaged by
the Mechanism confirmed the exposure of the victims to sulfur mustard and noted
that it might have permanent implications for their health.
Chemistry
20. The chemical agent that affected the victims is sulfur mustard. It is a blistering
agent whose precursor chemicals are relatively cheap and easy to acquire.
21. The Fact-Finding Mission conducted chemical analysis of the samples of
sulfur mustard. It concluded that the presence and relevant quantities of disulfide
and trisulfide mustard analogues indicated that this mustard was most likely
produced using the Levinstein chemical reaction process, which is widely
understood to be an alternative and relatively uncomplicated method of produc ing
sulfur mustard to which non-State actors might turn.
22. Witnesses and open sources point to ISIL as a possible perpetrator of the
chemical attack. Information provided to the Mechanism indicates that ISIL had
developed the capability to produce sulfur mustard as of 2015. ISIL had ample
access to industrial zones, including oil and gas fields, in which to produce the
relevant delivery systems, munitions and chemicals. ISIL has a historical record of
using sulfur mustard, including in August 2015 in Marea (just 7.4 km north of Umm
Hawsh). In its third report (S/2016/738/Rev.1), the Mechanism found that ISIL had
the capacity to produce sulfur mustard through the Levinstein process.

III.

Assessment and findings by the Leadership Panel
23. In order to determine, to the greatest extent feasible, those who were
perpetrators, organizers, sponsors or otherwise involved in the use of sulfur mustard
on 15 and 16 September 2016 in Umm Hawsh, the Leadership P anel requested that
the investigators examine four possible scenarios regarding how the events had

18/33

17-18978

S/2017/904

unfolded. Upon the conclusion of the investigation, the prevailing scenario that
emerged was that sulfur mustard munitions, one of which had caused the expos ure
of victims, had been fired on Umm Hawsh by an actor.
24. Most of the information collected and analysed by the Mechanism supports
this scenario. The majority of the evidence suggests that the munitions were fired
from a location to the east or south-east, where one particular actor (ISIL) was
positioned at the time of the incident.
25. With respect to identifying those responsible, the Leadership Panel has
determined that the information that it has obtained constitutes sufficient credible
and reliable evidence of the following:
(a) The trajectory of the mortar shell found in the pavement was determined
to have originated from a point to the east or south -east of the impact location. The
damage caused to the victim’s house indicated that the trajector y of the mortar shell
that had caused it had originated from a point to the south -east;
(b) ISIL was fighting against the Syrian Democratic Forces from the
outskirts of Umm Hawsh on 15 and 16 September 2016;
(c) ISIL was positioned along three sides of Umm Hawsh, specifically to the
east and south-east of the village (the assessed origin of the chemical mortar shells);
(d) Owing to the limited range (1 to 2 km) of the mortar shells, only ISIL
and the Syrian Democratic Forces were within striking dista nce of the impact
locations;
(e) As the Syrian Democratic Forces and ISIL were in active combat and
witness statements and forensic analysis support the conclusion that the mortar shell
came from the direction of ISIL-held areas, it is very unlikely that the Syrian
Democratic Forces were responsible for the incident;
(f) Unlike ISIL, which was found by the Mechanism to have used sulfur
mustard in Marea in August 2015 (see S/2016/738/Rev.1), there is no evidence that
the Syrian Democratic Forces have used sulfur mustard in the past.
On the basis of the foregoing, the Leadership Panel is confident that ISIL is
responsible for the use of sulfur mustard at Umm Hawsh on 15 and 16 September
2016. The findings of the Leadership Panel regarding the evidence in this case are
based on the information set forth in detail in the present annex.

17-18978

19/33

S/2017/904

Annex II
Khan Shaykhun
I.

Findings of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons Fact-Finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic
1.
On the basis of its analysis of biomedical specimens, interviews and
supplementary material submitted during the interview process, as well as analysis
of environmental samples, the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) Fact-Finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic found that a
large number of people, some of whom had died, had been exposed to sarin or a
sarin-like substance at Khan Shaykhun on 4 April 2017. While it had received
limited information on the dispersal mechanism and therefore had been unable to
draw firm conclusions on that specific matter, it considered that the release that had
caused the exposure was likely to have been initiated in the crater in the ro ad,
located close to the silos in the northern part of the town. It concluded that, on the
basis of such a release, the only determination that could be made was that sarin had
been used as a weapon.

II.

Investigation by the Mechanism
2.
Upon receiving the final report of the Fact-Finding Mission on the incident of
4 April 2017 at Khan Shaykhun, the Mechanism conducted an in-depth investigation
into the incident. The Leadership Panel defined the scope of the investigation by
adopting an investigation plan that outlined eight possible scenarios, including those
put forward by Member States, regarding how sarin had been released in Khan
Shaykhun. While the Mechanism sought to collect and analyse as much information
as possible in connection with each scenario, by the end of the investigation most of
the information obtained supported three scenarios: (a) sarin had been delivered
through an aerial bomb that had been dropped by an aircraft; (b) sarin had been
released from the ground as part of a staged attack; or (c) there had been an air
strike by the Syrian Arab Air Force against a storage facility containing toxic
chemicals, which had resulted in the dispersion of a toxic cloud.
3.
The first scenario is based on reports that aircraft were either seen or heard
dropping bombs over Khan Shaykhun early in the morning on 4 April 2017. Sarin is
believed to have emanated from a point of impact on a road (hereinafter referred to
as “the crater”) caused by an aerial bomb, located close to silos in the northern pa rt
of Khan Shaykhun.
4.
The second scenario is based on a report that sarin was released from the same
crater as that in the first scenario, caused by an explosive charge placed on the
ground containing sarin, so as to stage an attack for which the Governm ent of the
Syrian Arab Republic would be blamed.
5.
The third scenario involves a reported strike by the Syrian Arab Air Force on
an ammunition depot on the eastern outskirts of Khan Shaykhun where workshops
had been producing chemical warfare munitions. In a public statement, the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic stated that the Syrian Arab Air Force had
only conducted an attack in Khan Shaykhun at around noon on 4 April 2017. An
alternative third scenario is that a house in Khan Shaykhun that had bee n taken over
by a non-State armed group and used for the storage of toxic chemicals was bombed
on 4 April 2017, thus releasing toxic chemicals.

20/33

17-18978

S/2017/904

Background
6.
Khan Shaykhun is both a town and a subdistrict of Ma‘arrat al -Nu‘man
District, within the governorate of Idlib in north -western Syrian Arab Republic, with
the coordinates 35.44°N, 36.65°E, at 376 m above sea level. Located about 10 km
from the border of Hama Governorate to the south and about 100 km from Aleppo
Governorate to the north, Khan Shaykhun is positioned on the M5 motorway, which
runs from the Jordanian border in the southern part of the country, through
Damascus city and to Aleppo city in the northern part of the country.
7.
Recent information available to the Mechanism estimates that the subdistrict
of Khan Shaykhun has a population of approximately 34,000, with the town itself
having a population of 16,000.
8.
A review of open-source information indicates that, in mid-2014, the Nusrah
Front launched an offensive in southern Idlib Governorate and seized the town of
Khan Shaykhun. According to witness statements as well as open sources, on the
date of the incident on 4 April 2017, the Levant Liberation Organization, which
includes the Nusrah Front as its major component, had a prominent presence in the
area of Khan Shaykhun, with Ahrar al-Sham also being present in the general area,
along with several other non-State armed groups.
9.
A review of open sources also indicates that, on 21 March 2017, the Levant
Liberation Organization and its allied groups launched an offensive against forces of
the Syrian Arab Republic in the direction of Hama city from its positions in northern
Hama Governorate. By 23 March 2017, the Levant Liberation Organization and its
allied groups reportedly advanced to areas 3 to 5 km from the Hama city line and
threatened to capture the Hama military airport. On 24 March 2017, Ahrar al -Sham
and its allied groups reportedly launched a separate offensive in north-western
Hama Governorate. Open-source information suggests that at around the same time,
Syrian government forces started to gain momentum, although with some temporary
setbacks, in repelling these attacks. Reinforcements reportedly arrived from other
parts of the Syrian Arab Republic. Syrian government forces were also reportedly
aided in repelling air attacks on locations in northern Hama and southern Idlib
governorates. According to the Director-General of OPCW, sarin was found to have
been released in Lataminah on 30 March 2017. By 3 April 2017, Syrian government
forces had made rapid advances, reportedly regaining control over most of the areas
lost after 21 March 2017, and had moved deeper into some of the areas that h ad
been controlled by non-State armed groups prior to 21 March. Media sources
indicate that, between 17 March and 3 April 2017, aerial attacks were carried out on
a regular basis against targets in Khan Shaykhun.
Date and time
10. On the basis of witness statements and forensic analysis of photographs and
video footage, the Mechanism found that the sarin incident had occurred in Khan
Shaykhun between 0630 and 0700 hours local time on 4 April 2017. Moreover, the
Mechanism collected multiple reports released by the media during the morning of
4 April 2017, which indicated that a “chemical attack” had occurred in Khan
Shaykhun between 0630 and 0700 hours.
11. Witnesses reported that the alleged attack in Khan Shaykhun on 4 April 2017
had been carried out by an aircraft between 0630 and 0700 hours. The Mechanism
obtained original photographs and video footage from witnesses showing plumes on
the morning of 4 April 2017, indicating that several explosions had occurred in
Khan Shaykhun between 0630 and 0700 hours. On the basis of forensic analysis, it
was determined that the plume videos and images had been recorded on 4 April

17-18978

21/33

S/2017/904

2017 between 0642 and 0652 hours. Further forensic analysis confirmed that the
footage had not been manipulated and had been taken on the outskirts of Khan
Shaykhun.
12. Moreover, on the basis of satellite images from 3 April 2017, which do not
show the presence of the crater at that time, the Mechanism has confidence that the
crater was caused by an impact on 4 April 2017.
Early warning
13. Witnesses interviewed by the Mechanism described an “early warning system”
(commonly referred to as “spotters”, “observers” or “observatories”) that possibly
played a role in warning residents of the attack on 4 April 2017. By intercepting
communications between aircraft of the Syrian Arab Air Force and the bases from
which they are operated, members of the spotter network monitor flight activities
and communicate early warning information to residents about impending air
strikes.
14. The Mechanism collected information from witnesses to the effect that a first
warning of a possible upcoming chemical attack had been received by the “Syria
Civil Defence” (also known as the “White Helmets”) and spotters in Khan
Shaykhun. Witnesses stated that the Syria Civil Defence in Khan Shaykhun had
been in contact by way of the Internet with spotters and that, at approximately
0630 hours on 4 April 2017, the spotters had announced that a Sukhoi Su-22
military aircraft had taken off from Sha‘irat airbase. A witness interviewed by the
Mechanism, who reported having worked that morning as a spotter in Khan
Shaykhun, recalled having received an alert concerning the take -off of a Su-22 from
Sha‘irat airbase on the morning of 4 April 2017. The witness stated that the alert had
advised residents to be careful, as the aircraft was likely carrying toxic chemicals.
15. The Mechanism noted several witness statements suggesting that, on the
morning of 4 April 2017, the early warning system might not have been fully
functional. The Syria Civil Defence reported that, when the members of the first
volunteer team had responded to the air strike, they had had no idea that it was a
chemical attack and that they had all been poisoned. Several witnesses stated that
there had been no warning of an attack on the morning of 4 April, while others
reported having received alerts at various times between 0630 and 0715 hours that
morning.
16. While there are varying accounts as to whether the early warning system was
fully functional that morning, the above information gathered by the Mechanism
neither supports nor excludes any of the three scenarios.
Air deployment
17. While there are varying accounts of the nature and timing of the attack, and
the subsequent number of explosions, several witnesses interviewed by the
Mechanism and the Fact-Finding Mission stated that they had seen or heard aircraft
flying over Khan Shaykhun in the early morning of 4 April 2017, in keeping with
the scenario in which aircraft dropped bombs on Khan Shaykhun that morning.
18. The Mechanism collected two original videos, filmed by two witnesses from
different angles, showing several plumes; the videos were confirmed by forensic
institutes to have been filmed between 0642 and 0652 hours during the morning of
4 April 2017. Forensic analysis of the videos found that, at a certain point in each
video, the sound of an aircraft could be heard in the background along with an
explosion.

22/33

17-18978

S/2017/904

19. The Mechanism investigated whether a Syrian Arab Air Force Su -22 had taken
off from Sha‘irat airbase, located 110 km south of Khan Shaykhun, and launched an
air attack on the town that morning. The Governments of France and the United
States of America publicly provided information indicating that a Syrian Arab Air
Force Su-22 had taken off from Sha‘irat airbase on 4 April 2017, flown over Khan
Shaykhun at 0637 and 0646 hours, and launched up to six attacks around Khan
Shaykhun.
20. The Mechanism requested that the Syrian Arab Republic provide official
records with respect to activities carried out at Sha‘irat airbase on 4 April 2017,
including logbooks of all operations, movements at the airbase, flights, names of the
pilots flying aircraft and a detailed map or plan showing the layout of the airbase. In
response to that request, the Government provided the Mechanism with a set of
copies of official documents relating to Sha‘irat airbase, including extracts from
handwritten Syrian Arab Air Force logbooks as well as a document detailing the
airbase chain of command and an aerial image of the airbase.
21. During its visit to Sha‘irat airbase, the Mechanism observed that the
documents provided by the Syrian Arab Republic appeared to be copies of the
originals. The technical visit had the following objectives: (a) to verify the
authenticity of the logbooks and flight operation records from 4 April 2017; (b) to
review entry and exit logs and interview responsible personnel; (c) to photograph
the types of munitions flown on 4 April in accordance with logs received; and (d) to
photograph the mechanisms by which such munitions were attached to Su-22
aircraft.
22. The Mechanism found no entries in any of the documents that referred
specifically to Khan Shaykhun on 4 April 2017. Two entries in a logbook provided
details regarding the time of execution of missions that corresponded to the time
frame of the release of sarin at Khan Shaykhun. The operations relating to those
flights had been logged as aerial attacks using conventional munitions targeting
non-State armed groups in the vicinity of Kafr Zayta and Tall Hawash, situated
approximately 8 km south-west and 18 km west of Khan Shaykhun, respectively.
23. The Mechanism interviewed the pilot associated with one of the entries in the
logbook, who used the call sign “Quds 1” and had flown a Su -22 at the relevant
time that day. The pilot stated that no chemical weapons had been used and that the
mission that morning had been to carry out an attack to the west of Kafr Zayta using
three 500 kg conventional munitions. This was found to be consistent with the
details recorded in the logbook. According to the pilot, the closest distance to Khan
Shaykhun flown on that date had been approximately 7 to 9 km, to carry out an
attack against targets west of Kafr Zayta. While the Mechanism was able to confirm
severe structural damage to a building in the general vicinity of one of those targets
through analysis of satellite imagery, it could not precisely determine when the
damage had occurred.
24. The Mechanism did not interview the pilot associated with the second entry.
The Syrian Arab Republic informed the Mechanism that the pilot had later been shot
down and was missing in action.
25. Taking samples was not an objective of the visit to Sha‘irat airbase. The
Mechanism had determined that the collection of samples at the airb ase would not
advance the investigation. The Mechanism considered that if a single chemical
munition had been flown from that base, there was little chance of finding any trace
of sarin or its degradation products at an airbase of that size (approximately 10 km 2 )
without specific information as to where to collect samples.

17-18978

23/33

S/2017/904

26. During a briefing given by the Syrian Arab Republic to the Mechanism in
Damascus, a representative of the Syrian Arab Air Force stated that no aircraft of
the Air Force had attacked Khan Shaykhun on 4 April 2017. This contradicted the
public statement made by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic (see para. 5
above). The Mechanism also interviewed the Commander of Sha‘irat airbase, who
stated that no aircraft from the airbase had attacked Khan Shaykhun on 4 April.
27. At the request of the Mechanism, the Syrian Arab Republic provided the exact
coordinates of six locations targeted by the Syrian Arab Air Force aircraft operating
from Sha‘irat airbase on 4 April 2017. The coordinate s were found to be similar to
the description of the targets identified in the relevant logbook. While those entries
include flight times that correspond to the likely timing of the sarin event at Khan
Shaykhun, they refer to aerial attacks targeting unide ntified non-State armed groups
in the town of Tall Hawash and west of Kafr Zayta. As noted above, while the
Mechanism could confirm that one of these locations had sustained damage, it could
not confirm that the damage had occurred on 4 April.
28. On 7 April 2017, United States authorities publicly released a statement and a
map depicting a flight path of an aircraft originating from Sha‘irat airbase that
allegedly had been flying over Khan Shaykhun at approximately 0637 and
0646 hours. The Mechanism had access to another aerial map depicting the path of
an aircraft alleged to have been in the airspace around Khan Shaykhun between
approximately 0644 and 0651 hours on 4 April 2017. The aircraft was depicted as
flying in a circular loop pattern in the vicinity of Kafr Zayta and north-east of Khan
Shaykhun. The map indicated that the closest to Khan Shaykhun that the aircraft had
flown had been approximately 5 km away. Additional information provided to the
Mechanism referred to two aircraft that had taken off from Sha‘irat airbase at
around the same time as indicated above, 10 minutes apart, following the same
flight path. On the basis of the above, the Mechanism found that air activity had
taken place around Khan Shaykhun at about the time of the sarin incide nt.
29. The Mechanism compared the flight times of Syrian Arab Air Force aircraft
taking off from Sha‘irat airbase, as provided by the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, with other flight information that it had received. The Syrian and other
accounts are consistent in indicating that the Syrian Arab Air Force aircraft were in
the air at the relevant time. Where the accounts diverge is with respect to whether or
not the aircraft flew over or in the immediate vicinity of Khan Shaykhun.
30. As noted in paragraphs 19, 23 and 28 above, the Mechanism obtained
information detailing the presence of a Su-22 within 5 km of Khan Shaykhun, as
well as information provided by a Su-22 pilot interviewed by the Mechanism
indicating that he had been within 7 to 9 km of Khan Shaykhun at the relevant time.
The Mechanism consulted with a weapons expert to ascertain the confluence of
distance and altitude from which it might be possible to hit Khan Shaykhun with an
aerial bomb. The expert concluded that, depending on a numb er of variables such as
altitude, speed and the flight path taken, it would be possible for such an aerial
bomb to be dropped on the town from the aforementioned distances.
31. To date, the Mechanism has found no specific information confirming whether
or not a Syrian Arab Air Force Su-22 operating from Sha‘irat airbase launched an
aerial attack against Khan Shaykhun on 4 April 2017.
Ground explosion
32. The Mechanism also sought to collect information about possible activities
related to the dissemination of sarin from an improvised explosive device on the
ground in accordance with the second scenario. While the Mechanism found no
information relating to the preparation of an explosion through such means, it noted
24/33

17-18978

S/2017/904

a witness statement that was consistent with that scenario. In an interview with the
Mechanism, the witness reported waking up at approximately 0700 hours on 4 April
2017 to the sound of explosions. The witness stated that no aircraft had been flying
over Khan Shaykhun at the time and that aircraft had begun to launch attacks only at
around 1100 hours.
33. No witnesses reported any activities related to the placing of an explosive
charge on the ground at the location of the incident.
34. The Syrian Arab Republic provided information to the M echanism suggesting
that the release of sarin had been associated with an above -ground explosion, using
an explosive charge that did not exceed 10 kg and that had been placed on the
ground with a 25-litre container full of sarin. This is examined in further detail in
the sections below.
Bombing of a house taken over by a non-State armed group
35. In connection with the third scenario, witness statements refer to reports of a
house in Khan Shaykhun being taken over by a non-State armed group and used
thereafter for the storage of ammunition and barrels. The Mechanism identified the
location of the house, which corresponded to the second plume shown in the video
filmed between 0642 and 0652 hours that morning. Analysis of satellite imagery
revealed that damage caused to the roof of the house had occurred between
21 February and 6 April 2017. Original photographs provided by witnesses
interviewed by the Mechanism also showed damage to the roof and front of the
house. An independent expert engaged by the Mechanism found that the damage to
the house was consistent with an explosion being caused by an air -delivered
thermobaric bomb or fuel-air explosives. Samples taken by the Syrian Arab
Republic from the site of the house at a later date were not found to contain traces
of sarin or its degradation products.
36. The Mechanism has found no information indicating that sarin was released
from this location on the morning of 4 April 2017. The Mechanism found no other
information related to that scenario.
Bombing of a warehouse on the eastern outskirts of Khan Shaykhun
37. The Mechanism also conducted investigations with respect to the possibility
that sarin may have been released following the bombing of a building on the
eastern outskirts of Khan Shaykhun at around noon on 4 April 2017. The location,
referred to in some public statements as a terrorist ammunition depot, appears to be
a building used by the Syria Civil Defence as a medical site on the eastern outskirts
of Khan Shaykhun. Apart from the fact that victims of the sarin incident earlier that
morning had been treated there, the Mechanism did not link that location to the
release of sarin.
Impact location
38. In accordance with the first two scenarios investigated by the Mechanism, the
crater is the point of impact of either of the following: (a) an aerial bomb dropped
from an airplane, thus dispersing sarin; or (b) an undefined mechanism, linked to
the dispersion of sarin, that exploded on the surface of the road.
39. The impact location was determined to be the site identified by the FactFinding Mission as being to the west of grain silos in the northern part of Khan
Shaykhun. Samples taken from the crater and its surroundings were found by the
Fact-Finding Mission to contain sarin.

17-18978

25/33

S/2017/904

40. The Mechanism collected multiple photographs and videos of the crater from
witnesses and open sources, as well as satellite imagery from a provider contracted
by the Mechanism. Using those materials, forensic institutes engaged by the
Mechanism determined that the crater is located at approximately 35°26′59.75″N,
36°38′55.91″E.
41. In order to identify other points of impact possibly associated with the release
of sarin, the Mechanism commissioned the forensic analysis of video footage taken
between 0642 and 0652 hours on 4 April that showed four plumes across Khan
Shaykhun, three of which had been located approximately 320 m south-west of the
crater and the fourth approximately 1.3 km south-south-west of the crater, one of
which had been shorter and whiter than the others. None of the locations from
which the plumes had emanated could be associated with the loc ation of the crater.
42. Expert analysis of satellite imagery available to the Mechanism that had been
taken of Khan Shaykhun on 21 February 2017 and 6 April 2017 was carried out to
identify signs of damaged structures and craters in the area correlating to the
locations of the plumes. The Mechanism found that at least three of those locations
were buildings that appeared to have been damaged by a thermobaric bomb or fuel air explosives. Damage to a building was observed in the general vicinity of the
shorter plume, which appeared to have been created between the aforementioned
dates. Therefore, the Mechanism could not conclusively determine that the building
had been bombed on 4 April 2017.
43. The cause of the plume that was shorter and whiter in appearance than the
other three could not be conclusively identified by munitions experts engaged by the
Mechanism. Two experts noted that the plume had probably consisted of aerosolized
droplets of liquid. One explained that the plume’s appearance might indicate the use
of a vacuum bomb that had possibly failed to explode, with the plume being a cloud
of explosive liquid that had disseminated from the munition.
44. Although the plumes cannot be associated with the crater, they indicate that an
aerial attack occurred in Khan Shaykhun on the morning of 4 April 2017.
Crater analysis
45. As the site where the sarin was released on the morning of 4 April 2017 was of
particular importance to the investigation, the Mechanism undertook extensive
efforts to collect photographs and videos of the location and to obtain expert
analysis of its characteristics from several independent sources.
46. Original video footage and photographs of the impact location taken early in
the morning on 4 April 2017 by a witness interviewed by the Mechanism, which
were determined by a forensic institute to have been recorded between 0804 and
0917 hours, showed the crater and a deformed piece of metal protruding from it.
The crater was estimated by forensic experts to have a diameter of app roximately
1.5 to 1.65 m and a depth of between 42 and 51 cm. The videos and photographs
showed the crater to contain debris of rock and asphalt, fragments of metal and a
circular metal object that appeared to be a munition filler cap. Remnants of green
paint were observed on both the deformed piece of metal and the filler cap.
47. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic provided the Mechanism with a
report setting forth a series of observations about the crater. In the report, the
Government concluded that the shape and characteristics of the crater and the lack
of physical evidence did not indicate that it had been the result of an air strike. It
was noted that the shape, depth and contents of the crater were not consistent with
the effects of an aerial bomb, but rather indicated that it had been the result of a
ground explosion produced using a device weighing no more than 10 kg. In support
26/33

17-18978

S/2017/904

of its position, the Government referred to the incompleteness of the debris of the
alleged explosion and the absence of any residues of the bomb or rocket, including a
rocket motor, tail or fins. It was also stated that three pieces from an unknown
source had been deliberately placed, including the remnants of an alleged shell. The
Government stated that that confirmed that the scene had been fabricated to suggest
that the crater had resulted from the explosion of an aerial bomb. It was also noted
in the report that the crater and its surroundings had contained traces of live agent
(sarin) and its degradation products, which had been found 10 days after the alleged
attack, indicating that the explosion had not led to the dispersion of the full contents
of the sarin container, and that the explosion had not been well calculated.
48. The Mechanism obtained expert analysis of the characteristics of the crater
from three independent, internationally recognized institutes with specialization in
the areas of forensics, defence and security, as well as by two individual
independent experts in energetic materials.
49. A defence research institute with expertise in high explosives and related
materials noted that the site appeared to have been disturbed after impact.
Nevertheless, it found indications that the ground had been hit by a substantially
heavy object that had travelled at high velocity. While it could not rule out the idea
that the crater had been caused by other means, it stated that indications of the
detonation of a high explosive on the ground were not visible.
50. Another specialist forensic institute examined photographs and videos of the
crater. In considering what had caused the crater, the institute stated that the damage
was consistent with that of an impact from an unguided aerial bomb, possibly
containing a small bursting charge. It explained that that conclusion was based on
the evidence showing that there had been very little damage around the crater
caused by fragmentation of the munition casing and no significant damage to
structures near the crater due to blast overpressure. The institute also obse rved that
the use of a ground-launched munition was unlikely, as no remnants peculiar to a
rocket had been evident in the crater or found in its vicinity.
51. One of the individual experts noted that the impact location was a section of
paved road very close to which a metal cabinet was situated. As no significant
impacts or holes were visible in the plates of the metal cabinet, the impact was
consistent with that of a liquid-filled bomb that had a thin shell and contained a very
limited amount of explosive in its bursting charge. The expert found that the
appearance of the crater indicated that the pavement had been hit by a relatively
large object at high velocity, without a large amount of explosives being involved.
52. With regard to the suggestion that the crater might have been caused by an
explosive charge placed on the ground, the expert noted that that was contradicted
by the following: (a) the appearance of the edges of the surrounding pavement,
where little fragmentation was seen; (b) the absence of an elevated rim around the
crater; (c) the relatively few cracks in the pavement around the crater; and (d) the
existence of objects buried deep in the crater. The expert also dismissed the
suggestion that the crater might have been created by excavati on and the
emplacement of the objects found therein, on account of the following: (a) the
jagged appearance of the edges; (b) the radial cracks formed in the pavement;
(c) the depth at which the objects were buried in the crater; and (d) the lack of any
sign of the tools used to excavate the crater, which would have left marks on its
edges. The expert concluded that it was very unlikely that the crater had been
caused by a ground-launched weapon, an explosive charge or a liquid-filled
warhead emplaced on the ground, or excavation and the emplacement of the objects
found therein.

17-18978

27/33

S/2017/904

53. The expert examined the dimensions and shape of the crater and analysed
whether it was consistent with the use of various types of bombs and rockets. The
expert concluded that the type of munition most likely to have caused the crater was
a relatively large bomb with a mass of 300 to 450 kg. The shape of the crater, which
was relatively circular, indicated that the bomb had been dropped from a medium or
high altitude, of between approximately 4,000 and 10,000 m.
54. The experts agreed that the crater was unlikely to have been caused by high
explosives, as there were too few visible signs of damage caused by fragmentation
or overpressure, especially on the metal cabinet located 3 to 5 m away from the
crater. The expert analysis found that the characteristics of the crater were consistent
with the impact of a heavy object travelling at high velocity, probably with a liquid
fill. Any explosion from the bursting charge would be small and, furthermore, the
liquid surrounding the bursting charge would have absorbed most of the energy
from the explosion. The Mechanism notes that, on the basis of the foregoing, the
characteristics of the crater are more likely to have been caused by an aer ial bomb
with a small explosive charge, and that it probably contained liquid.
Munition analysis
55. As described in paragraph 46 above, two objects of interest that were visible in
photographs and videos of the crater were analysed by the Mechanism. These were
the filler cap from a chemical munition and a deformed piece of metal protruding
from deep within the crater.
56. According to information obtained by the Mechanism, the filler cap, with two
closure plugs, is uniquely consistent with Syrian chemical aerial bombs. The
Mechanism was provided with an assessment of the filler cap and with chemical
analysis showing sarin and a reaction product of sarin with hexamine that can be
formed only under very high heat. Information was also received that addit ional
metal fragments collected from the crater might correspond to parts of Syrian aerial
chemical munitions.
57. The two energetic-materials experts engaged by the Mechanism reported that
the size and thickness of the metal piece protruding from the cra ter indicated that it
had been the casing of an aerial bomb measuring between 300 and 500 mm in
diameter.
58. The munition remnants recovered from the crater by unidentified individuals
are assessed as being associated with an air-delivered chemical bomb. Specific
munition remnants, particularly the tailfin, could not be recovered. The absence of a
chain of custody relating to the munition remnants diminishes their probative value.
59. The Syrian Arab Republic provided information to the Mechanism suggesti ng
that the release of sarin had been associated with an above -ground explosion, which
is reflected in the second scenario examined by the Mechanism. According to the
government report, the point of impact had been the result of a ground explosion
using an explosive charge that did not exceed 10 kg of trinitrotoluene (TNT) and
that had been placed on the ground with a 25-litre container full of sarin. The
Government also noted that the fact that the crater and its surroundings had
contained traces of sarin and its degradation products 10 days after the incident
proved that the explosion had not dispersed all the sarin in the container, which
meant that the explosion had not been well calculated.
60. The Mechanism also requested the two individual experts, fo rensic institutes
and defence institutes to examine whether an explosive device placed on the ground
could have caused the crater. The forensic institutes and the experts in energetic
materials ruled out the idea that an improvised explosive device placed underground
28/33

17-18978

S/2017/904

would have created such a crater. This was based on the characteristics of the crater
and the lack of substantial cracks and radial detonation marks of blast products on
the surface surrounding it.
61. With respect to whether such a device might have been placed on the surface
of the road, they determined that it would have needed to contain an equivalent of
10 kg of TNT or 12 kg of ammonium nitrate fuel oil. The experts generally ruled out
that possibility, because such an explosion would have caused much more damage
to the surroundings than what had been observed. The two experts in energetic
materials also noted that the metal object protruding from the crater was too large
and too deeply embedded for the improvised explosive device scenario to be likely.
62. Further to the statements of witnesses that they saw and heard aircraft, the
observations with potentially the most probative value, namely, those of the forensic
institutes and individual experts, indicate that the crater was most likel y caused by
an unguided air-delivered bomb.
63. On the basis of the lack of characteristics that would be expected following an
explosion produced by an explosive charge placed on the ground, the Mechanism
notes that the munition used would more likely have been an aerial bomb.
Dispersion of sarin
64. Sarin of an undefined purity was disseminated from the crater in a direction
that was defined by local air movements. The Mechanism noted that the wind speed
in the area that day had been <0.5 m/s, which would normally result in a
considerable variation in the direction of the air movement. The Mechanism also
noted that the location of victims, as described in the report of the Fact-Finding
Mission, serves as an indicator of prevailing air movements west to south-west of
the location of the crater during the early morning on 4 April 2017.
65. A defence research institute with expertise in dispersion modelling was
commissioned by the Mechanism to determine the likely amount of sarin released
and its impact on the number of victims poisoned. In conducting the modelling, the
defence research institute took into account certain factors specific to Khan
Shaykhun, such as its population and local weather conditions.
66. While no firm conclusion as to the amount of sarin used in Khan Shaykhun on
4 April 2017 could be established, the institute noted that, if the same quantity of
sarin were used, an aerial bomb would be expected to deposit smaller amounts of
sarin on the ground than an explosive charge placed directly on the ground.
67. The observation made by the Syrian Arabic Republic that traces of live agent
(sarin) could be observed, 10 days after the incident, in the crater area and the area
near the silos 80 m to the east of the crater may be explained by the amount of sarin
deposited on the ground at the time of its release. The Mechanism therefore
compared the amounts of sarin that would be deposited on the ground by the
following: (a) a chemical aerial bomb; and (b) an improvised explosive device for
dispersion. A chemical aerial bomb releasing 150 to 250 litres of sarin and
depositing 10 to 15 per cent of its contents on the ground would deposit more sarin
on the ground than an improvised explosive device containing 25 litres of sarin. The
Mechanism notes that, in either case, sarin would have been dispersed into the
general environment, as has been confirmed by the analysis of environmental
samples.
68. The above analysis supports the scenario of an aerial bomb de positing a larger
amount of sarin on or into the ground than would be deposited by an improvised
explosive device containing 25 litres of sarin.

17-18978

29/33

S/2017/904

Medical effects and response
69. While noting the findings of the Fact-Finding Mission, the Mechanism
collected and reviewed information from a range of sources concerning the medical
effects on and treatment administered to persons in Khan Shaykhun following the
incident, including open sources, interviews with victims and medical personnel,
and a review of medical records. The Mechanism collected and analysed that
information to determine the impact of the incident on the community, in particular
its emergency response and health-care sector.
70. In reports from open sources in the immediate aftermath of th e incident, it was
noted that victims in Khan Shaykhun appeared to show symptoms consistent with
exposure to organophosphorus chemicals also expressed as a neurotoxic agent. In
addition, open sources reported that chlorine might also have been released, as
indicated by the smell of bleach. While the Mechanism could not rule out the
possibility of the use of chlorine, it focused its investigative efforts on the use of
sarin.
71. On the basis of medical records and witness statements, the Fact-Finding
Mission identified approximately 100 fatalities and at least 200 other casualties who
had survived acute exposure. Such an event in a town the size of Khan Shaykhun
would constitute quite a challenge for a society already in distress. There are four
critical immediate recourses that should be available in a mass -casualty incident
involving sarin poisoning: (a) adequate decontamination to stop exposure and
protect rescue and health-care staff from secondary contamination; (b) assisted
ventilation, either mechanical or manual, after intubation; (c) sufficient
administration of the primary antidotes atropine and pralidoxime; and (d) ample
capacity for the transport of patients so that their needs can be met.
72. The Mechanism ascertained that more than 10 health-care facilities in Khan
Shaykhun, Idlib Governorate and a neighbouring country had become involved in
providing health care to those affected by the incident. According to reports, doctors
were struggling amid extreme shortages, including of the antidotes used to save
patients. There were also reports that most of the fatalities had died before they had
reached the hospitals.
73. The Mechanism found that the reported symptoms of the victims were
consistent with exposure to sarin and that the available informat ion on the medical
impact of the attack on 4 April 2017, including the response of the health -care
sector, consistently pointed to the use of sarin.
74. On the basis of its review of open-source material showing first responders in
the hours immediately after the incident, the Mechanism observed several methods
and procedures that appeared to be either unusual or inappropriate in the
circumstances. In particular, the Mechanism noted that fully equipped hazmat teams
had appeared at the scene later that afternoon and reported early detection of the
presence of sarin, apparently using a Dräger X-am 7000 ambient air monitor, which
was not known to be able to detect sarin. Of additional concern to the Mechanism
was the relatively unprofessional manner in which certain environmental samples
appear to have been taken, for example, sampling from a muddy puddle.
75. The Mechanism also noted scenes recorded just after the incident at the
medical site to the east of Khan Shaykhun, where rescue and decontamination
activities filmed shortly after 0700 hours showed rescue personnel indiscriminately
hosing down patients with water for extended periods of time. That video footage
also showed a number of patients not being attended to, as well as paramedical
interventions that did not seem to make medical sense, such as performing cardiac
compression on a patient who was lying face down.
30/33

17-18978

S/2017/904

76. The Mechanism was provided with expert analysis regarding the medical
symptoms and responses indicated in witness statements and medica l records, as
well as the treatment received at a range of health -care facilities, including those in
a neighbouring country.
77. Certain irregularities were observed in elements of the information analysed.
For example, several hospitals appeared to have begun admitting casualties of the
attack between 0640 and 0645 hours. The Mechanism received the medical records
of 247 patients from Khan Shaykhun who had been admitted to various health -care
facilities, including survivors and a number of victims who ev entually died from
exposure to a chemical agent. The admission times noted in the records range from
0600 to 1600 hours. Analysis of the records revealed that in 57 cases, patients had
been admitted to five hospitals before the incident (at 0600, 0620 and 0640 hours).
In 10 of those cases, patients appear to have been admitted to a hospital 125 km
away from Khan Shaykhun at 0700 hours, while another 42 patients appear to have
been admitted to a hospital 30 km away at 0700 hours. The Mechanism did not
investigate those discrepancies and cannot determine whether they are linked to any
possible staging scenario or are the result of poor record -keeping in chaotic
conditions.
78. An inconsistency was identified in one of the Fact-Finding Mission’s
biomedical results from samples lacking a chain of custody. In sample No. 13, 1 the
blood sample tested negative for sarin or a sarin-like substance, while the urine
sample tested positive for the sarin degradation product isopropyl
methylphosphonate. There is currently no explanation for the inconsistency.
Medical experts consulted by the Mechanism indicated that the combination of the
negative result in the blood and the positive result in the urine was impossible. That
inconsistency was considered to be most likely the result of cross-contamination in
the sampling process.
79. The Mechanism observed from open sources that the treatment administered to
victims from Khan Shaykhun had frequently involved oxygen and cortisone therapy.
Such treatment is not recommended for sarin poisoning, but is recommended mainly
for lung damage, as would be caused by either chlorine or vacuum bombs.
80. On the basis of its consultations with two medical experts, the Mechanism
found that the response carried out by rescue workers and medical personnel in
Khan Shaykhun on 4 April 2017 had been essentially consistent with the use of
sarin on such a scale. While some potentially important irregularities were identified
throughout the rescue operation and in medical records, they may be explaine d by
such factors as poor training, the chaotic conditions or attempts to inflate the gravity
of the situation for depiction in the media.
Chemistry
81. In order to ascertain the origin of the sarin dispersed in Khan Shaykhun, the
Mechanism took steps to identify its components and its possible production
methods, including by commissioning studies at an OPCW -designated laboratory.
82. In the course of synthesizing a chemical, not only the desired chemical, but
also certain by-products, are formed. If the production of a chemical requires
several reaction steps, such by-products are also carried forward as impurities to the
next step of the synthesis. Furthermore, impurities may undergo chemical
transformation themselves, thus forming new and different impurities. Therefore,
the method used for the production of a chemical may be ascertained by identifying
the impurities that it contains. Impurities in samples may also link a sample to its
__________________
1

17-18978

See S/2017/567, table 4.
31/33

S/2017/904

starting material (precursor) should the impurities in the sampl e and the precursor
match.
83. During the removal of the stockpile belonging to the Syrian Arab Republic in
2014, OPCW collected samples from the sarin precursor methylphosphonyl
difluoride (DF) before the rest of the stockpile was destroyed. The Mechanism
commissioned a laboratory to study and compare the impurities, and their
formation, in samples of stockpiled DF. Five different samples from the country’s
DF stockpile were analysed for impurities.
84. Environmental samples were collected in Khan Shaykhun both from inside the
crater and from its surroundings. The results of the analysis carried out by OPCW designated laboratories confirm the presence of sarin and some of its known
degradation products. 2 Moreover, the results confirm that sarin was produced by the
binary route, in which DF is combined with isopropanol (iPrOH) in the presence of
hexamine.
85. The five DF samples from the Syrian Arab Republic stockpile and the
environmental samples from Khan Shaykhun all contained the impurity phosphorus
hexafluoride (PF6). The Mechanism studied the significance of PF6 as a “marker
chemical” for DF produced by the Syrian Arab Republic. The study tested the
conditions for the formation of PF6 in the production of DF, as well as the
possibility of its removal from DF. Laboratory experiments showed that PF6 is
formed when hydrogen fluoride (HF) is used as a fluorinating agent in the
production of DF. If a different commonly used fluorinating agent is used, no PF6 is
formed. PF6 is also not formed in such DF as a result of long -term storage.
Furthermore, the test showed that PF6 cannot be removed through distillation.
86. Two of the five samples from the Syrian Arab Republic DF stockpile contained
the impurity phosphorous oxychloride (POCl3). The environmental samples from
Khan Shaykhun had two additional types of marker chemicals: isopropyl phosphates
and isopropyl phosphorofluoridates. Laboratory tests show that such marker
chemicals are formed if DF from the Syrian Arab Republic stockpile containing
POCl3 is used to make binary sarin.
87. On the basis of the foregoing, the Mechanism concludes that the presence of
the marker chemical PF6 is evidence that HF was used to produce the DF that was
the precursor for the sarin released in Khan Shaykhun. HF is a very aggressive and
dangerous gas and therefore is difficult to handle. The use of HF indicates a high
degree of competence and sophistication in the production of DF and points to a
chemical-plant-type production method.
88. The samples from Khan Shaykhun contain the three types of marker che micals
described above: PF6, isopropyl phosphates and isopropyl phosphorofluoridates.
Their presence is a strong indicator that the sarin disseminated in Khan Shaykhun
was produced from DF from the Syrian Arab Republic stockpile.
89. An initial screening of the reports concerning previous incidents of the release
of sarin in the Syrian Arab Republic showed that some marker chemicals appeared
to be present in environmental samples. This would warrant further study.
90. The presence of marker chemicals that are believed to be unique is a strong
indication that the sarin released in Khan Shaykhun, as well as in previous
incidents, was produced using DF from the Syrian Arab Republic stockpile.
91. In the light of the marker chemicals identified in the DF and the sarin, which
are believed to be unique, the Mechanism concludes that the precursor chemical DF,
__________________
2

32/33

See S/2017/756, S/2017/567 and S/2017/440.
17-18978

S/2017/904

which is necessary for the production of binary sarin, is very likely to have
originated from the Syrian Arab Republic. This finding relates only to the ori gin of
the DF used as a precursor, not to those responsible for the dissemination of sarin.

III.

Assessment and findings by the Leadership Panel
92. In order to determine to the greatest extent feasible those who were
perpetrators, organizers, sponsors or otherwise involved in the use of sarin at Khan
Shaykhun on 4 April 2017, the Leadership Panel requested that the investigators
examine eight possible scenarios regarding how the events had unfolded. Upon the
conclusion of the investigation, the prevailing scenario that emerged was that sarin
had been delivered through an aerial bomb dropped by an airplane. Most of the
information collected and analysed by the Mechanism supports that scenario.
93. With respect to identifying those responsible, the Lead ership Panel has
determined that the information that it has obtained constitutes sufficient credible
and reliable evidence of the following:
(a) Aircraft dropped munitions over Khan Shaykhun between 0630 and 0700
hours on 4 April 2017;
(b) An aircraft of the Syrian Arab Republic was in the immediate vicinity of
Khan Shaykhun between 0630 and 0700 hours on 4 April 2017;
(c) The crater from which the sarin emanated was created on the morning of
4 April 2017;
(d)
velocity;

The crater was caused by the impact of an aerial bomb travelling at high

(e) A large number of people were affected by sarin between 0630 and 0700
hours on the morning of 4 April 2017;
(f) The number of persons affected by the release of sarin on 4 April 2017,
and the fact that sarin reportedly continued to be present at the site of the crater
10 days after the incident, indicate that a large amount of sarin was likely released,
which is consistent with its being dispersed through a chemical aerial bomb;
(g) The symptoms of the victims and their medical treatment, as well as the
scale of the incident, are consistent with large-scale sarin poisoning;
(h) The sarin identified in the samples taken from Khan Shaykhun was found
to have most likely been made with a precursor (DF) from the original stockpile of
the Syrian Arab Republic;
(i) The irregularities described in the present annex are not of such a nature
as to call into question the aforementioned findings.
On the basis of the foregoing, the Leadership Panel is confident that the Syrian Arab
Republic is responsible for the release of sarin at Khan Shaykhun on 4 April 2017.
The findings of the Leadership Panel regarding the evidence in this case are based
on the information set forth in detail in the present annex.

17-18978

33/33
