V.

Resolution.o adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

development projccts, that thc growth performance of
the most seriously affected, least dcveloped, land-locked
and island developing countries during thc first half
of this decadc has been extremely unsatisfactory and
that their per capita incomes have hardly increased,
Considering that substantial dcbt-relief measures in
favour of developing countries are essential and would
result in a significant infusion of untied resources urgently required by many developing countries,
Acknowledging that balance-of-payment support
facilities have been inadequate and that official development assistance flows havc been stagnating,
Convinced that net capital inflows, especially relating
to official development assistance, to developing countries, in particular to the most seriously affectcd, least
developed, land-locked and island developing countries,
must be increased substantially and rapidly,
A ware that the majority of developing countries do
not enjoy proper access to international capital markets
and that, in any event, loans in such markets are available at high interest rates and on short maturities,
Regretting that so far most developed countries have
not been prepared to assist in resolving the immediate
difficulties of those developing countries suffering from
the effects of heavy debt burdeos or to consider the
debt question in the perspective of development rather
than commerce,
Noting that the Special Action Programme of $1
billion offered by the developed donor countries at the
Conference on International Economic Co-operation165
will cover less than one third of the annual debt-service
payments of the most seriously affected and the least
developed countries, and that substantive action has yet
to be taken by them to implement the Programme,
1. W elcomes the adoption of the provisional agenda
for the part of the ninth special session of the Trade
and Development Board to be held at the ministerial
leve!, 166 which includes proposals for the immediate
solution of the debt problems of developing countries;
2. Calls upon the Trade and Development Board
at its ministerial session to reach satisfactory decisions
on:
(a) Generalized debt relief by the developed countries on the official debt of developing countries, in
particular of the most seriously affected, least developed, land-locked and island developing countries, in
the context of the call for a substantial increase in net
official development assistance flows to developing
countries;
( b) Reorganization of the en tire system of debt
renegotiation to give it a developmental orientation so
as to result in adequate, equitablc and consistent debt
reorganizations;
(e)
The problems created by the inadequate access
of the majority of developing countries to intcrnational
capital markets, in particular the danger of the bunching
of repayments caused by the short maturities of such
loans;
3. W elcomes the steps taken by sorne developed
countries to cancel official debts owed to them by
165 See A/31/478/Add.l
and Add.1/Corr.1, chap. III,
sect. F.
166 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtv-second
Sessíon, Süpplement No. 15 (A/32115), vol. II, part two,
annex IT.

ll7

certain dcveloping countries and the decision to extend
futurc official devclopment assistancc in favour of the
most seriously affected and the Ieast developed of the
devcloping countries in the form of grants, and urges
that this be followed by similar decisions by other developed countrics;
4. Rccommends that additional financia! resources
should be committed by multilateral development financc institutions to the developing countries experiencing debt-scrvicing difficulties.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
32/188.

United Nations Conference on an lnternational Code of Condut't on the Transf er of Technolo~y

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII)
of 16 September 1975 on development and international
economic co-opcration, as well as its resolution 2626
(XXV) of 24 October 1970 containing the International Development Strategy for the Second United
N ations Devclopmcnt Decade,
Recafling further paragraph 13 of its resolution 31/
159 of 21 December 1976,
1. Decides to convene a United Nations conference
to negotiate and to take ali decisions necessary for the
adoption of an international code of conduct on thc
transfcr of technology under the auspices of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to be
held from 16 October to 10 November 1978;
2. Invites the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to convene, if necessary, additional meetings of the Intergovernmental Group of Experts, in arder to adhere to
the time-table for the United Nations Conferencc on
an International Code of Conduct on the Transfer of
Technology as specified in paragraph 1 above;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to invite:
(a) Ali Sta tes to participate in the Conference;
( b) Representativcs of organizations that have
received a standing invitation from the General Assemhly to participate in the sessions and the work of all
intcrnational confcrenccs convened under its auspiccs
in the capacity of observers, to participate in the Confcrence in that capacity in accordance with Assembly
resolution 3237 (XXIX) of 22 Novembcr 1974 and
31 / 152 of 20 Deccmber 1976;

(e) Represcntatives of thc national libcration movemcnts recognized in its region by the Organization of
African Unity to participate in the Conference in the
capacity of observers in accordance with General Asscmbly resolution 3280 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974;
(d)
The United Nations Council for Namibia to
participate in the Conference in accordance with paragraph 3 of General Assembly rcsolution 32/9 E of
4 Novembcr 1977;

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

ll8

(e) The specialized agencies, the International
Atomic Energy Agency and the World Tourism Organization, as well as interested organs of the United
Nations, to be represented at the Conference;
(f) Interested intergovernmental organizations to
be represented by observers at thc Conference;
(g) Directly concerned non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council to be represented by observers at the
Conference;
4. Requests the Secrctary-Gencral to ensure that
the necessary arrangements are made for the effective
participation in the Conference of the representatives
referred to in paragraph 3 ( b) and (e) above, including the requisite financia! provisions for their travel expenses and per diem;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to make the
necessary arrangements for holding the Conference at
Geneva, to submit to the Conference all relevant documentation and to arrange for the necessary staff, facilities and services that it will require, including the
provision of summary records;
6. Decides that the languages of the Conference
shall be those used in the General Assembly and its
Main Committees.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977

32/189.

Fifth session of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31 / 159 of 21 December
1976, in which it decided to hold the fifth session of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in 1979 and requested the Trade and Developmcnt Board at its seventeenth session to recommend
the place, date and duration of the session, taking into
account the offer made in this regard by the Government of the Philippines,
Taking note of Trade and Development Board resolution 154 (XVII) of 31 August 1977 adopted at the
first part of its seventeenth session, 167 in which the
Board recommended that the General Assembly should
convene thc fifth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Dcvelopment at Manila from
7 May to 1 J une 1979, and a pre-Conference meeting
of senior officials at Manila on 3 and 4 May 1979,
1. Notes with appreciation the invitation of the
Government of the Philippines to hold the fifth session
of the United Nations Confcrence on Trade and Development at Manila;
2. Decides to convcne the fifth session of the Unitcd
Nations Conference on Trade and Developmcnt at
Manila from 7 May to 1 June 1979, and a pre-Confer,ence meeting of senior officials at Manila on 3 and
4 May 1979.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
167 /bid.,

vol. II, part one, annex l.

32/190.

Special measures in favour of the least
developed among the developing countries

The General Assembly,
Taking into consideration its resolution 3214
(XXIX) of 6 November 1974, in which it urged Member Sta tes and organizations of the United N ations system to intensify urgently their efforts for thc benefit
of the lcast developed countries, including those in
the field of trade,
Rea{firming the special measures in favour of the
least devclopcd among the developing countries adopted
by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in its resolutions 62 (III) of 19 May 1972 168
and 98 (IV) of 31 May 1976,169
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
2124 (LXIII) of 4 August 1977,
Bearing in mind the results of the meeting convcned
by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development betwecn 31 October and 8 November 1977.
at which the multilateral and bilateral financial and
technical assistance institutions, together with the representatives of the least developed among the developing countries, carried out a general review and assessment of their requirements and progress, 17º as called
for in paragraph 35 of Confcrencc resolution 98 (IV),
1. Invites the developed countries as well as international institutions to increase the flow of financia!
and technical assistance to the least developed among
the devcloping countrics;
2. Further invites the United Nations Development
Programme, the World Bank and other financia! institutions to provide increased resources to meet the
particular needs of the least developed countries;
3. Urges the developed countries, as well as appropriate international organizations and financia! institutions, to adopt specific and concrete mcasures in favour
of the least developed countries, as called for by the
General Assembly and in the decisions adopted by thc
United Nations Conference on Trade and Developmcnt
and other relatcd organizations within the United Nations system;
4. W elcomes the inclusion in the provisional agenda
for the part of the ninth special session of the Trade
and Development Board to be convened early in 197 8
at the ministerial level1 71 of the review of measures
taken in accordance with resolution 98 (IV) of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
concerning the debt and related development and financia! problcms, inter alia, of the least developcd
countnes;
5. Takes note of the allocation of $1 billion to the
Specia! Action Programme pledged by the developed
countnes at thc Conference on International Economic
Co-operation held in Paris;
HiB See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference 011
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.73.11.D.4),
annex LA.
1 9
~ !bid., F_our:h Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United
Nat1ons pubhcatJon, Sales No. E.76.11.D.10 and corrigendum),
part one, sect. A.
110 See TD/B/681.
171 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/32/15), vol. II, part two,
annex H.
