S/PV.8473

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8473rd meeting

Wednesday, 27 February 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Esono Angue/Mr. Ndong Mba . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Equatorial Guinea)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lindner
Mr. Djani
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Nkosi
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
Silencing the guns in Africa
Letter dated 13 February 2019 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Equatorial Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/169)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-05682 (E)
*1905682*

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
Silencing the guns in Africa
Letter dated 13 February 2019 from the
Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission
of Equatorial Guinea to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/169)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Angola, Benin, Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Congo,
Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland,
Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Ireland, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Lebanon, Libya,
Lithuania, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan,
Papua New Guinea, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, Rwanda, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, Spain, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland,
Togo, Tunisia, Turkey and Ukraine to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; His Excellency Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, African Union High Representative for
Silencing the Guns in Africa; and Mr. Vasu Gounden,
Founder and Executive Director of the African Centre
for the Constructive Resolution of Disputes.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
persons to participate in this meeting; His Excellency
Mr. João Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations; His
Excellency Mr. Maged Abdelfattah Abdelaziz,
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States to the
United Nations; and Mr. Robert Mardini, Permanent
Observer of the International Committee of the Red
Cross to the United Nations.
2/75

27/02/2019

I propose that the Council invite Monsignor
Antoine Camilleri, Under-Secretary for Relations with
States of the Holy See, to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/169, which contains the text of a letter
dated 13 February 2019 from the Chargé d’affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Equatorial Guinea
to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept note on the item
under consideration.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2019/179, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Algeria, Angola, Belgium, Canada,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, the Dominican Republic, Egypt,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland,
France, Germany, Guinea, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Latvia,
Lithuania, Malta, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nigeria, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania,
Rwanda, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, South Africa,
Spain, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Togo, Tunisia
and Ukraine.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru, Poland, Russian
Federation, South Africa, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2457 (2019).
I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Ms. DiCarlo: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to address the Security Council on
silencing the guns in Africa. I would like to commend
the presidency of Equatorial Guinea for organizing
today’s debate.
Silencing the guns is an initiative to promote the
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts in
Africa. It is critical not only for what it aims to do but
also for what it says about the importance of African
leadership in partnership with the global community. It
was the African Union (AU) that pledged in 2013 not to
bequeath the burden of conflict to the next generation
of Africans and undertake to end all wars by 2020.
The AU Peace and Security Council then took the lead
in 2017 and developed a master road map of practical
steps to silencing the guns by 2020. It was endorsed by
the AU Assembly of Heads of State and Government in
January 2018.
His Excellency Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, AU High
Representative for Silencing the Guns in Africa, whom
we have the honour to welcome here today, has worked
closely with the United Nations to accelerate the
implementation of the initiative, and this cooperation
is wide-ranging. Indeed, the United Nations-African
Union strategic partnership has become a cornerstone of
United Nations peace and security initiatives in Africa.
The United Nations and the AU share a common
mission: to prevent conflict. Silencing the guns also
means keeping them from firing in the first place. In the
past two years we have each strengthened our ability to
detect and defuse crises before they escalate, in addition
to strengthening our cooperation to help resolve them.
Our partnership with the AU involves concrete action.
In January 2018, among other initiatives, the United
Nations kicked off a two-year project to support policy
dialogue and technical assistance on conflict prevention
and mediation in Africa.
The African Union and the United Nations
partnership is bearing fruit in different countries on
the continent. The AU, with United Nations support,
shepherded the recent signing of the Global Peace
Agreement in the Central African Republic. The
signing of the revitalized peace accord in South Sudan,
facilitated by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, with the support of the AU and the United
Nations, has sparked renewed hope, even as more needs
to be done to definitively silence the guns and end
abuses, including sexual and gender-based violence in

S/PV. 8473

South Sudan. The United Nations and the AU continue
to work together in support of Somalia’s State-building
agenda, its fight against violent extremism and efforts
to restore peace and stability in the country.
Furthermore, the United Nations continues to work
closely with the AU and other partners to ensure the
peaceful conduct of elections on the continent. The
United Nations and the Southern African Development
Community actively supported the good offices led
by the African Union and Mr. Lamamra during the
2018 presidential election in Madagascar. Their efforts
contributed to a peaceful process.
The United Nations has also increased its support to
counter-terrorism efforts and prevent violent extremism
in Africa. In June 2018, the United Nations signed with
the AU a memorandum of understanding in this area to
increase its cooperation and capacity-building support
to the AU and several subregional organizations, as
well as to Member States.
Silencing the guns for good requires the
participation of all. As we assess efforts to increase
women’s leadership and meaningful participation in
political processes, we see that progress has slowed,
despite the combined work of the United Nations, the
AU and civil society. We must redouble our efforts in
this critical pursuit.
Building resilient societies is also key for silencing
the guns. That implies strong institutions that respond
to the needs of citizens, good governance and inclusive
politics. the continent has made great strides in
recent years in deepening democracy and democratic
institutions, including through the implementation
of the African Governance Architecture. However,
numerous governance challenges remain, including
the marginalization of certain groups from political
processes, the prevalence of a winner-takes-all
approach, corruption and the mismanagement of
natural resources.
The United Nations continues to work with the
AU and the regional economic communities in helping
to build strong national institutions and addressing
the root causes of armed conflict, including through
support to democratic consolidation, upholding human
rights, ending marginalization and promoting inclusive
socioeconomic development, in line with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the African
Union’s Agenda 2063.

19-056823/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

As the Secretary-General has stated, pointing to
recent peaceful elections and truces, a wind of hope is
blowing in Africa. Furthermore, across the continent,
entrepreneurship is up, access to education has
increased and child mortality has declined. One year
ago, Africa’s leaders launched the African Continental
Free Trade Area. These and other positive developments
are clear evidence that it is Africans, in partnership
with the global community, who are leading the way to
sustainable peace and prosperity on the continent.
In silencing the guns African countries have a
central role to play in making the initiative a success,
as do the African Union and Africa’s private sector
and civil society. But it is vital that the international
community lend its support to Africa in achieving this
objective. Let today’s debate galvanize global support
for these efforts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lamamra.
Mr. Lamamra: First of all, I would like to express
to you, Mr. President, and through you to all members
of the Security Council, my sincere thanks for your
welcome and the kind words you addressed to me.
As the Council members well to know, I was called
recently by the President of the Republic of Algeria,
President Abdelaziz Bouteflika, to work in his office as
Senior Minister and Diplomatic Adviser. I am therefore
glad that I could be with Council members today to
contribute to what appears to be a very significant
achievement in Africa’s endeavour to promote silencing
the guns, that being one of the flagship programmes
of our continental organization. President Bouteflika
has particularly asked me to convey to the members of
the Security Council his greetings as well as his high
appreciation for their efforts to promote the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
in contemporary international relations. He assures
the Council of Algeria’s support for the emblematic
and ambitious project of Silencing the Guns in Africa
by 2020.
The Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, who has entrusted me with
the mission of High Representative for Silencing the
Guns in Africa, sincerely regrets not being able to
participate personally in today’s meeting. He asked me
to share with the Council our vision for intensified joint
4/75

27/02/2019

efforts by our two organizations in the implementation
of their strategic partnership in peace and security.
Together with Secretary-General António Guterres,
the Chairperson Faki Mahamat intends to contribute to
raising this great partnership to the highest level.
I wish to congratulate you, Sir, and His Excellency
President Obiang Nguema Mbasogo on your successful
presidency of the Security Council during a very
busy month of February, with many achievements. In
particular, I would like to express our deep appreciation
to you for convening today’s important debate and for
your delegation’s exemplary efforts in drafting and
conducting the negotiations on resolution 2457 (2019),
which the Council just unanimously adopted. I also
take this opportunity to thank and congratulate all the
delegations that so graciously sponsored the resolution.
May I also thank all Council members for their support
for the resolution, which testifies to their continued
commitment to the Africanist agenda for freeing the
continent from violent conflicts.
Since its adoption, the African Union (AU)
flagship project to achieve a conflict-free Africa and
make peace a reality for all our people has not remained
a mere slogan. Instead, it has been pursued as one of
the top priorities in the realization of African Union’s
Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want.
In line with the 2013 fiftieth anniversary solemn
declaration, in which the African leaders pledged,
among other things, to not pass along the burden
of conflicts to the next generation of Africans and
undertook to end all wars in Africa by 2020, the AU
Assembly of Heads of State and Government adopted,
in January 2017, the African Union Master Roadmap of
Practical Steps to Silence the Guns in Africa by 2020.
To fulfil that objective, the African Union, in
close partnership with the United Nations and the
international community as a whole, has invested
tremendous efforts to make peace a viable and lasting
reality across the continent. As a result, notable progress
has been made in preventing, managing and resolving
conflicts throughout Africa. Many of the long-standing
conflicts that have ravaged the continent are now seeing
intensified collective efforts that will hopefully lead
to their complete resolution. The recently concluded
peace agreements in South Sudan and in the Central
African Republic, the successful democratic elections
in Madagascar and in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as well as the historic positive developments in
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the Horn of Africa, are all generating optimism about
a continent emerging from the shadows and moving
steadily to restore peace, stability and security, and make
a decisive move towards integration and prosperity.
The African Union and its regional mechanisms
have also enhanced their capacity to deal with conflict
and crisis situations on the continent. In doing so,
the African Union has developed the comprehensive
African Peace and Security Architecture and the African
Governance Architecture, which include a powerful set
of instruments and practices. That has indeed helped
the African Union and the international community
enhance their collaboration and partnership, to the
extent that today consultation and coordination among
the AU, the regional economic communities, regional
mechanisms, the United Nations and other partners to
harmonize strategies and interventions have become
the rule, rather than the exception.
In that context, I would be remiss if I did not
recognize the impressive progress made in consolidating
the strategic partnership between the African Union
and the United Nations, which was given new impetus
by the signing, in April 2017, of the Joint Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security.
As the December 2020 deadline to end wars in
Africa approaches, it is essential to bear in mind that
there are still major challenges and constraints that
need to be overcome in order to place the continent in a
better position to be able to secure real gains and enjoy
the dividends of peace.
Although the number of violent conflicts has
significantly decreased in the past few years, a number
of African countries still remain trapped in a vicious
cycle of violent conflict and its deadly consequences
as a result of, among other things, transnational crime,
terrorism and the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons. The effect of those challenges has been further
exacerbated by the existence of ungoverned spaces
that leave room for illegal activities, the persistence
of corruption and illicit financial flows that facilitate
funding for illicit weapons and conflicts, and the illegal
exploitation of natural resources that contributes to
funding insurgencies and rebellions, to mention a few.
Issues of governance and leadership also
continue to be a major source of instability and
conflict in Africa. Many experiences have shown the
critical role of national governance institutions and

S/PV. 8473

democratic practices in conflict prevention, especially
election-related violence and disputes.
Those challenges serve to underline the urgent need
to build a robust culture of conflict prevention, and
in particular structural conflict prevention, that goes
beyond the current trend of militarization of conflict
resolution — as necessary as it may be in certain cases.
They also serve to highlight the importance of all of us
redoubling efforts to accelerate the search for peaceful
and political solutions and maintain strong engagement
in support of the implementation of peace agreements
in Member States emerging from conflict.
To that end, our efforts will amount to too little if
we do not endeavour to reduce the gap between strategic
political and military efforts to prevent and resolve
conflicts, on one hand, and to invest in economic and
social development, on the other hand. At the African
Union we remain convinced that peace cannot be
achieved without development, and vice-versa, and
that both peace and development cannot thrive without
human rights and good governance.
Equally important is the need for the Security
Council to respond positively to the African Union’s
long-standing and legitimate calls concerning access to
United Nations assessed contributions to fund African
Union peace support operations. By responding to
multiple threats to peace and security, the African
Union-led operations are indeed doing so on behalf
of the United Nations and, in particular, the Security
Council, which bears the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
This issue deserves renewed attention by the Security
Council, in view of the ongoing efforts by the African
Union, including the recent operationalization of its
Peace Fund.
Last but not least, we also need to build and
promote a culture of peace and tolerance. In that vein,
my Office recently launched a media campaign to reach
out to African citizens in member States, especially the
youth, but also to the African diaspora. Furthermore,
the decision taken by the African Union to annually
declare September, until 2020, as Africa Amnesty
Month for the surrender and collection of illicit arms
and light weapons is one of many steps in the right
direction that will contribute to peace and security on
the continent. In that context, my role has been geared
towards coordinating the various stakeholders and
galvanizing the support necessary for deploying the

19-056825/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

relevant conflict-resolution interventions and efforts.
A plan of action supporting the Silencing the Guns by
2020 initiative in Africa is being developed with a view
towards translating it into concrete deliverables.
In conclusion, let me thank members of the Security
Council once again for giving us this opportunity
to share the views of the African Union on such an
important issue. I sincerely believe that today’s open
debate will significantly contribute to maintaining and
further enhancing the positive momentum generated
around the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative. I
look forward to hearing members’ views on how that
can be done within the strategic partnership between
the African Union and the United Nations. Despite the
huge challenges ahead, I remain confident that our joint
and genuine engagement will eventually pave the way
towards a conflict-free and prosperous Africa. Our
beloved African and world icon Nelson Mandela once
said, “It always seems impossible until it is done.” Let
us therefore do it together.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Lamamra for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Gounden.
Mr. Gounden: I thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting me to address the Security Council at this open
debate on silencing the guns. Let me take this opportunity
to congratulate the Government of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea for attaining the high office of the
presidency of the Security Council for the first time in
the country’s 50-year history of independence. I would
also like to congratulate you and your Government, Sir,
for using this seat of power to focus on one of our major
priorities in Africa — the prevention, management and
resolution of violent conflict in all its manifestations.
Our contribution here today comes after deep
reflection of our 27 years of involvement in assisting to
resolve conflicts in Africa and around the world. Over
the past 27 years, Africa has made huge progress in
evolving a peace and security architecture that started
with a fledgling conflict-management centre at the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and has today
evolved into the African Peace and Security Architecture
of the African Union. As the African Centre for the
Constructive Resolution of Disputes (ACCORD), our
organization has been involved with the OAU since
1993 under the guidance of then OAU SecretaryGeneral Salim Ahmed Salim, and we have consistently
worked with, and contributed to every incarnation of
6/75

27/02/2019

the mechanism, inclusive of its current form. All of us
who were involved, including Ambassador Lamamra,
have learned a lot, but, unfortunately, conflicts do
not remain static. Consequently, we have been, and
continue to be, on a steep learning curve. I will point
out shortly why today’s open debate is so timely and
why Africa’s time is running out fast.
Many conflicts in Africa have been resolved over the
past two decades, starting with my own country, South
Africa, and its negotiated settlement, which culminated
in its first democratic elections, held in 1994. We
have since seen a wave of conflicts resolved through
negotiations, including in Angola, Mozambique, the
Sudan/South-Sudan, Madagascar, Liberia and Sierra
Leone, and recently Ethiopia/Eritrea and the Central
African Republic. Those were all seemingly intractable
conflicts, but they were resolved through negotiation.
There is no doubt that huge progress in the area of
peace and security has been made over the past quarter
of a century in Africa, both in creating institutions
and developing knowledge, skills and expertise to
resolve conflicts. Our own institution, ACCORD — a
specialized conflict-management organization — has
trained more than 20,000 people in Africa, many of
whom now occupy high office as presidents, ministers,
senior Government officials, military generals and
civil-society leaders. We have just been ranked by the
annual Global Go To Think Tank Index Report of the
University of Pennsylvania as one of the top 100 thinks
tanks in the world, and the first in Africa. We are still
learning, but we do not lack structures, skills, expertise
or experience in Africa.
It might then be asked: Why do we continue to see
the persistence of conflicts in parts of Somalia and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the emergence of
a South Sudan and Libyan civil war, an increasingly
ungoverned Sahel region and violent street protests
across many relatively stable countries in Africa,
including my own country, South Africa? In this
context of emerging new conflicts, can we silence the
guns by 2020?
The answer is a resounding “no”. Were the
aspiration and vision correct? The answer must be a
resounding, “yes”. While explaining the 2020 deadline
during the October 2018 high-level workshop in Addis
Ababa on the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative
Mr. Lamamra made the point that,
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

“In deciding the deadline, there was a need to
balance seriousness and realism”.
However, today it is not important to debate the
deadline, but more important to debate the modalities
for silencing the guns. This debate on 27 February
2019, a year before the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the founding of the United Nations, can be meaningful
only if it recognizes that an initiative like Silencing
the Guns by 2020 is merely a mitigation tool that,
in the absence of good governance and the urgent
transformation of the structural drivers of conflicts,
will be meaningless. Many parts of Africa are reaching
a dangerous tipping point, and we are currently in a
race against time. Transformation to deal with the
root causes and the deep structural challenges will
take from 20 to 40 years to address. In the meantime,
protracted conflict ranging from violent street protest
to civil war and from radicalized terror insurgencies
to criminal insurgencies will characterize large
parts of the continent. Robust mitigation, including
silencing the guns, has to be an immediate priority if
we are to arrest the violence and conflict and allow
socioeconomic transformation to take place. Anything
short of that will result in the gradual collapse of law
and order and a deterioration into civil war that will
push Africa’s transformation even further back.
The deep structural challenges I speak of are not
new. We are all aware that the vast majority of countries
in Africa have not dealt with poverty, unemployment
and inequality. We have made some progress, but we are
still steeped in poverty, unemployment and inequality.
The main reason is that skills development and
employment creation have not been successful because
there has not been a fundamental transformation
in the structure of Africa’s economies for decades.
Most African countries remain largely subsistence
agricultural economies, which have made little to no
progress in moving towards an industrial or services
economy. That occurs amid an exponentially growing
population that is rapidly urbanizing into unplanned
cities that offer no prospects for proper housing, health
care, education, sanitation, water and so on.
That is the main challenge in Africa today.
Introduce guns into the equation and you light the
proverbial time bomb waiting to explode. That is why
we must silence the guns today. That is why we, Africa,
said by 2020, because we knew the urgency of silencing
the guns in the light of impending conflicts. The threats
posed by terrorism, criminal syndicates and separatist

S/PV. 8473

movements will continue to challenge our collective
expertise as our Governments fail to exercise sovereign
control over their entire territories.
However, they will be even more challenged in urban
areas, where they generally exercise sovereign control
but fail to deliver the essential social goods because of
a failure to transform their economies; because of poor
or non-existent leadership and governance; because of
corruption and because they are just overwhelmed at
times with challenges. Our prognosis five years ago was
that the theatre of conflict would shift to urban areas
over the next two decades. Urban conflicts that are
badly managed will result in higher levels of civilian
casualties and make Governments that lose control over
law and order become more authoritarian. That cycle
will have a negative effect on development, thereby
creating a new wave of internally displaced people and
political refugees. That is no longer a prognosis. It is
today’s reality.
I know that Council members adopted a resolution
today (resolution 2457 (2019), but what will they do
beyond that? Will they summon the political will of
their member States to halt the flow of illicit weapons,
almost all of which are not produced in Africa? Will
they provide more resources for conflict prevention
and peacebuilding and for building local and national
capacities for conflict prevention and management
so that women, young people, Government leaders,
religious leaders, business people and others can all
be trained to manage conflicts at their source and
prevent the escalation of those conflicts? Will they
ensure that their Member States encourage their private
sectors to turn Africa’s extractive industries into
productive industries, while ensuring that competitive
beneficiation benefits local employment and eliminates
poverty and inequality?
We have said much recently, at the World Economic
Forum and in this one, about the fourth industrial
revolution. But will the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo again contribute only their
materials and muscle, or will they also benefit from the
fourth industrial revolution? They will make one of the
largest contributions to the fourth industrial revolution
with the minerals they possess, which are vital to
the revolution.
Unless Council members take collective action so
that each representative here today exercises national
interest through the global responsibility the Chamber

19-056827/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

27/02/2019

demands, they will not silence the guns. They will
silence only their powerful voices.

well known that most of the world’s armed conflicts are
in Africa.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Gounden for his briefing.

Agenda 2063, which is the African Union’s legal
framework for inclusive growth and sustainable
development, is in line with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the sustaining peace agenda
and the fiftieth anniversary solemn declaration of the
African Union Heads of State and Government. They
all include a commitment to achieve the goal of a
conflict-free Africa, that is, making peace possible for
all African peoples, while ridding the continent of wars
and violent conflicts and not bequeathing the burden of
conflict to future African generations.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea.
I would like to begin by saying that it is indeed a
great honour to be here presiding over today’s important
and historic open debate on a theme of such significance
for Africa — silencing the guns in Africa by 2020. I
convey greetings from His Excellency Mr. Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo, Head of State of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea, who congratulates all countries that
helped to adopt resolution 2457 (2019) and thanks them
for their support during Equatorial Guinea’s presidency
of the Security Council.
I commend Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General
for
Political
Affairs
and
Peacebuilding, for attending today’s meeting. I also
commend Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, African Union High
Representative for Silencing the Guns in Africa and
Mr. Vasu Gounden, Executive Director of the African
Centre for the Constructive Resolution of Disputes, for
agreeing to participate in today’s meeting and offer
insightful briefings at today’s solemn and momentous
meeting on an issue affecting the African continent. I
would like to acknowledge His Excellency Mr. Walter
Lindner, State Secretary of the Federal Foreign Office
of the Federal Republic of Germany, who is here with
us today. I also extend congratulations to all dignitaries
and delegations present.
The unanimous adoption of resolution 2457
(2019) attests to the commitment and support of the
international community, expressed through this organ,
for Africa’s efforts to achieve sustainable peace and
stability. Resolution 2457 (2019) will undoubtedly help
safeguard peace and security on the African continent.
We hope that it will also mark a turning point in
Africa’s future.
Small arms and light weapons, including
anti-personnel mines, pose a great danger to human
survival, yet thousands of such weapons continue to
exist with the potential for use or proliferation. There
is an urgent need for Africa to accelerate the process of
combating, preventing and eradicating the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects. It is
8/75

The goal of silencing the guns by 2020, entailing
their complete, effective, controlled, verifiable and
transparent elimination through international and
regional legal instruments, is of vital importance to
Africa and must have the support of the international
community, especially the Security Council. It cannot
be achieved without involving those most directly
affected by the scourge of conflicts, which are our
peoples. That fact becomes a collective responsibility
of all African countries, which must prioritize the
participation of citizens in political and economic
processes, promote equity and prevent violence at all
levels of our people’s lives.
The current reality of, and the threat posed by, the
illicit manufacture, circulation and trade in small arms
and light weapons, including anti-personnel mines, is
a fact that challenges us all. We must be aware of that
reality and assess the damage and horror those weapons
cause to the whole of humankind, especially in Africa,
knowing that those weapons and explosive devices do
not come from another planet. Silencing weapons in
Africa by 2020 is not just a desire; our lives depend
upon it. Conflicts are the main cause of our problems,
as they touch on all aspects of our lives.
Africa must therefore address both the symptoms
and the root causes of conflict. In paying attention to
the current problems of peace and security, we must
also work to eliminate the source of those problems by
improving efforts to accelerate development and reduce
poverty, thereby eliminating the breeding grounds for
conflict and violent extremism. The flashpoints involve
complex national, ethnic, religious and social tensions.
Fundamentalists, criminals and terrorist and mercenary
organizations advantage of those problems to spread
terror throughout our lands and increase piracy and
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

transnational organized crime at sea, as already seen in
the Gulf of Guinea.
Equatorial Guinea therefore appeals to the
international community, particularly Africans
themselves, to pool their efforts to help Africa implement
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, together
with the African Union’s Agenda 2063, as avenues for
sustainable economic development, that is, to begin
working on the establishment of solid structures in the
areas of health, education, the economy, trade, peaceful
inter-ethnic coexistence and good governance, among
others, and focus on addressing with determination the
problems that affect youth, children, women, refugees,
immigrants, including employment among others.
Leaving those issues pending would lead us to the risk
of endless conflicts.
If we do not find definitive solutions to the causes of
the current conflicts that plague our continent, or if we
do not succeed in strengthening the mechanisms for the
effective prevention of such conflicts, we will continue
to address African problems in a rhetorical manner
without conclusive steps towards concrete objectives.
That is why peacekeeping operations on African soil
must be at the forefront of those efforts, and in that
endeavour cooperation with the United Nations and
partners is key. We must continue to strengthen United
Nations peacekeeping efforts in Africa. The draft
resolution on the financing of peacekeeping operations
in Africa, pending adoption by the Security Council, is
momentous. The hope for silencing the guns in Africa
will be a utopian one if it is not accompanied by that
important step.
I would therefore like to take this opportunity to
appeal to the Council to achieve unity, as was possible
on the occasion of adopting resolution 2457 (2019)
today, so that we can sooner rather than later adopt and
celebrate that other important part in order to complete
the equation that will be resolved only through the
adoption of both resolutions. That would represent
the solid ground necessary to genuinely and solidly
begin building Africa’s tomorrow, free of conflicts and
weapons, in which its citizens would be concerned only
with how to face the daily challenges in an atmosphere
of peace and stability.
The African Union itself must be able to optimize
the preventive diplomacy mechanisms and tools it
already possesses, including the Panel of the Wise and
the Continental Early Warning System, and ensure an

S/PV. 8473

immediate response to any threat that may arise. That
is a step in the right direction, but work still needs to be
done to operationalize the African Peace and Security
Architecture, particularly the African Standby Force
and its rapid deployment capability. African countries
have worked closely in recent years to address African
problems in an African way, thereby contributing
significantly to the maintenance of peace and security
on the continent.
The recently concluded thirty-second Summit
of the African Union reaffirmed its determination to
redouble efforts towards better and more effective
conflict prevention action in order to preserve the
African Union’s commitment to address critical points
in Africa, continue to strengthen African capacities
for peace and security, strengthen Africa’s collective
security mechanism and enhance African peace
and security.
It is true that progress has been made in conflict
prevention, management and resolution in Africa. Many
of the long-term conflicts that devastated the continent
have been resolved. The African Union and its regional
mechanisms have also improved their capacity to deal
with conflict and crisis situations on the continent.
Let me share my optimism. Let me say to those
present that somehow we have already begun silencing
the weapons on our continent. Equatorial Guinea greatly
celebrates the latest achievements in both the Central
African Republic and South Sudan, where long-lasting
conflicts have seen the signing of agreements that solely
benefit those two brother countries, with which they
will be able to begin their journey towards progress.
We also commend the achievements made in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Madagascar,
where elections were held under very complex
conditions and allowed for a peaceful transition of
power in those countries. Let us also not forget the
progress made in the Horn of Africa, or the success
of programmes on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and security sector reform, both crucial
elements of stabilization and recovery, which are an
integral part of the African Union Master Road Map
of Practical Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa
by 2020.
The only entities that should have a monopoly over
armed forces are legitimate Governments, and they
must use that only in accordance with the law and with

19-056829/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

respect for the rights of their citizens, with the ultimate
goal being to defend them.
I wish to conclude my statement by calling for
the spirit of unanimity that we have witnessed in the
Council today, which has resulted in the adoption of
the historic resolution 2457 (2019), to be preserved in
order to support the praiseworthy initiatives in Africa,
as silencing the guns on the African continent does not
only require the involvement of Africa, but rather the
necessary international cooperation of us all, given that
peace and stability in Africa means peace and stability
throughout the world.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to the others members of
the Council.
Mr. Lindner (Germany): At the outset, I would
like to thank my colleague and friend from Equatorial
Guinea, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, for convening
this timely debate, as well as the speakers who have
already spoken on the topic and those who will speak
later today.
(spoke in Spanish)
I thank you for your initiative, Mr. President — you
and your country have my full respect.
(spoke in English)
I have come to this debate to express our support
for the topic. I spent a number of years in Africa during
my career, having been Ambassador in Kenya, Somalia,
Burundi, South Africa, Eswatini, Lesotho and, during
the Ebola crisis, in Sierra Leone, Liberia and Conakry,
Guinea. This is a topic that is very close to our hearts
and to my heart personally, which is why I wanted to
come to express our support.
Our African partners have set themselves an
ambitious goal for ending conflict, as the founder of
the African Centre for the Constructive Resolution
of Disputes already mentioned: no more arms on the
continent by the year 2020. I suppose that is an illusion,
but equally, as Mr. Gounden expressed, it is important
to set that goal because it makes us all aware that there
is something to be done. The progress already made
has been tangible — there has been some progress.
The African Peace and Security Architecture provides
a framework, and the implementation of the action
plan to silence the guns in Africa is well under way.
10/75

27/02/2019

In all of those efforts, the African Union (AU) is an
indispensable partner, and we welcome the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security.
I also wish to commend Equatorial Guinea for the
resolution that was just been adopted unanimously
(resolution 2457 (2019)). The framework of the resolution
is quite broad and comprehensively addresses the root
causes of conflict and puts emphasis on prevention
and peacebuilding. In particular, we welcome that
it addresses climate change, natural resources — or
rather, the misuse of natural resources — terrorism
and organized crime as well as human rights. We fully
support that it also highlights the need to enhance the
role of women in all aspects of political life.
Let me highlight four areas in which my country
works hand in hand with African partners and the
African Union to further peace and security in Africa.
First, we support the strengthening of the African
Union’s capacity to prevent and respond to conflict. A
major challenge is to secure lasting conflict resolution
on the ground. We often see a resurgence of conflicts
that we thought had been deemed resolved or at least
contained. That proves that it is crucial to address
the whole conflict cycle, as Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo mentioned, starting with earlywarning mechanisms, crisis prevention, civilian
capabilities, mediation support and the African capacity
to respond to security threats. All of that constitutes a
cycle wherein we have to address every stage.
In that respect, Germany is an active supporter
of mediation efforts in the Sudan, South Sudan and
a number of other countries. We also support the
Mediation Support Unit of the African Union, which
increases the efficiency of African-led mediation
efforts, as well as the African Peace and Security
Architecture, as mentioned by the President of the
Council. We also provide training and specialized
equipment to a large number of African troop and
police contributors. We have expanded our support to
peacekeeping training institutes in Mali, Ghana and
Kenya. Our Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Heiko
Maas, has just landed in Mali, where he is visiting a
training camp at which an assault with weapons was
carried out against peacekeepers a few days ago. I
believe that it is important that we see the dangers out
there and do something about them. Germany is also
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the largest contributor to the European Union’s current
involvement in seven African peace missions.
Secondly, Germany has made fighting the
proliferation of weapons and ammunition, which are
the hard fuel of conflicts — without them, the conflicts
would not be as deadly — a priority of its Council
membership, which began two months ago. We fully
support the AU action plan to silence the guns in
Africa by 2020 — for example, through involvement
with the Mines Advisory Group and the Small Arms
Survey. We also welcome the African Union Strategy
on the Control of Illicit Proliferation, Circulation and
Trafficking of Small Arms and Light Weapons, which
was developed under AU leadership in close cooperation
with subregional African organizations.
We all know that implementation is key. We have
partnered with the AU to cut the flow of weapons into
areas of conflict, improve the control of arms and
ammunition in fragile States and train a new generation
of experts to take the lead in arms control. We need
to mobilize additional donors to give implementation
another push ahead of the symbolic year 2020. Germany
stands ready to support the AU in that endeavour.
Thirdly, as mentioned by the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, we
support strengthening the protection of human rights.
Human rights violations are often initial indicators
that a country is heading towards conflict. We need
to monitor such situations and prioritize preventive
measures. The failure to protect human rights is closely
intertwined with the aggravation of conflict. Tackling
that nexus is another priority of our membership of the
Security Council during the next two years.
In order to prevent abuse and strengthen compliance
with international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, we must promote transparency, the
rule of law and the effective regulation of commercial
security providers. Germany welcomes initiatives such
as the Montreux Document. We encourage all States and
stakeholders to align themselves with it. Peacekeeping
operations have a special responsibility to protect the
most vulnerable. Adequate human rights components
play a crucial role in preventing grave violations against
children in armed conflicts, as well as women, as I
mentioned earlier. We therefore strongly encourage the
inclusion of appropriate child protection provisions in
all United Nations peacekeeping mandates, including
for regional peacekeeping operations.

S/PV. 8473

Fourthly, Germany is a long-standing partner
of Africa in development cooperation and efforts to
advance beyond it. Given that armed conflicts are
linked to social, political and economic grievances,
it is critical that efforts to silence the guns be aimed
at enhancing reconciliation, social cohesion and, in
particular, economic development. Private sector
engagement in that area is of key importance. Job
opportunities, investment and growth must be assured
by that. Germany has therefore launched initiatives
such as the Group of Twenty Compact with Africa in
order to spur economic activities with and in Africa.
In conclusion, we remain committed to supporting
the African Union and regional and subregional
organizations under a multilateral approach to
sustaining peace. Whether it be in the General
Assembly, the Security Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission or the Human Rights Council, we must
use synergies and work closely together in order to
efficiently expend our scarce resources, maintain
coherence and avoid duplication. Our meeting today
illustrates the value of a cross-cutting discussion on
threats to peace and security with the African Union,
subregional organizations and donor countries. The root
causes of violence and conflict in Africa deserve the
close attention of the Council. Germany is committed
to keeping this topic on the agenda. We wish to reiterate
what was said by the Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs: may the wind of
hope we are seeing in Africa become a long-lasting one.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We wish to thank the Permanent
Mission of Equatorial Guinea for having convened this
important open debate and putting before the Security
Council the African Union initiative Silencing the
Guns in Africa. We also commend the good offices
involved in the drafting of the resolution adopted
today (resolution 2457 (2019)). We are also grateful to
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Mr. Ramtane Lamamra and
Mr. Vasu Gounden for their briefings.
At the outset, we wish to underscore the importance
of the Silencing the Guns in Africa initiative. It is a
somewhat ambitious initiative, but at the same time
one that is necessary owing to the high number of
conflicts and wars that have enveloped large parts of
the African continent. In the same vein, we commend
the progress made by African Union member States in
the implementation of the road map of practical steps
to achieve that overarching objective. There are various

19-0568211/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

reasons for which States find themselves embroiled
in continuous conflicts, but among the most common
we would mention economic crisis, bad governance,
scant institutionality, fighting for access to and
control of natural resources, human rights violations,
ethnic and religious differences and the effects of
climate change, among others. That diverse range
of factors makes it necessary to address the issue of
security and development in Africa from a broad and
comprehensive perspective.
Mali, the Sudan, Libya, Nigeria, Kenya and
Somalia have demonstrated that the threats faced by
the African continent must be tackled globally, while
maintaining the view that the future of the region is
the fundamental responsibility of African countries,
with the cooperation of the international community.
While it is true that the reasons for conflicts are distinct
for each country, it is equally true that in each and
every one of the conflicts on the African continent and
throughout the rest of the world there is an inevitable
presence of the illicit proliferation of small arms and
light weapons. Such weapons are cheap and easy to
use, transport and hide, thereby representing the main
element used in conflicts. It is those weapons that are
favoured for use in civil wars and for carrying out
criminal activity, organized crime and terrorism. The
illicit trafficking in those weapons represents a scourge
that exacerbates conflicts and undermines the stability
of those States that at one point or another managed to
emerge from conflict but have ended up immersed once
again in crisis.
We therefore encourage African Union States
to fulfil their domestic and international legal
commitments, including the effective implementation
and monitoring of arms embargoes put in place by the
Security Council, as well as the various international
instruments that advocate for peace, disarmament
and the realization of lasting international security, in
particular through the full implementation of the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects.
We also call on non-signatory States to the Arms
Trade Treaty to sign and ratify it with a view to its full
universalization. In that regard, with the support and
assistance of the United Nations Regional Centre for
Peace and Disarmament in Africa, we call for measures
to be established in order to strengthen citizen security
and combat the illicit trade in small arms and light
12/75

27/02/2019

weapons by implementing security sector reforms and
draft laws for the control and regulation of firearms,
munitions, explosives and their related materials.
The primary objectives of those projects and
reforms should be to prevent and control the use
of weapons by the civilian population and the
weapons used by the military and police outside
the scope of regulation, as well as promoting the
gradual disarmament of the population through the
implementation of a legal system that establishes
crimes that do not exist in current criminal legislation,
in addition to promoting institutional strengthening,
capacity-building, reinforcing control measures for
arms acquisition, developing adequate procedures for
the management of stockpiling, physical security and
the marking, registration and tracking of such weapons.
In that regard, we also recognize that the effectiveness
of weapons-collection programmes and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes depend,
inter alia, on providing sustainable opportunities for
ex-combatants and on the ability of State institutions to
foster an inclusive environment in which people feel safe
and protected, as expressed in resolution 2220 (2015).
Another aspect that we would like to highlight
is that the African continent has achieved positive
developments with regard to the various protocols and
resolutions that have been adopted on women and peace
and security. However, Governments must remain
committed to gender equity, particularly by ensuring
women leadership in peace and security processes and
mechanisms and by making efforts to guarantee their
implementation, as they are catalysts for successfully
achieving the objectives of Agenda 2063 of the African
Union and a continent free of conflict by 2020.
We believe that investment and multilateral
cooperation in Africa and among the countries that
comprise it, as well as investment in education, the
greater participation of women and young people
in various sectors of society and the participation of
civil society and a focus on human rights, among other
aspects, would allow countries across the continent
to capitalize on their vast human capital and natural
resources and thereby achieve the socioeconomic
development that they yearn for.
The Dominican Republic, as a country that firmly
believes in young people as transformers of societies
that are more just, inclusive and peaceful, supports
the recommendations of the fourth report of the Peace
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

and Security Council of the African Union in the
implementation of the road map for the participation of
young people and women throughout the full cycle of
peace processes across the continent. We also welcome
the designation by the African Union of a special envoy
for youth, peace and security.
Other issues that we must analyse include the
challenges generated by the effects of climate change
on the African continent, particularly for agriculture,
which represents the economic linchpin of a large
part of the population. All estimates suggest that a
significant part of the continent will become more arid
and experience greater climate variability. Several
African countries are already experiencing those
effects as a result of reduced rainfall, soil degradation
and the depletion of natural resources.
In particular, it is worth mentioning the increased
desertification of the Sahel, which could lead to greater
regional instability and an increase in northward
migration to the Maghreb region and Europe, while
an increase in adverse weather events in East Africa
and a decrease in rainfall in North Africa could affect
the Sudan and cause food shortages in Ethiopia and
Somalia, which would increase tensions in the Horn of
Africa. It is also predicted that climate change will have
a considerable effect on the spread of diseases, which
will contribute to aggravating existing tensions.
As we can see, the main threats to the African
continent are not isolated but rather interrelated,
meaning that a joint effort is necessary in order to
effectively confront them through strategies for
conflict resolution, development and economic and
environmental sustainability. Governments and armed
groups should also renew their commitments and
focus on overcoming the great challenges they face in
implementing existing peace agreements in countries
such as Mali and the Central African Republic, among
others, and should adopt measures for the effective
implementation of those agreements.
It is also important that the international community,
the Economic Commission for Africa and regional
and subregional organizations support and assist the
regional defence cooperation frameworks with a view
to achieving their overall objectives.
Finally, the Dominican Republic reiterates its
commitment to achieving and maintaining international
peace and security. We therefore extend our support
to the African Union member States in their efforts

S/PV. 8473

to achieve a continent free of conflicts. It is the
responsibility of the entire international community
to ensure the well-being of its citizens and guarantee
collective security in a sustainable manner.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to welcome the presence among us of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Equatorial Guinea and that of the State Secretary of the
Federal Foreign Office of Germany.
Allow me to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
on behalf of France, for organizing this important
debate, and to commend the excellent work carried
out by Equatorial Guinea during its presidency of the
Security Council in the month of February under the
unanimously appreciated leadership of its Permanent
Representative to the United Nations. I also wish
to welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2457 (2019), submitted by Equatorial Guinea on
behalf of the three African members of the Security
Council and the African Union, which France
co-sponsored, and to warmly thank Ms. DiCarlo,
Mr. Lamamra and Mr. Gounden for their particularly
enlightening briefings.
For France, the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union is of strategic
importance today for the prevention and resolution of
crises in Africa. The development of that partnership is
in our view one of the main drivers of consolidating and
strengthening the multilateralism that we all yearn for,
so that supporting and strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union is
one of France’s top priorities.
The strength of that partnership is as robust as
it is promising. The past year has been testimony to
the important results that have been achieved thanks
to the joint initiatives of the United Nations and the
African Union — initiatives driven by the exemplary
collaboration between the Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat.
Without being exhaustive, I would mention in
particular the recent signing of the peace agreement in
the Central African Republic, the peaceful transition
of power in the Democratic Republic of Congo, the
signing of the peace agreement in South Sudan in
September 2018 and the historic rapprochement under
way in the Horn of Africa since the end of last June. Of
course, these positive developments should not conceal

19-0568213/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the fact that crises and conflict situations remain on
the continent. In that context, while the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union is of
strategic importance to France, we also note the rise of
African peace operations.
In line with what has already been said, in particular
by Mr. Lamamra and the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Equatorial Guinea, we fully support
the initiative of the African Union for the sustainable
and predictable financing of African peace operations,
including mandatory contributions from the United
Nations. President Emmanuel Macron recalled France’s
resolute commitment in this area during the most recent
general debate of the General Assembly (see A/73/PV.6)
and, as the Council is aware, African peace operations
are also a priority for the current French presidency of
the Group of Seven.
African peace operations and the military response
to crises on the continent are of course only part of the
solution. To echo what has already been said by several
speakers, in particular by the State Secretary of the
Federal Foreign Office of Germany a few minutes ago,
we believe that a broader approach is essential both
before and after crises. That is the goal of the Silencing
the Guns by 2020 initiative, which was launched by
the African Union and its member States and which
we fully support. That is another area in which the
partnership between the United Nations, the African
Union and African subregional organizations is of
major importance to us.
In the area of prevention,
​​
concrete results have
been achieved, in particular in the Gambia, where the
combined efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States made it possible to prevent the post-electoral
crisis from turning into a conflict, the victims of
which would have been the country’s population. More
recently, successful work was carried out by the African
Union High Representative for Silencing the Guns in
Africa by 2020, Mr. Lamamra, in cooperation with
the Southern African Development Community, the
United Nations and the European Union in preventing a
major crisis from arising during the organization of the
presidential elections in Madagascar.
Finally, the African Union has adopted a number
of instruments in recent years, notably the African
Peer Review Mechanism, the Panel of the Wise and
the Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention
14/75

27/02/2019

and Mediation of the African Union. I would like to
reiterate that the role of women in conflict prevention
and resolution and their participation in political
processes is an absolutely crucial factor in achieving
lasting peace — that is certainly something that France
is fighting for.
More broadly, all of the actions undertaken by the
African Union and its member States to address the root
causes of conflict are now key elements of long-term
crisis prevention and avoiding the recurrence of crises.
In that regard, we welcome the efforts undertaken by
the African Union, its member States and African
subregional organizations in implementing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and Agenda
2063 of the African Union, as well as in launching the
Continental Free Trade Area, developing the governance
architecture of the African Union, promoting respect for
human rights, investing in the education of the younger
generations and implementing the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change — we are all aware of the extremely
serious threat to the continent posed by climate change.
France wholeheartedly supports all of those priorities.
Lastly, let us not forget the importance of mobilizing
efforts to combat the illicit arms trade in Africa,
which continues to fuel conflict and exacerbate armed
violence while aiding organized crime and terrorism.
In this regard, we welcome efforts to universalize and
fully implement all the relevant instruments, which
should be a priority.
I would like to conclude by echoing the words of
Léopold Sédar Senghor, who stated that there is no such
thing as an armed peace, peace under oppression or
fraternity without equality. Those words should guide
us all in our resolute support to our African partners
and friends in their goal of ending the crises on their
continent. They can be assured of France’s unwavering
commitment in that regard.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome you today as
President of the Security Council, Sir. We would like to
thank the Equatorial Guinea presidency, both in terms
of its performance of its functions throughout this
month and for organizing today’s meeting on a subject
whose significance for the work of the Security Council
is difficult to overestimate. And we are grateful to our
briefers, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Ambassador Lamamra
and Mr. Gounden, for the information and assessments
they have provided.
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The African Union’s Agenda 2063, adopted six
years ago, is predicated on achieving peace on the
African continent by that date. It is encouraging to
see that Africa’s leaders have not stopped at that
unquestionably noble but long-term goal but have
rather committed to making every possible effort to put
an end to armed conflicts in Africa as early as 2020.
Needless to say, there is a whole tangle of complex
problems causing long-term instability in Africa and
hampering the achievement of that ambitious task.
Resolution 2457 (2019), adopted on the initiative of
Equatorial Guinea, focuses on many of them. We
believe that the right thing to do in our meeting today
will be to put the emphasis on discussing the efforts
of African countries themselves to solve the problems
they are facing in the area of peace and security and the
ways that the international community may be able to
help them to do that.
Despite the fact that African issues continue to
occupy the greater part of the Security Council’s agenda,
we should not fail to note the significant progress that
has been made in resolving various crises, particularly
during the past year. Important peace agreements have
been reached in South Sudan and the Central African
Republic. Thanks to bold steps on the part of the leaders
of Ethiopia, Eritrea and Somalia, the situation in the
Horn of Africa has improved, and a number of African
countries, including the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Nigeria, have held generally peaceful and
democratic elections.
However, the situation in many African countries
remains difficult. We are particularly concerned about
hotbeds of tension in Mali, Burkina Faso, the Niger,
the Central African Republic, Somalia, the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Lake Chad
basin region. In that regard, we welcome the activities of
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and the
Multinational Joint Task Force in fighting Boko Haram.
It will be crucial to continue to build on efforts to halt
the increasing terrorist activity in Africa. Terrorists are
returning to countries in the region from Syria, Iraq
and Afghanistan, and Libya, which became a haven for
terrorists of all stripes after the intervention in 2011, is
increasingly becoming a base for their activities. We
support the African Union’s desire to raise its profile
in the settlement of the situation in Libya, including
by organizing a joint international conference with the
United Nations on reconciliation there.

S/PV. 8473

We note the operationalization of the African
Standby Force within the framework of the establishment
of the African Peace and Security Architecture.
The African Union is currently mobilizing efforts to
prevent conflict, including by utilizing the potential
of subregional organizations and the good offices of
prominent African leaders. We greatly appreciate the
mediation efforts of Mr. Lamamra, African Union High
Representative for Silencing the Guns in Africa, and
hope to see productive work coming out of the recently
established African Union Centre for Post-Conflict
Reconstruction and Development.
We believe that adequate assistance on the part of
the international community is essential to ending the
conflicts in Africa. That support should be provided
on the basis of strict compliance with the Charter of
the United Nations and respect for the principle of
non-interference in the affairs of sovereign States.
However, Africans themselves must take the leading
role in resolving crises, in accordance with the principle
of African solutions to African problems. We want to
point out that Russian assistance in ensuring security
and stability in Africa has always been provided
with the approval of national Governments and on
a basis of regional and continental peace initiatives.
With the aim of enabling African States to form their
own anti-crisis forces, we will continue our bilateral
training programmes for military and law-enforcement
personnel, as well as our instruction for African
peacekeepers at specialist Russian institutions.
We welcome the mutual willingness of the United
Nations Secretariat and the African Union Commission
to expand the cooperation between the two organizations
on peace and security, including by holding an annual
high-level conference and increasing the number of joint
missions to conflict zones. We consider the Security
Council’s focused attention to African initiatives to
ensure sustainable financing of African peacekeeping
operations under the auspices of the African Union to
be justified. We note the progress made in replenishing
the African Union Peace Fund, which affirms the
determination of African leaders to take on their share
of support to peacekeeping missions’ budgets.
As many speakers have said today, ensuring stability
in Africa is closely linked to resolving the most important
socioeconomic issues facing the continent. Issues
related to overcoming lagging industrial development,
building modern infrastructure and creating new jobs,
including for young people, are especially urgent. It will

19-0568215/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

27/02/2019

be essential to minimize the negative consequences of
problems related to refugees and internally displaced
persons, uncontrolled migration, famine, poverty
and epidemics. All of this demands increasing the
efficiency of public administration and training highly
qualified personnel in various fields. In that regard,
Russia intends to continue contributing to training
specialists from African countries by providing State
scholarships for education in Russian institutions in
medicine, education, advanced technologies, transport,
geology and other areas.

development. Therefore, I would like to encourage
African partners to ratify the Arms Trade Treaty and
follow its provisions, and the United Nations to stand
ready to offer its expertise and assistance. We cannot
cease to underline the significance of all levels of
implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. We highlight
action at the national level, which plays a decisive role.
Regional approaches and interaction also create the
necessary input in support of those instruments.

Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to commend
the presidency of Equatorial Guinea for organizing
this timely debate aimed at ending the conflicts on the
African continent. We are very pleased to see you today,
Sir, as President of the Council, and we appreciate
the work of the Equatorial Guinean diplomats here.
I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo, Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, African
Union High Representative for Silencing the Guns, and
Mr. Vasu Gounden, Founder and Executive Director of
the African Centre for the Constructive Resolution of
Disputes, for their very informative interventions.

It is equally important to provide necessary
technical and financial assistance to conflict-affected
countries in the processes of security sector reform, as
well as demobilization, disarmament and reintegration.
Therefore, we commend the efforts of the African
Union Commission aimed at providing support to such
countries. The strengthening of African capabilities
in the area of early warning, mediation and conflict
prevention, including the Panel of the Wise, as well as
the adoption of confidence-building measures, are of
the utmost importance. Enhanced cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union remains
crucial, and continued United Nations support to the
African Union in its efforts to equip itself with the
capabilities, capacities, tools and means necessary for
effective action is also critical.

Poland believes that a conflict-free Africa is
an ambitious goal that can only be achieved with
African ownership. We perceive the Silencing the Guns
initiative and today’s debate as clear evidence of this
ownership. There is no doubt that Africa deserves great
credit for making efforts to end the violence that has
plagued the continent. Particularly in recent years, the
African Union has taken on important responsibilities
and its role in promoting peace and security across the
continent has only expanded.
However, there is also no doubt that a lot remains
to be done in order to achieve the goal of a conflict-free
Africa. Strong commitment is needed to make peace a
reality for all people and to rid the continent of wars,
civil conflicts, human rights violations, humanitarian
disasters and violent conflicts and to prevent genocide,
as stipulated in the African Union’s fiftieth anniversary
solemn declaration. Let me focus on certain crucial
elements that are of particular importance from our
point of view.
We believe that additional efforts have to be
made to counter the illicit transfer, destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons in Africa. The illicit proliferation of arms
destabilizes the continent and negatively impacts its
16/75

Conflicts in Africa are complex and so are their
root causes. Social, political and economic inequality
still exists in Africa, along with unemployment, lack
of education and population pressure. There is also a
historical pattern of conflict and battles for control
over natural resources. All of these elements must
be addressed in order to secure durable peace on the
continent. Tackling the root causes requires concerted
efforts, the ownership of African Governments
and local communities and support from the
international community.
Last but not least, let me stress the importance of
yet another element that is central to preventing and
managing conflicts: good governance and functioning
State institutions. African Governments have to
continue to develop institutions that are accountable
and responsive to citizens, that promote the rule of law
and ensure political stability. In this context, I would
like to stress that lasting peace will not be possible
without ensuring inclusiveness and the participation of
women and youth in peace processes and political life.
It is our strong belief that African women and youth
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

can play a vital role in peacebuilding and reconciliation
efforts, as well as in forging the continent’s resilience.
We also bear in mind that people with disabilities
are disproportionately impacted by violent conflict
and that it is important to include them in the conflict
resolution and peacebuilding processes. They are able
to bring their unique perspective, share their knowledge
and contribute to peacebuilding activities to ensure
more inclusive and equitable societies, as well as more
just conflict relief, assistance and long-lasting peace.
In conclusion, allow me to once again applaud
Africa on the progress achieved so far in preventing,
managing and resolving conflicts. Still, in order to
silence the guns by 2020, a lot remains to be done.
An efficient relationship between the United Nations
and the African Union plays an important role in this
regard. Let me assure you, Sir, that Poland will continue
to support the African Union’s vision for peace and
prosperity, as well as the prevention and resolution
of conflict and the maintenance of regional peace,
security and stability. In this context, we welcome
today’s unanimous adoption of resolution 2457 (2019)
as an important step towards the goal of a conflictfree Africa.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Equatorial Guinean presidency
for organizing this open debate on the African Union’s
ambitious Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative and for
its outstanding leadership of the work of the Council.
Allow me also to welcome your presence among us,
Sir, which testifies to the leadership and commitment of
your country to the efforts made by our States to make
a reality of the noble African ambition of silencing the
guns on our continent by 2020.
I would like to express my delegation’s
appreciation to our briefers for their wise analyses
and timely recommendations. I thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; His Excellency Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, African Union High Representative for
Silencing the Guns in Africa; and Mr. Vasu Gounden,
Founder and Executive Director of the African Centre
for the Constructive Resolution of Disputes. I thank
Secretary-General António Guterres and Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, whose commitment to conflict prevention
and the maintenance and consolidation of peace and
security in Africa is well-known.

S/PV. 8473

Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the outstanding progress
made since the adoption in January 2017 of the African
Union Master Road Map of Practical Steps to Silence
the Guns in Africa by the Year 2020 and welcomes the
adoption today of resolution 2457 (2019), submitted
by the Republic of Equatorial Guinea on behalf of the
three African members of the Council, in accordance
with paragraph 5 of the Peace and Security Council
communiqué of 16 January 2017.
We congratulate our colleague Ambassador
Anatolio Ndong Mba and his entire team for their
excellent work throughout the month of February. We
are convinced that the resolution marks an important
step in the process of the assumption of ownership by
the United Nations and its competent bodies of this
important project, which is perfectly in line with the
African Union’s efforts to promote peace, security
and development.
On 16 January 2017, the African Union Peace
and Security Council of the African Union adopted
the Master Roadmap of Practical Steps to Silence the
Guns in Africa by the Year 2020, in line with Agenda
2063 of the African Union, towards the socioeconomic
transformation of the continent. Since then, the panAfrican organization has spared no effort to make a
reality of the dream of a peaceful Africa, steadfastly
on its way to achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals, as Ambassador Lamamra has just demonstrated.
Convinced that the coordinated efforts of all
stakeholders constitute the best means of effectively
implementing this important project, the African Union
has tirelessly mobilized all member States, subregional
organizations and African civil society, as well as the
international community, including the United Nations.
Indeed, the coordination of our strategies and the
pooling of our resources are critical, even indispensable
conditions for effectively leading the struggle against
the increasing and evolving nature of conflicts in
Africa, as well as the worrisome proliferation of
arms trafficking.
While we cannot deny that combining our efforts is
essential to silencing the guns in Africa, it should also
be recognized that it is first and foremost the task of
Member States to combat the ravages caused by arms
through national legal and operational frameworks.
Indeed, silencing the guns as a means of conflict
prevention must be the primary responsibility of States
under the Charter of the United Nations. It is in light of

19-0568217/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

this primary responsibility that Côte d’Ivoire, which has
experienced the pain of post-electoral armed conflict,
has implemented a relevant national legal framework
stemming from the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Convention on Small Arms
and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and Other
Related Materials and the Arms Trade Treaty.
At the operational level, the fight against the illicit
proliferation of and trafficking in small arms and light
weapons has been carried out in conjunction with
our disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) process for ex-combatants and security sector
reform. In this regard, my country has created an
authority on DDR, a national security council to lead
the security sector reform and a national commission
for the fight against small arms and light weapons.
The DDR process, which was completed in June 2015,
was financed with 72 per cent of our own funds and
followed by community disarmament and a policy to
reintegrate ex-combatants, which is essential for the
sustainability of the gains we have made in peace,
security and stability.
Côte d’Ivoire is of the opinion that the
implementation of the African Union Master Roadmap
of Practical Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa
by 2020 must also and above all be based on strong
political and financial commitments in order to achieve
our common goal of preserving future generations from
the burden of war and violent conflict. It is therefore
particularly important to insist on the decisive role
of the regional economic communities, as defined in
paragraph 4 of the African Union Peace and Security
Council communiqué of 16 January 2017.
In this regard, I would like to cite and welcome the
example of the positive cooperation among the national
small arms and light weapons committees of ECOWAS
member States within the framework of the Convention
on Small Arms and Light Weapons and the Arms Trade
Treaty. Such cooperation facilitates the strengthening of
national capacities in the fight against arms trafficking,
as well as the regular exchange of experiences and good
practices, thereby enabling member States to make
excellent progress in monitoring, tracing and securing
stockpiles of weapons and munitions.
Côte d’Ivoire also underscores the need for the
African Union and international partners to maintain
their multifaceted support in strengthening the
capacities of regional organizations in order to increase
18/75

27/02/2019

their effectiveness in the fight against the proliferation of
arms, awareness-raising and community disarmament,
alongside civil society organizations. In this regard, my
country welcomes United Nations efforts undertaken
through the United Nations Mine Action Service,
the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, and the International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in
a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons. We urge the United Nations to continue
its cooperation with the African Union, in accordance
with the Joint Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security between the two institutions, to
work towards conflict prevention in Africa.
Our commitment to silencing the guns in Africa by
2020 must take into account structural vulnerabilities,
such as poverty and unemployment. Our coordinated
efforts must take security and development concerns
into account and provide young people in particular
with alternatives to crime and illegal arms-related
activities. We must also consider the need to further
include women in our approach to security and
development issues.
To conclude, I make an urgent appeal to the
international community, including the Security
Council, to support the African Union’s Silencing the
Guns initiative — an expression of the readiness of
its member States to work towards the establishment
of peace, security and development in Africa. Côte
d’Ivoire will certainly play its part.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would once
again like to welcome you, Sir, as well as the State
Secretary of the Federal Foreign Office of Germany, to
the Chamber. I wish to convey our sincere appreciation
to you for convening this very important meeting, as
well as to congratulate you and your delegation on
promoting the very important and historic resolution
2457 (2019) that we have just adopted. I do believe that
this is an important resolution of the Security Council.
I would also like to thank the briefers for their
presentations. Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra of the African Union and, of course, Mr. Vasu
Gounden have given us a prognosis of the situation on
the ground, which I must say is an eye-opening reality.
The commitment of African countries to silencing
the guns by 2020 is truly an important initiative, for
armed conflicts in Africa have had great costs. Ten of
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

thousands of lives have been lost; 15 per cent of the
gross domestic product is estimated to be lost annually;
over 5 million people have been forcibly driven from
their home countries; and armed conflict has also left
millions of others internally displaced and in dire need
of humanitarian assistance.
Now, the importance of this meeting goes beyond
realizing a peaceful and conflict-free Africa. It is
also important to promote sustainable development
in the region — not only Sustainable Development
Goal (SDG) 16.4 in particular, but the SDGs as a
whole. Without peace there can be no development,
and without development there can be no peace. It is
therefore high time that African countries set the goal
of a conflict-free Africa through this initiative and its
road map. Allow me to underline some pertinent points
in this regard.
First, combating the illicit flow of arms and
ammunition is imperative, as illicit arms contribute
significantly to the exacerbation of conflicts. Enhanced
capacity in the areas of national legislation, law
enforcement and judicial capacity is important. The
international community must support the efforts
of African countries in this regard. The capacity to
safeguard national stockpiles of weapons should also be
improved. Cooperation within the region is crucial. The
joint management of borders, including through border
security measures and information-sharing, needs to
be strengthened.
Secondly, combating terrorism and transnational
organized crime is also key. Terrorist activities have
become a major security threat in Africa and the surge
of terror attacks across Africa, both in number and in
sophistication, has led to the loss of lives, undermined
governance and institution-building, and torn apart the
fabric of society. These terrorist activities are often
closely related to other transnational organized crimes,
including the illicit trafficking of drugs, humans and
natural resources and maritime piracy. It is therefore
crucial to combat terrorism, including by eliminating
illegal activities that contribute to the funding of
terrorist groups. Indonesia welcomes the leadership
taken by African countries to spearhead joint efforts to
combat terrorism. The Multinational Joint Task Force
and the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
are two commendable examples.
To sustain such initiatives, support from the
international community is needed, including

S/PV. 8473

in capacity-building and predictable funding.
Strengthening national and local institutions on conflict
prevention is also an important factor. Regarding that
subpoint, it is important to address the root causes and
drivers of conflict. Indeed, it is not only guns that need
silencing. Poverty, economic gaps and social inequality
also require a response in order to reduce the occurrence
of conflict and prevent the relapse into violence. Social
cohesion and inclusion must be fostered. Indonesia
therefore supports the attainment of the Sustainable
Development Goals in Africa, as well as Agenda 2063.
It is also important to build resilient communities,
strengthen democratic and judicial institutions, include
all sectors in socioeconomic development and promote
the participation of civil society, women and youth. We
in Indonesia stand ready to contribute to that effort, and
we are pleased that the majority of beneficiaries of our
South-South and triangular cooperation programmes
are African countries. We also continuously strengthen
economic ties, among others, through the IndonesiaAfrica Forum, the Indonesia-Africa Infrastructure
Forum, as well as other relevant forums. Our ties
with Africa are centuries old. We also engaged Africa
through the Bandung Asia-Africa Conference of 1955,
and we will continue to do so in future.
Finally, I would like to commend the convening
of this meeting under the agenda item “Cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in maintaining international
peace and security”. Indeed, the role of regional and
subregional organizations is crucial to ensuring the
success of the Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020
initiative. My delegation has continuously stated
the fact that Africa knows what it is best for Africa.
Indonesia can relate to this approach. In our region, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations has managed
to transform a region formerly prone to conflict into a
region of peace and progress.
While silencing the guns in Africa is not an easy
task, it is not an impossible one. It is within our reach
so long as all stakeholders join forces to support the
initiative and the African Union Master Roadmap of
Practical Steps to Silence the Guns in Africa by the
Year 2020. We therefore call for enhanced partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union,
including through strategic dialogue and exchange of
views, capacity-building and analysis, to contribute to
the Silencing the Guns initiative.

19-0568219/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

I wish to conclude by underlining that we need to
aim for the sky to reach the ceiling. While silencing
the guns in Africa by 2020 is a noble and essential
aim, it must be pursued with practical and measurable
steps. We should aim to get rid of the guns and not
only provide silencers so that the sound of the gun is
not heard. All stakeholders should take part in this
important initiative, to save the upcoming generations
from the scourge of war. I just want to underline what
Mr. Vasu Gounden mentioned. Africa does not produce
guns; the guns come from abroad. Therefore, this is
not only an African problem; it is a problem for us all.
I would like to conclude by quoting an old and wise
proverb from Uganda: “When there is peace in the
country, the chief does not need shields.” In the same
light, if there is peace and development in Africa, the
guns will be silent forever.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs; Mr. Lamamra, African
Union (AU) High Representative for Silencing the
Guns in Africa; and Mr. Gounden, Executive Director
of the African Centre for the Constructive Resolution
of Disputes, for their briefings today.
Today’s debate and vote on resolution 2457 (2019),
supporting the AU Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative,
is intended to advance the goal of creating an African
continent that is free of conflict. As we have stated
before, the goal of a conflict-free Africa is ambitious
and worthy, but it will not be easy to implement.
Nevertheless, the resolution and gatherings like today’s
open debate demonstrate the willingness of the African
Union and its member States, as well as the broader
international community, to take on the challenge.
The factors contributing to violence in Africa
are complex. Poor governance, corruption and
underdevelopment create fragility that feeds cycles
of conflict. Additionally, poor management of natural
resources can contribute to the problem. The proper
management of natural resource endowments should
bring prosperity and social development; but in too
many countries natural resource wealth does not
translate into improved livelihoods for citizens but
feeds corruption, violence and conflict.
As most other speakers have also noted, the
trafficking in and circulation and use of small arms and
light weapons remain key drivers of conflict in Africa
and are responsible for a majority of deaths in conflicts.
20/75

27/02/2019

Small arms are illicitly acquired through various
means, including diversion from national stockpiles,
attacks on military posts and trafficking and sales by
networks willing to sell weapons to non-State actors.
Those activities often violate United Nations arms
embargoes or contravene United Nations sanctions
regimes. Corrupt officials who turn a blind eye to the
pilfering of unsecured weapon stockpiles also facilitate
the smuggling of arms.
Weak criminal justice systems, weak border and
maritime controls, inadequate physical security and
poor stockpile management further exacerbate the
problem. These are just a few of the many factors that
propagate conflict in Africa today. Today we must ask
ourselves what actions we can take to combat those
drivers of violence.
First, we can strengthen existing mechanisms
to anticipate the outbreak of conflict, whatever the
cause, and support mediation and prevention efforts.
Empowering the continental early warning system
by giving additional political weight to its analytical
findings and endorsing diplomatic responses that
address potential crises in their infancy are two
critically important examples. Taking action as a result
of the warning systems is often politically difficult but
can be key to reducing the potential for violence.
Secondly, States can partner bilaterally with
countries across the continent to address arms control in
Africa. The United States is assisting Kenya, Tanzania,
Rwanda and Uganda to meet their commitments
under the Nairobi Protocol. In Somalia, United States
programmes bolster the security of Federal Government
of Somalia stockpiles against attacks by Al-Shabaab
and other armed groups. The United States has also
worked to stabilize the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo by destroying excess and poorly secured
weapons and ammunition and by improving physical
security and stockpile management for the Congolese
army and national police. Additionally, the United
States funds a multimillion-dollar responsible minerals
trade programme aimed at breaking the link between
conflict and the mineral trade in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
The United States has also consistently supported
many objectives of the African Union Agenda
2063. The Agenda includes important goals such
as improving access to and the quality of education,
investing in infrastructure, protecting the environment
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

and strengthening democracy and the rule of law. We
are concerned, however, by language committing to
reducing food imports, which could have a negative
impact on food security and may not be consistent
with the trade obligations of African members of the
World Trade Organization. We hope to hold further
discussions with the AU on that issue.
Thirdly, the international community should
continue to look for ways to bolster cooperation with
the African Union, other regional organizations and
individual African States to prevent and mitigate crises,
resolve conflicts and prevent mass atrocities and the
displacement of populations. Strong African leadership
and commitments to addressing the underlying causes
of violence will facilitate that cooperation. Today’s
resolution is a good example of that type of partnership.
Finally and perhaps most importantly, we can
expect Governments in Africa to hold each other
accountable to provide security to all their citizens,
regardless of race and ethnicity and in a way that
respects and values human rights. Societies that
promote and protect human rights are more resilient.
The United States also recognizes the role of women’s
empowerment and leadership in preventing conflict.
It is particularly troubling when armed State security
forces repress and abuse citizens, as we have seen
recently in countries such as Zimbabwe, where earlier
this year State security forces were responsible for at
least 13 deaths, 600 victims of violence and torture and
at least 600 arbitrary arrests. We call on Governments,
including that in Zimbabwe, to hold accountable those
State security forces who misuse their positions to
commit human rights abuses and violations.
The escalating crisis in the anglophone regions of
Cameroon is also of concern. We urge both sides in
the north-west and south-west regions of Cameroon to
renounce further violence and to allow unfettered access
for humanitarian and health-care workers. We call for
immediate and broad-based reconciliatory dialogue,
without preconditions, between the Government of
Cameroon and separatists in the north-west and southwest regions.
In the Sudan, President Omer Al-Bashir has
declared a year-long state of emergency and dissolved
national and provincial Governments in response
to protests calling for his removal from office as a
result of months of economic and political crisis. At
the same time, the repressive tactics of the Sudanese

S/PV. 8473

security forces, including the use of live fire, arbitrary
detention and torture, threaten to further destabilize
the Sudan. There is an urgent need for political and
economic reform in the Sudan that is fully inclusive
and that addresses the legitimate grievances expressed
by the protesters.
The United States recognizes that lasting stability,
prosperity, independence and security on the African
continent are in the national interests of the United
States and of the countries represented in this Chamber
and around the globe. We will continue to be a close
partner of the African Union and its member States
in addressing the underlying causes of conflict. With
the collective support of the Security Council, we look
forward to continuing to work together to silence the
guns and end conflict on the African continent.
Mr. Nkosi (South Africa): At the outset, allow me
to convey the apologies of our dear sister Ms. Lindiwe
Sisulu who, due to other pressing commitments,
unfortunately could not join today’s special discussion.
My delegation wishes to join previous speakers in
expressing its profound appreciation to the rotating
presidency of the fraternal Republic of Equatorial
Guinea for convening this important open debate on
silencing the guns in Africa.
We wish to take this opportunity to express our
gratitude to Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs; our
dear Ambassador Ramtane Lamamra, African Union
(AU) High Representative for Silencing the Guns in
Africa; and our compatriot Mr. Gounden, Executive
Director of the African Centre for the Constructive
Resolution of Disputes, for their extremely insightful
briefings this morning.
This debate is timely, as it follows immediately
upon the successful conclusion of the thirty-second
ordinary session of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union held in Addis Ababa,
where the AU considered issues of utmost importance
to the continent, including progress with regards to
AU aspirations outlined in Agenda 2063: The Africa
We Want.
Since its creation, the United Nations has
consistently recognized the valuable contributions of
regional and subregional organizations to peace and
security. Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations underscores the need to enhance the partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations

19-0568221/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

in the prevention and peaceful settlement of disputes.
The cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations has over the
years produced tangible results, as has been seen for
example on the African continent with the deployment
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur.
South Africa welcomes the progress that has been
made over the years in strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the AU, including the
adoption of the landmark resolutions 1809 (2008) and
2033 (2012), among others. Indeed, this cooperation
is strategic for promoting the principle of comparative
advantage, complementarity and burden-sharing. It is
therefore imperative that the United Nations continue
to work closely with the AU and regional organizations
to achieve sustainable peace on the African continent.
South Africa has consistently underscored the view
that the use of United Nations assessed contributions
provides the most reliable, sustainable and predictable
means for United Nations-mandated AU peace
operations. It was indeed heartening to sit here and
listen to the representative of the French Republic
indicating that France subscribes to the notion that AU
peace operations need to be supported from the regular
contributions of the United Nations. We shall work with
the French Republic and other delegations to ensure
that we fulfil that objective.
Reliable and sustainable funding for the AU has
been a persistent challenge for the African Union
over the past two decades, with an overreliance on
funding from international donors. That has resulted
in a subordinate role for Africa in decision-making,
particularly in the area of peace and security. In
order to address that historical problem, and as part
of the recently approved AU institutional reforms
aimed at ensuring that the continent achieves greater
autonomy, ownership and self-reliance in addressing
its peace, security and development challenges, the
AU has established the Peace Fund. The Peace Fund
is structured around three thematic areas that cover
mediation and preventative diplomacy, institutional
capacity and peace support operations.
At the recent thirty-second Assembly of the AU
Heads of State and Government, it was noted that
since 2017, 50 AU member States have contributed to
the Peace Fund on the basis of the existing scale of
assessments, and that a total amount of $89 million
22/75

27/02/2019

has been contributed. That indeed demonstrates the
high-level commitment by the AU membership to fully
operationalizing the Peace Fund.
Overall, significant progress has been made in
recent years to establish peace, security and stability
on the African continent, resulting in positive peace
dividends and strong and sustainable economic
growth and positive development outcomes for many
African countries. As has been said and noted by many
representatives who spoke before me, we have witnessed
a tremendous peaceful transition in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We recently also witnessed
peaceful elections in Madagascar. Furthermore, we
have witnessed a very historic breakthrough in the Horn
of Africa with the rapprochement between Ethiopia
and Eritrea and now between Eritrea and Djibouti. We
also witnessed the peaceful conclusion of agreements
in the Central African Republic and in South Sudan.
However, pockets of conflict and instability in a number
of countries run the risk of eroding the positive gains
made, and in so doing, risking a relapse into conflict in
countries that have emerged from conflict.
Through the 2013 solemn declaration marking the
fiftieth anniversary of the Organization of African
Unity/AU, African leaders renewed their resolve
and commitment to tackling the peace and security
challenges confronting the continent by adopting the
AU Master Roadmap of Practical Steps for Silencing
the Guns in Africa by 2020, as part of the flagship
projects and programmes of Agenda 2063. Since the
adoption of the AU Master Roadmap, the continent
has made significant strides to reduce violent and
armed conflict, as has already been mentioned. South
Africa’s approach to peace, security and sustainable
development resonates strongly with the aspirational
goals adopted by the AU Assembly.
The AU Master Roadmap is indicative of the
strong resolve of African leaders to ensure continental
ownership and sustainable solutions for Africa’s
challenges. South Africa believes that it is imperative,
therefore, that we accelerate efforts to strengthen and
capacitate the African Peace and Security Architecture.
My delegation is of the view that the African Peace and
Security Architecture should be the central framework
through which Chapter VIII engagement with the AU
on peace and security matters should take place. All
of us, including the Security Council, must gear our
efforts towards the effective operationalization of the
pillars dealing with conflict prevention, crises and
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

conflict management, post-conflict reconstruction and
development and strategic security issues.
My delegation is confident that the Master Roadmap,
as well as its monitoring and evaluation mechanism,
will greatly assist us in achieving our goal of a conflictfree Africa. A multidimensional approach that helps
to take Africa to an era of peace should be adopted.
That approach should include, among other things,
promoting inclusive socioeconomic development and
resilience, promoting access to resources and economic
opportunity, and promoting and entrenching democracy
and good governance.
The scale and magnitude of the challenges
involved and their intersectionality require not only the
availability and allocation of significant resources, but
also the establishment of strong, sustainable and vibrant
partnerships at the national, regional, continental and
international levels. The effective implementation of
the Roadmap requires strong regional and continental
architecture in which regional economic communities
and regional mechanisms will be instrumental to
advancing our quest for a united, prosperous and
integrated African continent that is free of conflict and
underdevelopment. South Africa supports ever-closer
cooperation between the AU and the United Nations in
that area through the efforts of the AU Post-Conflict
Reconstruction and Development Framework and the
United Nations Peacebuilding Commission.
In conclusion, South Africa reiterates its belief that
an Africa free of war and conflicts and at peace with
itself is critical to continental efforts to advance the
achievement of both the United Nations 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the African Union
Agenda 2063. We therefore encourage the Security
Council and the broader international community
to support our continent to achieve those vital
development objectives.
My delegation expresses its utmost appreciation to
the delegation of Equatorial Guinea for its inspirational
leadership, which has resulted in the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2457 (2019) on silencing the guns
in Africa. We believe that the adoption by the Council
of this resolution is yet another step forward that should
move us closer towards ensuring that Africa is at peace
with itself. The momentum towards silencing the guns
is indeed unstoppable.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank our briefers of today — Ms. DiCarlo, Under-

S/PV. 8473

Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs; Mr. Lamamra, African Union High
Representative for Silencing the Guns in Africa; and
Mr. Vasu Gounden — for their valuable insights.
The United Kingdom warmly welcomes Equatorial
Guinea’s initiative to schedule a high-level debate on
this important issue.
I was particularly struck by Mr. Gounden’s thoughtprovoking briefing. I very much agree with him that
we all need to take action to tackle good governance
and other structural causes of conflict if we are to turn
this aspiration into reality. I was also struck by the
comments of my United States colleague, who focused
on a number of country-specific issues. I also agree with
him that we need to prioritize those country-specific
issues — whether it is Zimbabwe, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Sudan or Cameroon — if we
are to move towards this ambitious goal.
The United Kingdom believes that it is vital that
we translate the noble goal of silencing the guns into
concrete initiatives that will make a tangible difference
in the lives of ordinary people across Africa. With that
in mind, I would like to highlight four priorities to
follow up on.
The first is strong and effective partnerships.
Those are crucial in ensuring that the sum of our
efforts is greater than its parts. The United Kingdom is
committed to our strategic partnership with the African
Union to support peace, stability and development. In
doing, so we will continue to take a holistic approach,
recognizing that there is a mutually reinforcing link
between security and prosperity. We will also continue
to support efforts to strengthen and deepen the
partnership between the Council and African regional
and subregional organizations.
As the Secretary-General sets out in his sustaining
peace agenda, effective early warning and conflict
prevention mechanisms require close cooperation
among all relevant stakeholders. Together, we can and
should scan the horizon for signs of emerging conflicts
and crises in Africa, sharing our insights and analysis,
and we should collaborate to take meaningful action
at an early stage whenever opportunities arise to
de-escalate violence and advance political solutions.
Secondly — and a number of Council members
have referred to this today — we should give our full
backing to effective preventative diplomacy, good
offices and mediation as indispensable elements of

19-0568223/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

regional and subregional efforts to promote peace and
stability. The value of this work has been demonstrated
in the African context, for example in the efforts of the
Economic Community of West African States to enable
a peaceful transition of power in The Gambia in 2017,
or the support of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development for the revitalization of the peace process
in South Sudan. That is why the United Kingdom is
partnering with the African Union to support the
development of continental early warning capabilities
in order to enhance preventative diplomacy efforts.
Thirdly, as the representatives of Germany and
Poland have already highlighted today, and as the
Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative rightly recognizes,
strengthening women’s participation is another vital
element of effective conflict prevention and resolution.
That is reflected in the United Kingdom’s current national
action plan on women and peace and security, which
includes a commitment to support the implementation
of national action plans in a range of partner countries,
including Nigeria, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and South Sudan. The United Kingdom is also
a proud member of the Friends of FemWise group,
supporting the African Union’s FemWise initiative to
strengthen the network of African women involved in
conflict prevention and mediation. We also attach great
importance to the role of civil society and community
initiatives to advance women’s participation in conflict
prevention and peacemaking. The example of Liberian
Nobel Peace Prize laureate Leymah Gbowee and her
fellow activists shows that when women campaign for
peace at the grass-roots level, their activism can have a
truly catalytic effect.
Finally, and as many other speakers have mentioned
this morning, peacemaking and peacebuilding efforts
should be complemented by a robust approach to
countering the proliferation of weapons, especially small
arms and light weapons. Small arms and light weapons
have a role to play in ensuring legitimate defence and
security, but their misuse costs hundreds of thousands of
lives every year, undermines security and development,
and fuels conflict, crime and terrorism. That cannot be
achieved without the effective functioning of peace and
security institutions at the national level, but it also
relies on strong cross-border and regional cooperation.
The United Kingdom looks forward to continuing to
work with the African Union on improving management
of small arms and light weapons and ammunition in
Africa. That should support and complement existing
24/75

27/02/2019

work through the United Nations, as well as other arms
control treaties, conventions and regimes, including the
Arms Trade Treaty. We urge all States in the region that
have not yet done so to become party to the relevant
international arms control instruments, demonstrating
their commitment to countering the proliferation of
illicit weapons.
The United Kingdom will remain a staunch
supporter of African initiatives to foster peace and
security across the African continent. We look forward
to hearing from other Member States in the course of
today’s debate about efforts in hand to deliver progress
against the road map for silencing the guns to 2020
and beyond.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
First of all, we would like to thank Equatorial Guinea for
organizing today’s open debate. We would also like to
thank the Under-Secretary-General, the African Union
High Representative, and the founder and Executive
Director of the African Centre for the Constructive
Resolution of Disputes for their insightful briefings
this morning.
Today’s open debate on the African Union’s Silence
the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative is an excellent
opportunity to reflect on the deepening of the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union. Today, I would like to focus on three
main messages.
First, Belgium welcomes this important initiative.
It demonstrates, once again, the importance of African
leadership and ownership on peace and security issues
on the continent. It also demonstrates how strong the
partnership between the African Union and the United
Nations is. We share the same challenges and we have a
collective duty to provide answers.
Secondly, we must certainly continue to reflect
on the issue, but we must first and foremost act in
the field. The ambition of the initiative to silence the
weapons by 2020 reminds us of the magnitude of the
challenges on the ground. At the international level, we
must redouble our efforts to improve the regulation of
the international trade in conventional weapons and to
prevent and combat illicit trafficking in weapons. We
must also seek better coordination between the various
regional and international arms-control systems and
mechanisms. At the same time, at the national level, we
must also ensure that we ratify and implement existing
instruments, such as the Arms Trade Treaty.
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Finally, for Belgium, and for many colleagues who
have spoken before me, it is essential to maintain a
holistic approach to this initiative. This initiative aims
first and foremost to create an African continent free of
armed conflict. But it also makes it possible to deepen
the reflection on the continent’s development and on
its further integration. In this context, this initiative
must pay attention to the deep roots of conflicts, be
they political, economic or linked to the violation of
human rights.
While the political challenges, including the
importance of good governance, participation and
inclusion are well known, the economic challenges are
less so. In this context, Belgium calls for particular
attention to be paid to the problem of the exploitation,
trafficking and illegal trade in natural resources,
particularly conflict minerals, such as tin, the 3T, gold,
diamonds, coal and wildlife. These have contributed
to the outbreak, intensification and continuation of
many armed conflicts. That is why we encourage
organized, transparent and sustainable management of
natural resources, including through the promotion of
responsible practices throughout the chain of supply.
This initiative must also recognize the crucial
role of women and young people. Belgium considers it
particularly important to strengthen access to justice for
women in conflict or post-conflict situations, as well
as to ensure adequate reparations for victims. We must
also recognize the important and positive contribution
of young people in conflict prevention and resolution
and in post-conflict situations.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Equatorial Guinea for convening
today’s meeting, and express gratitude to Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Mr. Ramtane Lamamra and Mr. Vasu Gounden
for their briefings. We also welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Equatorial Guinea to this important
debate, in which we are recognizing the importance and
significance of the African Union Silence the Guns in
Africa by 2020 initiative. We also welcome resolution
2457 (2019) and the role played by Equatorial Guinea in
its important adoption.
We believe that this common effort by African
countries is a symbol of the commitment, will,
responsibility and unity of African peoples and leaders
around the ambitious goal of building a conflict-free
continent as an essential basis for its development. We
support this initiative which, in line with Agenda 2063

S/PV. 8473

of the African Union and the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) of 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, seeks to build a stable, peaceful and
prosperous continent. In particular, we recognize the
importance in this context of SDG 16, which commits
us to promoting the rule of law and strengthening
institutions with a view to achieving peaceful and
inclusive societies.
We consider it positive that the progress achieved
in many countries in this region can be shared through
good practices and lessons learned with those who
continue to face serious challenges and threats driven
or exacerbated by acts of violence by armed groups,
illicit arms trafficking, the fight for illegal control of
natural resources, interethnic violence and the limited
presence of the State. In this regard, we wish to stress in
particular the importance of eradicating the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons, which contributes
significantly to exacerbating insecurity and violence
in various parts of Africa. Regional cooperation and
cooperation between neighbouring States are essential
for strengthening the intelligence work and border
controls required to confront this scourge. We stress
the need to fully implement existing international
instruments in this area, including the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, and the Arms Trade Treaty.
In addition, in order to achieve a conflict free
zone, it is necessary to address the root causes thereof,
including poverty, inequality, climate change and weak
institutions, applying a multidimensional approach
that privileges the strengthening of capacities and
institutions established to promote human rights, the
rule of law and sustainable development. In this regard,
the need to promote education and create employment
opportunities for women, young people and children.
To this end, the simultaneous implementation of the
African Peace and Security Architecture and the
African Governance Architecture, as well as the road
map to silence weapons by 2020, will be vital.
It must be stressed that this initiative must have the
support of the international community as a whole. It
will be necessary to promote greater cooperation and
synergies between the African Union and the United
Nations system, especially joint work between the
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union, particularly in peacebuilding
processes, as well as with other regional and subregional

19-0568225/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

organizations, in accordance with resolution 2320
(2016).
As was mentioned by the Secretary-General
when he took part in the recent Ordinary Session of
the Assembly of the African Union, the relationship
between that organization and the United Nations,
while having been significantly strengthened in recent
years, is capable of generating an even closer and
more efficient alliance. The resolution that we have
just adopted is a sign of the Security Council’s firm
commitment to this goal.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes His Excellency Mr. Simeon Oyono Esono
Angue, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Equatorial
Guinea, who is presiding over today’s meeting. I
also thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, the
African Union High Representative for Silencing the
Guns in Africa, Mr. Lamamra, and Mr. Gounden for
their briefings.
Home to the largest number of developing
countries, Africa is also the most dynamic continent,
with the greatest development potential in the world
today. Peace and stability in Africa is key to security
and development around the world.

27/02/2019

First, United Nations-African Union cooperation
must be strengthened. Recent years have seen a
deepening of the United Nations-AU partnership,
following the signing of the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security and intensified cooperation in jointly
tackling issues of regional peace and development. The
United Nations should fully leverage its own strength
and provide greater assistance to Africa. In the spirit
of the Joint Framework, the two organizations should
collaborate more closely on conflict prevention and
mediation in the pursuit of lasting peace by addressing
the root causes of conflict, among other things.
The Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council should further enhance their communication
and coordination with one another. The Security
Council has just unanimously adopted resolution 2457
(2019), on silencing the guns in Africa, which China
welcomes. That resolution can help the United Nations
lend greater support to the AU’s Silencing the Guns by
2020 initiative and bring the United Nations and AU
closer together in their joint endeavours.

Over the past few years, the African Union (AU) and
African countries have been vigorously implementing
Agenda 2063 and the Silencing the Guns in Africa
by 2020 initiative, at the same time as the continent’s
peace and security situation has steadily improved. At
the thirty-second AU Summit, held recently, a number
of decisions were adopted in such areas as establishing
the African free trade zone and strengthening the
African Union Peace Fund, which fully demonstrates
the resolve of the AU and African countries to work
together for self-empowerment in order to resolve
African issues through African-led processes. China
applauds those efforts.

Secondly, we should continue to support Africa’s
capacity-building in the areas of peace and security.
The AU’s peace and security operations are becoming
a critical means of responding to crises in the continent
and complementing United Nations peacekeeping
operations in important ways. The United Nations
should actively assist the AU and other regional and
subregional organizations in bolstering their mission
planning and management capacities in their good
offices, peacekeeping and disarmament tasks, including
by supporting African countries in resolving African
issues the African way. China supports the United
Nations by providing sustainable and predictable
financial support to AU peace and security operations
and by working with the AU to overcome funding issues
concerning their peace and security operations.

However, the situation remains fragile in some
regions of Africa, where traditional security threats
are intertwined with non-traditional ones and other
prominent issues persist, such as intercommunal
tensions, terrorism, transnational organized crime, high
levels of poverty and unemployment and refugee crises.
In addition, regional collective security mechanisms
are underfunded and face other constraints. Those
are the ongoing challenges to achieving the goal of
silencing the guns in Africa by 2020. In that context,
China wishes to highlight the following three points.

Thirdly, we must scale up assistance to Africa
for its economic and social development so as to
eradicate the root causes of conflict. International
partners should increase their contributions in priority
areas, such as agriculture, health care, education,
economic development and trade, connectivity and
other infrastructure sectors, and should lend effective
support to African countries in the region to help them
achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
reduce poverty, develop their economies and improve
livelihoods. It will also increase the capacity of

26/75

19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

African countries to achieve sustainable economic and
social development.
The international community must also pay close
attention to such issues as youth, women and children, as
well as refugees and employment in Africa. The issue of
internally displaced persons was included in the theme
of the 2019 AU Summit. The international community
should provide humanitarian assistance in line with
the needs of the AU and African countries. The United
Nations should provide constructive assistance by fully
utilizing the United Nations Development Programme,
the Peacebuilding Commission and other mechanisms.
From the outset, China has supported peace,
security, prosperity and development of African
countries and peoples. China has adhered to President
Xi Jinping’s proposals on what should guide our
relations with Africa — the principles of sincerity,
practical results, affinity and good faith, combined with
the values of friendship, justice and shared interests.
We have stayed actively engaged in matters pertaining
to Africa’s peace and security.
China announced the establishment of the ChinaUnited Nations Peace and Development Fund in
2015, which covers a 10-year period and amounts to
$1 billion. Thanks to China’s active efforts, the Fund
has focused on Africa’s peace and development and has
provided financial support to many projects related to
the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative.
At the Beijing Summit of the Forum on ChinaAfrica Cooperation held in September, Chinese and
African leaders unanimously adopted the Beijing
Declaration — Toward an Even Stronger ChinaAfrica Community With a Shared Future, in which
Sino-African peace and security cooperation is defined
as one of the eight cooperation priorities and in which
China pledges, in no uncertain terms, its continued
support for the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative.
In addition, China will establish a China-Africa
peace and security cooperation fund to encourage
greater Sino-African cooperation on peace, security,
peacekeeping, sustaining peace and the maintenance
of stability. China is ready to continue playing a
constructive role in promoting peace, stability and
development in Africa.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
I welcome you, Mr. President, as you preside over
our meeting today. I would also like to thank the

S/PV. 8473

briefers — Ms. DiCarlo, Mr. Lamamra and Mr. Gounden.
I thank them for their detailed and valuable briefings,
which included a wealth of information on various
aspects of the Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020
initiative, the African Union Master Roadmap of
Practical Steps to Silence the Guns in Africa by 2020
and the challenges and obstacles that could prevent the
African continent from implementing that initiative by
the target date.
The concerns and aspirations of the African continent
are on the agenda today — not only in the Security
Council but throughout all United Nations organs
and specialized agencies in Africa. That reflects the
importance of the African continent for the international
community and international organizations.
The African Union (AU) has achieved many
accomplishments in its efforts to resolve a number of
African issues, which enables the United Nations to
build upon them. The cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, under Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, is an exceptional and
commendable development. If we review the various
aspects and kinds of cooperation we have seen in recent
months, we will note that there is substantial progress,
such as the signing of joint frameworks for sustainable
peace and development, as well as holding annual
meetings between both organizations at the highest
levels, which has been institutionalized, in addition
to the Joint Statement on Support for United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations and increased cooperation
between the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council. The two Councils hold annual
meetings, and additional meetings are held between the
AU Peace and Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission. Recently, the AU Commission and the
United Nations Secretariat also held for the first time a
dialogue on human rights.
We call for the preservation of that momentum,
which led to many gains, and for building upon them,
especially the initiative related to maintain peace in
order to enable peace missions to be more efficient,
better equipped, safest and stronger. Undoubtedly,
that requires robust Security Council mandates and
sustainable and predictable funding. The positive
developments that we have seen in the Security
Council on a number of agenda items well exemplify
the outcome of constructive cooperation between the
two organizations.

19-0568227/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

It is important to pool efforts in responding to the
challenges that threaten peace and security through
preventive diplomacy and mediation as a first line of
defence to prevent the outbreak of conflicts, for which
there are several examples. In that regard, the best way
by which to silence the guns in a lasting manner lies
in building sustainable peace. There is no peace amid
a turbulent climate, and no prevention of conflicts
without working on establishing the foundations of
peace, which can be done only through establishing
societies whereby all citizens can effectively participate
in building those foundations, achieve lasting peace
and implement the Sustainable Development Goals of
the 2030 Agenda. It is therefore necessary to resolve the
root causes of conflicts before they erupt.
The African Union’s Agenda 2063 envisages a
number of factors that would prevent the emergence of
conflicts as well as resolving them. That would require
establishing a culture of peace and tolerance through
educating children and young people about peace, the
principles of good governance, democracy, human
rights, the rule of law, access to justice and addressing
the root causes of interrelated and complex differences.
Development — together with peace, security and
human rights — is one of the main pillars of the United
Nations for achieving lasting peace. Accordingly, the
State of Kuwait has attached great importance to that
pillar in partnership with all African States, based on
its conviction that Africa is of strategic importance for
the international community, especially the Arab world.
As was mentioned a while ago, peace and security in
Africa are imperative to the international community.
The State of Kuwait, as an observer State in the African
Union, will continue to support development in Africa,
whether at the governmental or grass-roots level or
through the institutions linked to the Kuwait Fund for
Arab Economic Development. We believe that Africa is
an important region with regard to our activities.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait relies on the
United Nations and its relevant organs in promoting
the potential of African countries to implement the
Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative and Agenda 2063
in cooperation with donor countries. We were pleased
to work with all Council members on resolution 2457
(2019), related to silencing the guns in Africa. We are
also pleased to sponsor and implement that resolution,
as well as to reap its benefits in the near future.
28/75

27/02/2019

The President (spoke in Spanish): May I remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate their texts
in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.
I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Guatemala.
Mr. García Sáenz (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala thanks the delegation of Equatorial Guinea,
in its capacity as President of the Security Council, for
convening this open debate, which provides us with an
opportunity to exchange views on an issue as important
as cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations to silence the guns in
Africa.
We are also grateful for the concept note (S/2019/169,
annex) provided for this debate, with which we fully
agree, as it states, in paragraph 1, that this initiative is
intended to
“achieve the goal of a conflict-free Africa, to
make peace a reality for all our people and to rid
the continent of wars, civil conflicts, human rights
violations, humanitarian disasters and violent
conflicts, and to prevent genocide”.
We recognize that, over the past two decades,
the African Union and its regional mechanisms have
ramped up their capacities to address crisis situations
and conflicts on the continent, while contributing to the
creation of conditions that are conducive to the growth
and development of their populations, with the ultimate
goal of achieving peace in the region. Despite progress
pertaining to conflict prevention and their management
and settlement, however, Africa continues to face
various crises that jeopardize human, national and
regional security. At the same time, it is appropriate to
mention that the region to which my country belongs
also faces the same challenges.
Moreover, the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons sets the stage for the commission of mass
atrocity crimes. The consequences of the devastating
impact of the illicit transfer of small arms and light
weapons is a problem that is severely affecting the
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

African continent and is a global phenomenon.
Consequently, it requires international and multilateral
responses and commitments — that is to say, a strong
and determined resolve.
Every day throughout the world, small arms and light
weapons and their proliferation and illicit trafficking
result in the deaths of hundreds of people, fuel conflict
and exacerbate violence. Such trade is unscrupulous
and unethical, which is why the Organization should
devote efforts to its strict regulation. The manufacture
of such weapons and their ammunition shows no signs of
decreasing. It is linked to illicit markets and contributes
to drug trafficking, organized crime and armed
conflicts, thereby undermining security and standing
in the way of creating an appropriate environment in
which human, economic and sustainable development
is fostered.
Guatemala supports initiatives that seek
comprehensive and sustainable solutions to the problems
afflicting our peoples, in particular with regard to
effectively addressing current and emerging threats to
international peace and security. Although that is the
primary obligation of our Governments, we must also
recognize that we are stronger when we work together
and multilaterally, so that solutions are sought based on
experiences and good practices in the implementation
of the various relevant international instruments.
We therefore urge States that have not yet done so to
accede to the Arms Trade Treaty, while recalling that it is
a legally binding instrument that establishes a common
regime for the international trade in conventional arms,
as well as seeks to reduce the illicit proliferation of
small arms and light weapons. It is therefore necessary
to reduce the human suffering caused by illegal and
irresponsible transfer of such weapons.
The Arms Trade Treaty contributes to improving
regional security and stability, as well as promoting
accountability by establishing better controls on
the transfer of conventional arms. In addition to that
Treaty, the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects is also a suitable platform for
the exchange of capabilities, assistance and cooperation
for the improvement of national laws on small arms and
their import and export controls, as well as the proper
management of stockpiles.
Guatemala firmly believes that peace and
development go hand in hand. We therefore emphasize

S/PV. 8473

the need to generate synergies linking instruments
related to peace and security with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, which represents the
broadest consensus at the international level for
achieving peaceful and inclusive societies.
In conclusion, I would like to recall that armed
violence is an evil that affects our entire society, and
vulnerable groups are the most affected — especially
women, young people and children who are seeking a
better future. That is why it is in our hands and our
responsibility to take measures to ease the suffering of
our peoples, thereby demonstrating our firm willingness
to safeguard multilateralism and maintain peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I thank you, Sir, for
convening today’s important meeting. We commend
your leadership on the issue. We welcome the adoption
earlier today of resolution 2457 (2019), which we
co-sponsored. Let me also express my gratitude to the
briefers for their insightful remarks.
The goal of silencing the guns in Africa by 2020
is ambitious and worthy. As Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo said in her briefing, it demands that we address
the drivers and root causes of conflict and fragility in a
holistic manner. With that in mind, my remarks today
will focus on three issues — small arms, prevention
and institution-building.
First, we must tackle the guns themselves. Small
arms and light weapons are the greatest common factor
among various types of security threats on the African
continent. Such weapons are a force multiplier of
instability that exacerbate and prolong the conflict in
whatever arena they enter.
In that regard, Japan welcomes the newly
established funding mechanism — the Saving Lives
Entity, otherwise known as SALIENT, launched
under the Secretary-General’s disarmament agenda.
Small arms issues are cross-cutting and affect the
entire spectrum of conflict resolution. Japan believes
that that approach, which enables the strengthening
of institutional capacities for controlling small arms,
will pave the way for a more coherent United Nations
response. For that reason, Japan recently decided — and
today announced — that we will disburse $2 million
to SALIENT.

19-0568229/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Japan has also decided to provide more than half a
million dollars to the United Nations Regional Centre
for Peace and Disarmament in Africa (UNREC) in
Lomé. Small arms and light weapons are borderless,
and regional cooperation is imperative in combating
their use. We look forward to seeing UNREC enhance
the capacities of disarmament institutions in Africa
through its coordination with regional partners.
In addition, most of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Africa already have mandates associated
with small arms. It would be useful for the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) to look at the issue
horizontally and synergize their efforts.
Secondly, just managing small arms is not enough.
The United Nations and the AU need to boost prevention
efforts. It is better to prevent a gun from being fired in
the first place than to have to silence one that is already
firing. Both the United Nations and the AU have
preventive tools at their disposal, ranging from early
warning and mediation to peacebuilding, which can and
should complement each other in the quest for political
solutions. Japan believes that a greater emphasis on
prevention on the part of the Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council will have a powerful impact on
silencing the guns. We also highlight the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in that regard.
The recent peace agreement in the Central African
Republic is a great example of the collaborative mediation
efforts by the United Nations, the AU and subregional
organizations. Japan contributed financially to the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation for the
Central African Republic through the AU Peace Fund.
Finally, strengthening institutional capacity is
crucial. The foundation for sustaining peace is built
on institutions that serve people. That is why Japan
strongly emphasizes institution-building in Africa. We
believe that the United Nations and the AU can leverage
their strategic partnership to strengthen institutional
capacity-building in Africa towards the goal of
silencing the guns. Japan will do its part in promoting it,
including at the upcoming seventh Tokyo International
Conference on African Development in August.

27/02/2019

today’s open debate on a subject that is very relevant to
international security.
Conventional weapons account for the largest
number of deaths and victims throughout the world and
perpetuate armed conflicts, while hindering security,
development and sustainable peace. All Member States
have a responsibility to promote societies free of armed
violence, because the uncontrolled proliferation of
conventional weapons in various regions of the world
poses a threat to international peace and security.
Regrettably, Africa, Latin America and the
Caribbean absorb the greatest human cost of this
problem, although we are not weapons manufacturers.
Mexico is therefore particularly concerned about
the irresponsible and uncontrolled arms trade, which
fosters illicit trafficking across borders and cause
weapons to end up in the hands of criminals.
In order to meet the challenge, it is essential to
recognize that producers, exporters, intermediaries and
recipients of weapons all have a shared responsibility.
Cooperation and multidimensional efforts at the
subregional, regional and global levels must be the
vehicle that enables us to overcome the challenge,
supported by full compliance with, and the proper
implementation of, the arms embargoes imposed by the
Council, as well as the promotion and implementation
of effective programmes and mandates on the collection
and registration of weapons.
Mexico welcomes the fact that the African Union
has developed a vision and a continental strategy to
put an end to armed violence and control the trade and
trafficking in weapons in an effort to spur development.
We in Latin America and the Caribbean have also
promoted and implemented ambitious regional and
hemispheric agreements.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.

For example, under the chairmanship of Mexico, the
Conference of the States Parties to the Inter-American
Convention against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives, and
Other Related Materials held last year agreed on an
innovative approach to action for its implementation
and synergies with other international instruments and
mechanisms in order to align national and regional
efforts with the overall achievement of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.

Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Equatorial Guinea for convening

A decisive fight against arms trafficking and
diversion must be accompanied by strategies that make

30/75

19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

development and sustainable peace the top priorities for
States. The achievement of Agenda 2030 is particularly
visible and relevant to the issue, not only as regards
target 16.4 of the Sustainable Development Goals, on
reducing illicit arms flows and combating organized
crime, but also because the reduction of violence is
imperative to achieving sustainable development,
complying with Agenda 2030 and saving thousands of
lives. We must forge inclusive societies with a healthy
social fabric. Many of our societies are plagued by
firearms, which groups use as tools to threaten the rule
of law and the kind of society we all want.
Mexico urges all members to take full advantage
of the proper implementation of the multilateral
instruments at our disposal in order to achieve the
universality and implementation of the Arms Trade
Treaty and revitalize the United Nations Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects for the purpose of holding comprehensive
discussions on the issue and the complete cycle of
weapons, including the indivisibility of the equal and
proportional treatment of ammunition.
Within the framework of that discussion, we
reiterate our call not to combine actions taken in
response to organized crime with actions taken
in response to the fight against terrorism, as both
phenomena require dedicated and effective cooperation
efforts that are bound to differ because the two issues
are different in nature.
Mexico reiterates its support for the disarmament
agenda
proposed
by
the
Secretary-General.
Disarmament is not an end in itself but a means,
or vehicle, to achieve peace, save humankind, save
lives and save future generations, as proposed by the
Secretary-General. We note the implementation of
the multiparty voluntary fund to combat illicit arms
trafficking and the strategy aimed at young people as
agents for change in their communities.
Similarly, the concrete actions being taken in
different regions are very important — the positive
role of the regional disarmament centres stands out. As
far as the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace,
Disarmament and Development in Latin America and
the Caribbean is concerned, its activity is indispensable
for the efforts of countries in my region, such as Mexico,
which has benefited from various activities, studies and
diagnostics for the implementation of public policies.

S/PV. 8473

Economic resources that are diverted from
sustainable development to purchase weapons could
undoubtedly help our societies in a more humane and
integrated way. Sustainable peace is the collective
desire of the United Nations. Let us silence the guns
in Africa — but also in other regions that suffer from
armed violence and conflicts that are exacerbated by
the proliferation of conventional weapons.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Benin.
Mr. Do Rego (Benin) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the Group of African States.
At the outset, allow me to welcome to you to New
York again, Mr. Foreign Minister, and to thank the
presidency of Equatorial Guinea for organizing this
important open debate on the Silencing the Guns by 2020
initiative. The Group thanks Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo and Mr. Vasu Gounden for their
briefings on that extremely important subject. I would
especially like to commend Mr. Ramtane Lamamra,
African Union High Representative for Silencing the
Guns in Africa by 2020, for his tireless efforts in the
service of peace and stability on our continent.
The African Group deeply appreciates the efforts
made by the three African members of the Security
Council, under the coordination of the President of
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, to carry forward
the initiative to hold this open debate of the Security
Council to consider resolution 2457 (2019) on silencing
the guns in Africa. This debate demonstrates the United
Nations commitment to the promotion of peace on our
continent. In that regard, I would like to congratulate
all the members on the unanimous adoption of today’s
resolution, which gives new impetus to the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union in the area of peace and security.
The Group remains deeply concerned about the
illicit trade, transfer and circulation of small arms and
light weapons, as well as their excessive accumulation
and uncontrolled proliferation in many parts of the
world, particularly in Africa, due to their humanitarian
and socioeconomic consequences. Africa continues
to be at the forefront of the regions most affected by
the illicit trade and transfer of small arms and light
weapons, which are mainly manufactured outside the
continent but acquired and used by unauthorized actors
and illegal armed groups on the continent.

19-0568231/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The African Group therefore sees the present
meeting as a renewed opportunity for the international
community to redouble its efforts to curb the
phenomenon of the illicit flows of small arms during
conflicts in order to create an environment that is
conducive to peace, security and socioeconomic
development. It is important to note that promoting
the free and inclusive participation of States in global
efforts to combat the illicit flow of weapons, particularly
in Africa, will facilitate the effective implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
African Union’s Agenda 2063.
In that context, the Group welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s agenda for disarmament, reaffirms
the validity and relevance of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, and underlines the importance of its
full and effective implementation. We also stress that
international assistance and cooperation are an essential
aspect of its implementation. In that regard, the African
Group welcomes the efforts of Member States and
regional organizations to implement the Programme of
Action and also calls for the full implementation of the
International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons in order to enable
States to identify in a timely manner and reliably trace
small arms and light weapons, thereby preventing their
illicit flow.
The African Union’s commitment to silencing the
guns by 2020 has taken an important step forward in
recent months. The Horn of Africa, which is one of
the regions of our continent that has unfortunately
been home to many conflicts, is delighted today with
the rapprochement between Ethiopia and Eritrea — a
new impetus that allows us to look to the future with
optimism. As a concrete example of the successful
exercise to peacefully end crises, I would also like to
mention the recent peace agreements reached in South
Sudan and the Central African Republic, as well as the
peaceful elections held in both Madagascar and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Africa has the most to gain from international law
and multilateral institutions. In the 16 years since the
establishment of the African Union, we have seen the
considerable benefits of our multilateral approach,
which has led to the decline in conflicts and the
increase in the number of democratic Governments
32/75

27/02/2019

across the continent. In an international context marked
by a tendency to question multilateralism and the
international order based on the rule of law, it seems to
me important to emphasize that point.
The African Group therefore wishes to highlight
the significant work and progress made in the fight
against the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
since the adoption of the Bamako Declaration on Small
Arms Proliferation in 2000, as well as the Constitutive
Act of the African Union; the Protocol relating to the
Establishment of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union in 2002; the Solemn Declaration on a
Common African Defence and Security Policy, adopted
in Sirte, Libya in 2004; the Nairobi Protocol for the
Prevention, Control and Reduction of Small Arms
and Light Weapons in the Great Lakes Region and the
Horn of Africa; the Southern African Development
Community Protocol of 2004; the 2006 Economic
Community of West African States Convention on
Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition
and Other Related Materials; and the efforts undertaken
within the framework of the Community of SaheloSaharan States and the Arab Maghreb Union.
With the African Union’s Agenda 2063 in mind,
our Heads of State and Government launched the
Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative in 2013, alongside
other relevant subregional initiatives to address that
challenge on the continent. Although some believe that
this initiative is too ambitious, we are convinced that
the objective set remains achievable with the political
will and commitment of all.
The African Group recognizes that the current
regional pattern of conflicts on the continent presents
new challenges, particularly in the Sahel-Saharan
region, the Great Lakes region and a few outbreaks in
the Horn of Africa, where the phenomenon of terrorism
and cross-border crime threatens to undermine all
gains achieved. Moreover, despite the progress made in
recent years, the African Group continues to stress that
international assistance and cooperation, on a larger
scale, remain an essential element in permanently
silencing the guns in Africa.
In that regard, the African Group calls on all
Member States to strengthen their technical and
financial cooperation with developing countries in
order to achieve the overall objectives of eradicating
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. The
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV. 8473

Group believes that those efforts will promote national
and regional initiatives and contribute to global efforts.

resolve to work together. We also thank the briefers for
their informative submissions.

The African Group welcomes the efforts made
by States parties to the Arms Trade Treaty since its
entry into force, as well as the holding of the third
Conference of States Parties to the Treaty in Tokyo
in August 2018. The Group urges the States parties to
the Treaty to implement it in a balanced and objective
manner, ensuring that the interests of all States, and not
only those of the main producing and exporting States,
are protected, while avoiding any infringement of the
legitimate right of States to meet their defence and
security needs, in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations.

We join in commending this unique and ambitious
effort, for which the whole continent of Africa is
committed to working together on the entire spectrum
of issues, including on peace and security through the
African Union (AU).

The full implementation of the Treaty remains
achievable with the cooperation of all its parties.
The African Group recognizes that arms transfers to
unauthorized recipients and illegal armed groups fuel
the illicit trade and it urges all States to refrain from
such transfers and to prohibit them to any recipient not
authorized by a competent national authority of the
importing State.
The African Group reaffirms the sovereign right
of States to acquire, manufacture, export, import and
retain conventional weapons, their components and
parts necessary for their legitimate security and defence
needs, in accordance with the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations.
The African Group appreciates the efforts of
the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Africa, its contribution to disarmament
efforts and its assistance to African States in achieving
disarmament, peace and security objectives. The
African Group stresses the need to strengthen all
United Nations regional centres so that they can fully
carry out their mandates.
In conclusion, the African Group wishes to
reaffirm the crucial importance of political will and
transparency in addressing international disarmament
and security issues. The Group calls on all stakeholders
to work together to strengthen the cause of peace and
prosperity in the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): We thank the delegation
of Equatorial Guinea for thoughtfully bringing muchneeded focus on an issue that reflects our collective

India welcomes the approach that provides for a
leading role of Africa in addressing African problems,
through African solutions. We also believe that this
is a work in progress and needs to be supported. On
the other hand, the maintenance of international peace
and security is one of the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, which also entails
the collective responsibility of Member States to
extend mutual support for strengthening capacities
and capabilities to address threats to international
peace and security. Thus, the cooperation of the United
Nations with African efforts is a natural progression. I
will focus on three issues.
First, the AU is playing a critical role in its
contribution to conflict prevention in Africa, with a
focus on the prevention of the outbreak, escalation,
continuation and recurrence of conflict. The mediation
efforts by the AU and the regional and subregional
organizations in Africa are showing positive results. We
believe that such efforts, based on the interest, consent
and commitment of all parties, will lead towards a
sustainable and peaceful settlements. We appreciate
the measures taken by all stakeholders towards the
implementation of the AU Master Roadmap of Practical
Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020.
Secondly, as the African Union continues to make
progress in addressing the resolution of conflicts, the
need for peacebuilding and development becomes a
priority. We believe that the commitment to support
peacebuilding is an imperative for sustainable peace in
Africa. While there is a broad consensus at the United
Nations to strengthen the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission, there is no agreement on increasing its
funding to even a 1 per cent level of that of peacekeeping
operations annually. Building peace cannot be a
voluntary pursuit; it has to be the common objective
of all.
For its part, India is a regular contributor to this
effort. As part of the traditional South-South solidarity
for development cooperation, at the Third IndiaAfrica Forum Summit, India extended concessional

19-0568233/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

credit worth $10 billion and doubled scholarships for
African students to $50,000 over a five-year period.
India’s partnership with Africa is based on a model of
cooperation which is responsive to the needs of African
countries. It is demand-driven, free of conditions and
provided in a non-prescriptive manner.
Thirdly, ever-expanding terror networks have
endangered the peace and security of the African
region in unprecedented ways. From Boko Haram to
Al-Shabaab, these terrorist networks are more and
more connected to terrorist networks from all around
the world. Our response to terrorist threats remains
less than satisfactory. The price of that indifference has
been immeasurable. A scaled-up response is required.
No easy recipe exists. Scaling up requires working
through additional partners, both regional bodies and
States. Coalitions and bilateral relationships will be
critical for completing key tasks. A strong, effective
and coherent response that reflects the international
community’s collective commitment to defeat the
scourge of terrorism is essential, in Africa as elsewhere.
The complex nature of modern conflicts makes it
necessary to respond to the changing needs of our times.
In the African Union, the United Nations has a willing
partner. We hope the adoption of resolution 2457 (2019)
today will lead to specific steps in that direction.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I speak on behalf of the five
Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden
and my own country, Norway.
We applaud the aspirations of the Silencing the
Guns by 2020 initiative and Agenda 2063 of the African
Union (AU) for a peaceful and secure Africa. We
commend the African Union and its member States for
their ambition and active engagement. It will enhance
our common future and collective security. Even though
the conflicts on the African continent have primarily
been intra-State conflicts, many have affected regional
peace and security.
It is crucial that regional and subregional
organizations and mechanisms, such as the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
Economic Community of West African States, continue
to improve the delivery of their mandates and that their
capacity is further increased. This should happen in
coordination with the African Union.
34/75

27/02/2019

Ending armed conflict in Africa requires African
solutions. We stand ready to support African leadership
in this endeavour. We want a more transparent and
representative Security Council that better reflects
today’s global realities. We support an increase in the
number of both permanent and non-permanent seats
for Africa in this Council. We welcome and support
the strengthened partnership between the AU and
the United Nations, not least between the AU Peace
and Security Council and the Security Council. This
includes securing the predictable and sustainable
funding of AU operations. The Nordic countries are
in favour of combining assessed contributions from
the United Nations with funding from the AU. We
also call for focused and accountable efforts to ensure
protection of human rights and respect for international
humanitarian law in all operations.
Achieving peace and stability in Africa requires
conflict prevention as well as mediation. We actively
support the implementation of the African Peace
and Security Architecture, including improved
capacity within the AU for preventive diplomacy,
mediation and peacebuilding. The Nordic countries
are long-term partners for development, addressing
root causes and multipliers of conflicts, building
stronger institutions through promotion of the African
Governance Architecture, mitigating climate change
and reducing inequality.
Protection of civilians is a fundamental concern in
all our humanitarian efforts. It is also is a key priority
of Norway’s presidency of the Anti-Personnel Mine
Ban Treaty this year.
There can be no sustainable peace without women’s
full and equal participation. Women’s involvement in
peace efforts is key to enhancing trust, legitimacy and
credibility. Women’s participation in preventing and
mediating conflicts makes solutions more effective
and sustainable. That is why the Nordic countries
are staunch supporters of resolution 1325 (2000) and
related resolutions on women and peace and security.
We will continue to work with such key partners as the
Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission on Women, Peace and Security and the
Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention and
Mediation, FemWise-Africa, to achieve full inclusion.
We will continue to be consistent partners, committed
to contributing to our collective security and our
common future.
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Khan (Pakistan): Mr. President, I would
like to thank you for presiding over this important
meeting. I also wish to thank the briefers for their
insightful contributions.
Our world is confronted with unprecedented
challenges. Many of the world’s regions are witnessing
prolonged periods of instability and conflict, growing
turmoil, extremist violence and terrorism, and, of
course, mass human dislocation and suffering. These
challenges are compounded by persistent poverty,
unemployment, inequality, water and food scarcity
and human rights violations — factors that diminish
the gains made so far and further exacerbate violence.
Nowhere are these threats more pronounced than in
Africa. Against this backdrop, we welcome today’s
meeting and hope that it will generate greater awareness
of the challenges confronting the continent.
The fiftieth anniversary solemn declaration of
the African Union (AU) importantly pledged to end
conflicts in Africa. The AU Master Roadmap of
Practical Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020
presents a significant milestone towards achieving the
aspirations of Africans for their continent.
Considerable progress has been made towards
preventing, managing and resolving conflicts in Africa.
Many of the devastating conflicts in Africa now stand
resolved. Reconciliation between Ethiopia and Eritrea,
agreements in South Sudan and the Central African
Republic, and the holding of elections in Madagascar,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Mali are
success stories that testify to the enhanced capacity
of the African Union and its regional mechanisms for
dealing with crises. With United Nations support, these
efforts have contributed to strengthening peace and
stability and creating favourable conditions for Africa’s
development in the last decade.
Despite these achievements, significant challenges
persist. Parts of Africa remain mired in conflict, while
new threats are emerging. Allow me to make five
specific points.
First, addressing the root causes of conflicts in their
widest dimensions is imperative for ending conflict as
well as to prevent relapses into cycles of violence. The
key drivers of violence, extremism and terrorism must
be tackled.

S/PV. 8473

Secondly, the illicit trade of small arms and
light weapons exacerbates violence and insecurity
and undermines development. A holistic approach,
including international assistance and cooperation, is
needed to address this challenge.
Thirdly, the eradication of poverty and inequality
are essential to ending conflicts. Towards this end, the
AU’s partnership with the United Nations offers a strong
foundation. Robust efforts are needed to strengthen the
implementation of the AU’s Agenda 2063, and to build
on the synergies with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Mobilization of international support
for Africa’s development priorities and its inclusive
transformative agenda are vital.
Fourthly, stabilization of conflict situations and
resolution of disputes are critical for a peaceful, secure
and prosperous Africa. A comprehensive approach to
peacekeeping, relying on strong African Union-United
Nations cooperation, is required. In this regard, the
growing dialogue between the Security Council and the
African Union for a better and more effective response
to peace and security issues is a welcome development.
As one of the largest troop-contributing countries to
United peace operations, Pakistan’s peacekeepers have
served and continue to serve in Africa, contributing to
many of Africa’s success stories. We take pride in our
contribution to bringing peace and security to Africa
and remain committed to improving peacekeeping
initiatives as environments and needs evolve.
Investment in sustainable resources, formulation of
achievable mandates and better utilization of triangular
cooperation mechanisms are crucial for strengthening
our efforts.
Finally, the African Union and its regional
mechanisms have devised several useful instruments
to prevent, manage and resolve conflicts. Sustained
progress requires enhanced cooperation with relevant
stakeholders, improvements in governance, the
strengthening of existing mechanisms, the monitoring
and evaluation of agreements, and ensuring adequate
resources for their implementation. Most significantly,
the role of women as key participants and decision
makers in all aspects of conflict resolution and
prevention must be fully promoted.
Pakistan remains committed to achieving a
conflict-free Africa and will continue its cooperation
to realizing the goal of lasting peace, security and
development in Africa.

19-0568235/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I would like to thank the
Equatorial Guinean presidency for convening today’s
open debate on such a relevant and urgent topic.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Head of Delegation of the European
Union. Additionally. I would like to make the following
few remarks.
Silencing the guns in Africa by the year 2020 is
without doubt an ambitious initiative, and only high
ambition can really bring us closer to achieving this
goal. Also, we clearly need to look beyond the year
2020 in terms of achieving a full and lasting peace in
all the corners of the African continent.
Much remains to be done, and all efforts need
to be made to that end. However, while looking at
the challenges at hand and ahead, we also need to
recognize the process already made. The partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union has
brought us closer to achieving lasting peace, with one
of the latest examples being the signing of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic just a few weeks ago. In order to not
let this hard work and time go to waste, strong political
commitment is needed from all sides to implement this
and other important agreements.
While putting an end to ongoing active conflicts
and crises is the most urgent goal, we must not forget
that, if we want the guns to stay silent, we need to
address the root causes of conflicts. The African
Union’s Agenda 2063 does that and highlights that
forging synergies between governance and peace and
security is crucial to addressing conflicts in a holistic
manner. Estonia welcomes the African efforts on
concrete structural conflict prevention initiatives, early
warning, mediation and preventive diplomacy, and we
very much encourage further efforts to that end.
Furthermore, better governance, creating strong and
reliable State institutions and ensuring accountability
and justice for the victims is the only way to move
towards truly achieve lasting peace. To that end, it
is critically important to include women and youth
in all aspects of conflict resolution and political
processes. Estonia stands ready to work with all our
partners to enhance capacities and work on solutions,
including digital ones, for conflict prevention and good
36/75

27/02/2019

governance. That is also something we prioritize as we
strive to become an elected member of the Security
Council for 2020-2021.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I am
delivering this statement on behalf of the Group of
Arab States.
First of all, I would like to welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation
of Equatorial Guinea. I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate. I also thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, African
Union High Representative for Silencing the Guns in
Africa; and Mr. Vasu Gounden, Founder and Executive
Director of the African Centre for the Constructive
Resolution of Disputes, for their briefings.
In Africa there is a saying that “It takes a village
to raise a child”. That applies equally to resolving the
problems on the African continent. Africa’s problems
call for the planetary village to work together to resolve
them. I speak on behalf of a group linked to Africa
through history, geography, culture, language and
religion. Africa’s problems and prosperity are our own.
Arabs have historically been interested in Africa and its
people, as well as in progress and peace. The continent
has long suffered from armed conflict, which has had
a considerable impact on the humanitarian, economic
and social situation of its countries and people.
The Arab Group reaffirms its support for the
principles and objectives of the United Nations for
the peaceful resolution of conflict, in accordance with
Chapters VI and VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. At the core of the Arab Group, we have many
African countries. We therefore reiterate the importance
of the Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative, as
well as the Lusaka Roadmap, which advocates African
solutions to African problems.
The peoples of Africa are determined to shoulder
their responsibility for establishing security and
stability in their continent, as well as for the resolution
of ongoing conflicts. We commend the progress made
in conflict resolution in order to realize peace and
security in Africa. There are many examples of that,
such as the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic in
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Khartoum, under the auspices of the Sudan; the signing
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan; and the peaceful transfer of
power in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Madagascar. However, the continent still faces many
challenges, including non-traditional threats to peace
and security, such as terrorism and organized crime.
The Arab countries, including Arab African
countries, for years played a critical role in conflict
resolution and in silencing the guns in Africa. Many of
them have participated in national reconciliation and
mediation processes with regard to conflicts in Africa.
On 16 September 2018, reconciliation efforts between
Ethiopia and Eritrea, with Saudi sponsorship, led to the
Jeddah peace agreement between Eritrea and Ethiopia,
after many decades of conflict. In 2007, Saudi Arabia
helped reach a reconciliation agreement between the
Sudan and Chad in order to restore stability to Darfur
and neighbouring areas in Chad.
Similarly, Morocco has always supported
preventive diplomacy efforts, mediation, peaceful
conflict resolution and political dialogue to put an
end to conflicts in Africa, including mediation to
restore stability to the Mano River basin. It also hosted
inter-Libyan political dialogue, which led to the Skhirat
Political Agreement of 17 December 2015. In August
2009, Morocco hosted the Ministerial Conference of
African States Bordering the Atlantic, which led to
the Rabat Declaration against maritime piracy and
transnational crime. In November 2013, Morocco
hosted a regional ministerial conference on border
security between Sahel and Maghreb States in order to
bolster border security between the Sahel countries and
the Arab Maghreb countries.
The State of Qatar sponsored negotiations between
the Sudanese Government and the opposition factions,
which led to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
The Security Council welcomed that document as a
step towards reaching a comprehensive solution. Qatar
also participated in mediation efforts to put an end
to border disputes between Djibouti and Eritrea, and
launched an initiative to deploy peacekeeping troops
that maintained stability for an entire decade.
Algeria hosted negotiations between Malian parties
and led international mediation, which culminated in
2015 with the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali, emanating from the Algiers process.
Algeria continues to make efforts to implement the

S/PV. 8473

agreement through its chairmanship of the Agreement
Monitoring Committee.
The Arab and Gulf countries have also played a
leading role in combating terrorism in Africa, with
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates pledging
$118 million and $35.4 million, respectively, to support
counter-terrorism forces in the Sahel and West Africa.
The Arab Group welcomes the strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
on issues of peace and security, economic and social
development in the continent. We underscore the
positive outcome of that partnership and coordination
between them and hope to see it continue. We call on
the international community to support that partnership
in all its aspects. We commend the United Nations for
its efforts to resolve the crisis in Libya and the African
Union for its support to help bring peace and stability
to Libya.
Africa continues to pursue the development of joint
African peacekeeping forces across the continent. We
must provide predictable and sustained financing to
African peacekeeping operations.
The close link between peace and security, on
the one hand, and economic and social development,
on the other, requires all partners in the international
community to reinforce the cooperation and synergy
frameworks with the African Union and African
countries in order to address the root causes of
armed conflict, including economic challenges such
as poverty, unemployment and food insecurity.
National reconciliation will not be possible unless we
address such challenges, including gender inequality,
marginalization, the accumulation of wealth in the
hands of the few and feelings of injustice and despair.
It is well known that Arab countries have played a
critical role in bolstering stability in Africa to enable
economic, social and human development. We have
excellent and cooperative economic relations with
Africa. The State of Kuwait, for example, through
the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development,
established over more than 56 years ago, has effectively
strengthened sustainable development in many
countries, including African countries. The Kuwait
Fund cooperates with 42 African countries. During the
fiscal year 2017-2018, the Fund provided them with 312
concessional loans.

19-0568237/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The Arab Fund for Technical Assistance to African
Countries, which was established at the seventh Arab
Summit in Rabat in 1974, represents the Arab Group’s
commitment to the principle of Arab-African solidarity
and common destiny. Since its inception, the activities
of the Arab Fund have supported support economic and
social development in the continent.
Cooperation between Arab States and the
African Union is embodied in joint initiatives aimed
at strengthening the pillars of peace, stability and
development in Africa, exemplified most recently by
the joint initiative between Qatar and the African Union
to support the return of migrants to their countries
of origin. We also stress the central role played by
Arab communities in Africa, especially the Lebanese
nationals living in Western African States, in the
economic and social development of those countries.
The migrant labour is also important as part of the
economic and social ties linking Arab and African
countries, in particular the Gulf countries.
Regarding investment, the United Arab Emirates,
which is the second largest investor in Africa after
China, invested approximately $11 billion in the
continent in 2016. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
intends to invest $10 billion in South Africa’s energy
sector. It is also considered the biggest investor in the
agriculture sector in Africa. The State of Qatar signed
a contract of $4 billion to manage the Red Sea port of
the Sudan in 2018. It invests in the agriculture and food
sectors in the Sudan.
Regarding human support, the Arab countries, in
particular countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council,
engaged in charitable activities in Africa. Assistance
to refugees on the continent is another element of
Arab support for efforts to limit human outflows and
lessen factors of instability in Africa. For example,
the King Salman Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre
contributed more than $250 million to assist refugees in
Djibouti in 2017.
In 2013, the State of Kuwait hosted the third ArabAfrica summit on the theme “Partners in development
and investment”. During the summit, His Highness
the Emir of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber
Al-Sabah, announced an initiative involving five-year
soft loans to non-Arab African States issued by the
Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development. That
Arab partnership with the United Nations was made
into reality by Kuwait’s pledge at the Summit of
38/75

27/02/2019

$1 billion through the General Investment Authority,
in cooperation with World Bank and its affiliated
institutions, as well as the China-Africa Development
Fund, with the aim of investing in the infrastructure of
the African continent.
The Arab Group believes that greater focus
should be placed on post-conflict reconstruction and
development. We emphasize that the objective behind
silencing the guns does not end with achieving political
settlements but is closely linked to reconstruction
and development. In that context, the Arab Group
commends the announcement regarding the opening
shortly of the African Union Centre for Reconstruction
and development in the Egyptian capital, Cairo. That
Centre will be involved in coordinating efforts and
policies of the African Union in that regard.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Head of Delegation of the European Union.
Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its 28 member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, North Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate country Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
I will focus today on what the European Union (EU)
and its member States are collectively doing to further
strengthen the range of tools of the African Union (AU)
and its regional mechanisms in preventing, managing
and resolving conflicts, while also illustrating how
the AU-United Nations strategic partnership can be
leveraged to help Africa achieve the ambitious goal of
silencing the guns.
The European Union welcomed the adoption of the
African Union Master Roadmap of Practical Steps for
Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 and the launch of
African Amnesty Month in the context of the Silencing
the Guns in Africa by 2020 flagship initiative. We
fully share the African Union’s concern about the
illicit proliferation of small arms and light weapons as
a major source of insecurity. We therefore commend
you, Mr. President, and your country for the initiative
to use your presidency of the Security Council to hold
today’s open debate on how cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations can further
contribute to its key effort of ending conflicts on
the continent.
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Agenda 2063 is a bold and ambitious strategic
framework for the sustainable development of the
African continent. The European Union is working
closely with the African Union to make those ambitions
come true, as witnessed by the AU-EU Summit in
Abidjan in November 2017 and, more recently, by the
first AU-EU annual joint ministerial meeting, held in
Brussels in January 2018.
Peace and security during all phases of the conflict
cycle are a central pillar of the AU-EU strategic
partnership. Our memorandum of understanding on
peace, security and governance, signed in May 2018,
puts the EU-AU partnership on a solid and structured
basis, taking into account the complexity of the
emerging threats and the need to address their root
causes. Our two organizations are also operationally
active in the Sahel, the Central African Republic and
Somalia. While cooperation is ongoing in all those
theatres, it is particularly strong in Somalia, where the
African Union Mission in Somalia is a key partner of
the EU civilian and military missions. Moreover, the
EU and the AU are exploring opportunities to further
strengthen operational cooperation on peace and
security, including between missions and operations.
The same goal is being pursued with the United Nations
and trilaterally. Progress in that area has the potential to
contribute significantly to Africa’s ambition to silence
the guns by 2020.
Another important area where progress has been
steady is the operationalization of the African Union
Peace Fund, a clear sign of the AU’s dedication to take
charge of the continent’s peace and security. We also
see it as an important tool for the alignment of partners’
support. We are honoured to be offered a seat on the
Fund’s Board of Trustees.
Under the African Peace and Security Architecture,
the AU regional economic communities, regional
mechanisms and subregional ad hoc coalitions are
building tools to respond to a wide variety of crisis
situations. The means range from diplomacy and
mediation to peace support operations and postconflict reconstruction and development. While peace
support operations generally receive the most attention
and resources, it is the quiet forces of diplomacy and
mediation and structural attention to fragility triggers
that contribute greatly to any successful intervention in
preventing or resolving conflict. The European Union
has therefore allocated €20 million for the continuation,
until 2020, of the early response mechanism of the

S/PV. 8473

African Peace Facility, making possible a range of
African Union activities of both a preventive and a
mediatory nature.
At the working level, the European Union and
the African Union are engaged in conflict prevention
dialogue. That is a dialogue of peers through which we
seek to learn from one another. A number of subjects
have been identified as entry points for cooperation,
including joint analyses, conflict prevention, climate
change, mediation and, last but not least — and
particularly relevant in today’s discussions — United
Nations-AU-EU trilateral cooperation. The European
Union is also committed to continue supporting a
stronger linkage between the African Peace and Security
Architecture and the African Governance Architecture
in order to reduce fragility and foster political stability
and effective governance across Africa for the benefit
of all.
The prevention of violent conflict is our key
endeavour. Beyond short-term actions to prevent an
imminent outbreak of violence, fragile situations
require tailored approaches and support to help create
sustainable peace, while addressing the underlying
causes of conflict. The successful prevention of violent
conflict must aim at local ownership and at prioritizing
the concerns of local communities. The protection of
human rights and responsive and accountable political
governance, as well as inclusive economic growth,
are essential elements of addressing the root causes of
conflict. Gender equality is a prerequisite for peace,
security, sustainable development and justice, all of
which positively influence our global, regional and
national economies. Women’s perspectives need to be
equally represented, as do the hopes and aspirations
of young people, who are ultimately responsible for
the future.
Indeed, an active role for youth and women in the
prevention, management and mediation of conflicts
is of paramount importance. That is recognized in
the declaration of the Abidjan Summit and is an area
in which we would like to see greater trilateral AUEU-United Nations cooperation. Building sustainable
and peaceful societies will require the utilization of all
African Peace and Security Architecture and African
Governance Architecture components to ensure a
comprehensive approach that brings together peace and
security, sustainable development and human rights.
Bringing those responsible for alleged violations and

19-0568239/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

abuses to justice and holding them accountable by
ending impunity is essential to reconciliation.
Allow me to end by assuring the Council and, in
particular, our African friends and colleagues that the
European Union will continue to encourage concrete
initiatives and bolster projects to support the African
Union and its regional mechanisms in enhancing their
capacity to deal with conflict and crisis situations on
the continent and meet its ambition of silencing the
guns by 2020.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): Allow me,
Mr. President, to read out the statement of Mr. Ahmed
Aboul Gheit, Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States, who would have liked to attend today’s
meeting in response to your kind invitation, but urgent
circumstances required that he be in Cairo.
“I would like to begin my statement today
by expressing our deep appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for your pioneering initiative to
convene today’s high-level open debate. I thank
you for inviting me in my capacity as SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States to participate
in the meeting.
“We welcome the briefings by Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs; His Excellency
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, High Representative of the
African Union Commission for Silencing the Guns
in Africa, whom we wish every success in his new
post in Algeria; and Mr. Vasu Gounden, Founder
and Executive Director of the African Centre for
the Constructive Resolution of Disputes, whom we
also congratulate on his achievements in Africa.
“We also congratulate you, Sir, on the
unanimous adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 2457 (2019).
“There is no doubt that the pioneering African
Union initiative to silence the guns by 2020 is an
effective framework for strengthening cooperation
between our organizations. It is something I
strongly emphasized at the thirty-second summit of
the African Union, held in January in Addis Ababa.
It was not only because half of the States members of
the League of Arab States are prominent members
of the African Union or because Egypt is the current
40/75

27/02/2019

Chair of the African Union for 2019 — as Egypt is a
founding member of the Arab League, the African
Union and the United Nations — but because of a
number of facts and common interests that require
us to intensify our Arab-African efforts to achieve
that noble objective.
“The Arab world represents the strategic and
natural geographic extension of Africa, just as
Africa represents the strategic depths of the Arab
world. That has led the African Union and the
League of Arab States to intensify their cooperation
by convening four Arab-African summits, hosted in
Cairo, Sirte, Kuwait and Malabo, in your brotherly
nation, Sir. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia will host
the fifth summit this year. It is all in an effort to
achieve the common interests and objectives of our
two organizations and work together to achieve
the goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the regional goals of Agenda 2063 of
the African Union and the Arab goals determined
by the Arab Summit resolutions.
“That will require us to intensify and coordinate
cooperation on a number of fronts to overcome
all challenges that prevent implementation. At
the same time, the Arab world and Africa need
strengthened cooperation to address the root causes
of armed conflict. We both need effective measures
to limit the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons and to overcome the weak control systems
for such weapons. We need to combat terrorist
organizations, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (Da’esh) and the Muslim Brotherhood in
the Arab world, as well as Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab
and others in Africa. We both need great reform
in the security sector to enable us to address
developments in transnational organized crime,
cybercrime, terrorism and violent extremism. We
both need strengthened regional and subregional
mechanisms to resolve conflicts and operationalize
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
We both need to strengthen early warning systems
and preventive diplomacy to prevent conflicts, hold
peaceful elections, ensure good governance and
achieve lasting peace. The list goes on.
“The Arab League agrees with the conclusions
of the report on silencing the guns, presented by
Equatorial Guinea on behalf of the African Union
Peace and Security Council at the most recent
African summit, especially since the report included
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the five comprehensive aspects of addressing the
issue, namely, the political, economic, social,
environmental and legal dimensions. The League
also agrees with the importance of national
ownership and of expanding popular participation
in the implementation process through civil
society and the private sector and with a focus
on young people and women, backed by regional
organizations and the United Nations.
“In that regard, the League of Arab States
attaches importance to strengthening cooperation
at the regional and international levels for
implementation purposes by enhancing cooperation
between the African Police Cooperation
Organization and the Council of Arab Interior
Ministers in silencing the guns. The effort includes
support from United Nations disarmament and
counter-terrorism entities, as well as from political
and peacekeeping/peacebuilding mechanisms of the
AU, the Arab League, the European Union and the
United Nations, through various alternatives that
were discussed at the high-level meeting hosted by
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra in Addis Ababa on 11 and
12 October 2018. The Arab League participated in
that high-level meeting in an effort to strengthen
cooperation between the two organizations in
that area.
“Within that important initiative, we must also
invest in the reforms adopted by the United Nations
based on the initiative of Secretary-General António
Guterres, especially the adjustments that are being
implemented within the African Peace and Security
Architecture. In that regard, the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and
senior officials who specialize in Africa and the
Arab region must cooperate and coordinate with
one another and promote preventive diplomacy
and conflict prevention. They should also enhance
cooperation among the Security Council, the
African Peace and Security Council, the EU
Political and Security Committee, and the political
and security committees of the Arab League in
order to implement initiatives that lead to silencing
the guns.
“An example of such action is the Africa
Amnesty Month for the Surrender of Illegally
Owned Weapons and Arms initiative, which began
through a flagship project in various African
States, including Burkina Faso, Madagascar, Mali,

S/PV. 8473

the Sudan and Zambia. We look forward to its
implementation and celebration on a regional level
soon in order to reach a continental agreement
on small arms and light weapons, in line with the
provisions of the relevant resolutions of the Arab
Interior Ministers Council. That topic, among
others of importance, was discussed at the first
Arab League-European Union summit, which was
held for in Sharm el-Sheikh on 24 and 25 February,
with a view to promoting cooperation among the
Arab League, EU and AU.
“While Africa and the Arab world share the
international concern with regard to the global
challenges facing multilateral systems in the
area of combating weapons of mass destruction
as an extremely fundamental pillar to achieve
international peace and security, we also underscore
the importance of joint international efforts to
establish a zone free of nuclear weapons, including
weapons of mass destruction, in the Middle East.
We must together implement the provisions of
the Pelindaba Treaty, which is the basis for the
maintenance of international peace and security at
both the African and Arab levels.
“Similarly, and through that same effective
partnership and joint efforts, we look forward
to reaching a just and comprehensive peace in
the Middle East in a manner that significantly
contributes to silencing the guns through the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State,
with Jerusalem as its capital, and through peaceful
settlements, free of guns, in Syria, Libya, Yemen,
Iraq, Somalia, the Sudan and other Arab States.
“In parallel, our effective partnership
continues to consolidate lasting and inclusive
peace in Burundi, The Gambia, Guinea-Bissau,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central
African Republic and other African States,
with the support of the United Nations and the
European Union, as well as other regional and
subregional organizations.
“We thank the representative of Lebanon, who
spoke on behalf of the Arab Group, and we align
ourselves with everything she said in her statement.
“We are confident in that regard that the
cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations will lead to the desired
results on the African and Arab levels.”

19-0568241/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month, and to thank you for all the
meetings that you have organized, especially those
pertaining to Africa. We meet once again here in this
Chamber to discuss an African topic, which is how to
silence the guns and put an end to conflicts and civil
wars in Africa?
I would like to touch upon a number of points.
The first pertains to the nation State. All social,
ethnic and religious groups merge in a nation State to
become a single nation of citizens with equal rights and
responsibilities. A nation State is based on transparent
and robust administration, with independent
accountability mechanisms, an active security and
military architecture, a strong army subject to strict
military law and a strong economy. Those are all
conditions for the peaceful coexistence of nations
around the world. The nation State is the basis for
stability and could put an end to all the root causes of
conflicts and civil wars.
The lack of a nation State poses a threat to stability
and peace, even more than international conflicts
themselves. The alternative to the nation State is
fragmented ethnic or religious factions that strive to
survive through distorted economies based on conflict
and ambiguous goals. There are numerous examples of
the fact that States and nations cannot be built that way.
Those who call for the fragmentation of nation States
will reap what they sow.
My second point concerns national reconciliation.
Individuals and groups can achieve reconciliation within
a nation State. Reconciliation requires compromise
and mutual concessions to tackle the root causes of a
specific conflict or dispute. It is certainly important
to achieve national compromise through a clear road
map based on national interests, rather than foreign
intervention. Reconciliation should take place at the
social level first, and then move to the political level.
Reconciliation rejects intolerance and hatred and calls
for tolerance and peaceful coexistence in the interest
of future generations based on fair foundations. It is
not enough to have peace and security; the groundwork
must be laid for the modern State.
42/75

27/02/2019

Thirdly, with regard to foreign interference, guns
will not be silenced by foreign intervention and we
will never be able to silence guns if there is foreign
intervention in domestic conflicts. Any kind of foreign
intervention only complicates matters further. Foreign
Powers often usurp and exploit the complexities
of the social fabric, exacerbate domestic conflicts
and aggravate historical disputes between various
religious or ethnic groups within a specific nation. The
outcome is therefore a conflation of priorities and a
prolongation of conflicts. External players, including
non-State actors, have always played a negative role
in the escalation of conflicts and their evolution into
international conflicts, rather than promoting the quest
for solutions, due to competition among the various
foreign players with diverging interests.
Fourthly, as to development and its political effects,
Africa has an important global stature and history. It is
rich in natural resources, people and heritage. However,
many of its countries are facing conflicts, civil wars
and acute divisions. That demonstrates the agency of
historical, political and human flaws, in addition to
the old and new versions of colonialism, which is also
playing a role in that dynamic.
We would like to stress the following. We must
recognize that Africa is not immature. It is not possessed
by foreign Powers that dictate African policies. There
should be a genuine will to stop conflicts and wars
in Africa by enhancing the human, historic and legal
responsibility of parties to a conflict. In that regard,
civil society’s capacities must also be strengthened,
which is key to creating conditions that are conducive
to reconciliation.
The economic downturn and climate change are
also considered to be main causes of the outbreak of
conflicts. Real development in Africa must take into
account the specific features and characteristics of each
country, leading to economic integration among the
countries of the continent. It is also important to simplify
bureaucratic complexities and provide administrative
services throughout the African States with a view
to achieving horizontal development, including the
development of cities and villages, while supporting
their capacities to achieve fair development. We also
need to provide job opportunities dignified lives to
the people for them to contribute to the development
process. In addition, it is necessary to eliminate the
phenomenon of corruption, promote good governance
and achieve political and economic reform.
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that the
topic of today’s debate, silencing the guns in Africa,
touches on the situation in Libya. We underscore the
importance of the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union to coordinate efforts in
many areas, especially with regard to peace, security
and stability. The African declaration to achieve the
noble objective of a conflict-free Africa and make
peace and security a reality, rather than an aspiration,
is a step in that direction. We call on the international
community to sincerely help without any hidden or
overt agendas to find real solutions that tackle the root
causes of conflicts before they escalate.
We also call on the international community to
contribute effectively to the elimination of outlaw
groups, organized crime networks and terrorist groups,
especially in border areas. We stress the importance of
implementing security agreements with neighbouring
countries, particularly with regard to the Libya quartet
border control and protection force. In that context, the
efforts of the Libyan National Army in the south of the
country will contribute immensely to implementing
those security agreements with neighbouring countries
and putting an end to the spread of transnational
organized crime, such as trafficking in human beings
and weapons, as well as to activities of terrorist groups.
The Libyan National Army is working to impose
State authority across the entire Libyan territory to
achieve security and stability in the border areas with
neighbouring countries and in the Sahel region as
a whole.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to warmly congratulate the sisterly
Republic of Equatorial Guinea on its outstanding
presidency of the Security Council during this month
of February and for its extremely positive contributions
to the work of the Council. That you are presiding over
this meeting, Mr. Minister, is a powerful testimony
of the importance that Equatorial Guinea attaches to
peace and security in Africa. I am particularly grateful
to the presidency of the Council for having organized
this open debate on a topic that is important to Morocco
and the entire African continent, namely, the African
Union (AU) initiative of Silencing the Guns by 2020. I
would like to congratulate the delegation of Equatorial
Guinea and the three African members of the Security
Council for the unanimous adoption of resolution 2457

S/PV. 8473

(2019), which Morocco co-sponsored. Finally, I wish to
especially thank the briefers for their substantial and
valuable contributions to our debate today.
Our continent, Africa, has experienced many
conflicts but has managed to make great strides on the
path to peace, led by strong African determination,
which is in line with the principle of the pre-eminence
of politics, necessarily implies unremitting efforts,
involving compromise and gestures towards peace,
unwavering commitment in good faith and strong
support from all stakeholders. The success of the African
initiative of Silencing the Guns by 2020 also requires
stronger financial support from the international
community for AU peace support operations as well as
for multinational stabilization forces such as that of the
Group of Five for the Sahel.
In the same vein, the African Union Military
Observer Mission in Somalia and the Multinational
Joint Task Force in the Lake Chad basin play major
roles in maintaining regional peace and stability.
Those operations, which are better adapted to
their environments and therefore less burdensome,
also represent effective means of countering new
asymmetrical threats. Unfortunately, they still do
not receive predictable or sustainable funding. That
is why Morocco reiterates its strong support for the
legitimate African demands for the funding of African
peace operations that have been mandated by our
Organization, through mandatory United Nations
contributions. It is in that spirit that my country
co-sponsored the resolution submitted by the three
African members of the Security Council on this issue.
An Africa at peace is a strategic goal for the entire
international community. We believe that goal is fully
achievable. To that end, we must all further engage in
strengthening and implementing the United NationsAU strategic partnership. With that in mind, we
welcome the signing and implementation of the strategic
partnership agreement between the two organizations
in 2017, the positive effects of which are already being
felt on our continent.
Among the obstacles to the success of the initiative of
Silencing the Guns by 2020, the issue of small arms and
light weapons is a major one. Our collective awareness
of the scale of the impact of the scourge caused by the
circulation of small arms and light weapons demands
new impetus to our actions and those of the United
Nations and the African Union, given that it is now less

19-0568243/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

than two years until the December 2020 deadline. The
deterioration of the global security environment and
the emergence of new, more violent and deadly threats,
such as terrorism and transnational organized crime,
serve to highlight the relevance of the African Union
initiative of Silence the Guns by 2020, calling on us to
further bolster regional and subregional cooperation in
the area of cross-border security. In that connection,
Morocco hosted in November 2013 a ministerial
conference of the Community of Sahelo-Saharan States
for the strengthening of cross-border security between
the Sahel countries and the Arab Maghreb Union. Our
noble goal also includes full ownership of the African
Union’s Master Road Map of Practical Steps for
Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020.
The promotion of peace and security in Africa
as well as the socioeconomic and environmental
development of our continent constitute absolute
priorities for Morocco under high instructions of
His Majesty King Mohamed VI. My country is fully
aware of the interrelationships and challenges linked
to peace and security, climate change and economic
and sustainable development. As an active member of
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union,
Morocco underscores the triad of security, development
and regional integration, convinced of the fact that
those three tracks are essential for lasting peace
throughout the continent, which is perfectly in line with
the philosophy promoted by the initiative of Silencing
the Guns by 2020.
By the same token, Morocco’s multidimensional
commitment to peace on the continent goes back a
long way in history, as evidenced by its continuous
participation in United Nations peace operations
in Africa since the 1960s. More recently, Morocco
has strengthened its commitment to the Central
African Republic and has been the largest troop
contributor to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic. Morocco has also been chairing the Central
African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission for five years, having visited the
country two weeks ago to mobilize the efforts of the
international community, particularly in the light of
the signing of the peace agreement on 6 February.
My country maintains its multifaceted support to the
authorities and people of the Central African Republic,
both in terms of capacity-building and training and the
financing of structural projects.
44/75

27/02/2019

Furthermore, Morocco pays particular attention to
mediation and conflict prevention, as evidenced by the
many initiatives carried out by the Kingdom of Morocco
across the continent, such as the Mano River Union,
which enabled confidence-building measures among
the countries of the Union and initiated a peace process.
My country also hosted the intra-Libyan dialogue that
led to the adoption of the Skhirat Agreement, which
remains the reference framework for the resolution of
the situation in Libya.
While fully aware of the negative impact of
climate change on stability and development in Africa,
Morocco organized — at the initiative of His Majesty
King Mohammed VI, on the margins of the twentysecond Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change held in
Marrakech in November 2016 — the Africa Action
Summit. The Summit brought together approximately
50 Heads of State and Government as well as other
representatives of African countries, establishing three
commissions to address climate challenges across the
continent, namely, the Congo River Basin Commission,
which was operationalized in February 2018, the Island
States Commission and the Climate Commission for
the Sahel. The latter held its first conference at the
level of Heads of State and Government two days ago in
Niamey. In his address to that conference, His Majesty
King Mohammed VI announced that the Kingdom of
Morocco undertakes to take charge of the feasibility
studies in order to finalize a climate investment plan for
the Sahel region. Morocco also prioritizes cooperation
with African countries to help meet the economic and
social challenges on our continent. Moreover, Morocco
is bound by no fewer than 1,192 agreements with a large
number of African countries, within the framework
of mutually beneficial South-South cooperation and
contributing to the sustainability and consolidation of
peace on our continent.
I would like to conclude by reiterating Morocco’s
unwavering commitment to promoting peace, security
and sustainable development in Africa in order to
achieve our common goal of permanently silencing the
guns on our continent.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Namibia.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I wish to join colleagues
in expressing our appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for having convened this very important meeting
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

on silencing the guns in Africa. Namibia proudly
co-sponsored resolution 2457 (2019), which was
unanimously adopted here today. I would also like to
take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your
excellent presidency of the Security Council for this
month. I would furthermore like to thank the UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo; the African Union (AU)
High Representative for Silencing the Guns in Africa,
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra; and the Founder and Executive
Director of the African Centre for the Constructive
Resolution of Disputes, Mr. Vasu Gounden, for their
comprehensive and detailed briefings.
In thanking the Secretary-General, I also wish to
welcome his report Securing our Common Future — An
Agenda for Disarmament. It is alarming that in all
cases it is civilians who are the most affected as a
result of armed conflicts. The widespread availability
of small arms and light weapons is of major concern
to all of us. I cannot emphasize enough the harm
caused to lives all across Africa by illicit arms and
small weapons. We welcome the establishment of a
multi-partner trust facility through the Peacebuilding
Fund in order to provide a more sustainable solution,
with a sharp focus on development, for the control of
small arms and light weapons. We take note that the
new facility will be designed to support inclusive,
integrated and participatory approaches to small arms
control at the country level, and in some situations at
the subregional level.
My delegation firmly believes that peace and
security is a prerequisite for development. Prosperity
will therefore remain elusive if we do not seriously
take charge of our peace and security architecture.
Unfortunately, most of the peace and security issues
brought to the Security Council are on Africa. As
part of Agenda 2063 of the African Union and its first
10-year implementation plan, the fiftieth anniversary
solemn declaration, of 26 May 2013, decided not to
bequeath the burden of conflicts to the next generation
of Africans, and they decided — we decided — to
silence the guns by 2020.
As Chair of Southern African Development
Community (SADC), I wish to share with the Council
that the subregion emphasizes, through its decisions,
the need to prioritize preventive diplomacy and
mediation in approaching crises and conflict situations.
Furthermore, SADC is in full support of the need to
enhance the AU’s prevention capabilities and tools in

S/PV. 8473

the context of the aspiration of the AU to silence the
guns by 2020. We are all aware that not all election
processes go smoothly. SADC recently averted
potential conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo following elections in that country. Equally,
Madagascar experienced a peaceful transition of power
from one leader to another. We cannot overemphasize
preventative diplomacy, mediation and negotiations in
peacebuilding and reconstruction.
I also wish to hail achievements reached in other
regions of the continent. On 6 February, the Central
African Republic Government and 14 armed groups
came together in Bangui to sign a historic peace
agreement, following negotiations held in Khartoum.
That agreement is an important first step taken by all
parties in the Central African Republic. The 2018 peace
agreement signed between Ethiopia and Eritrea was
also a landmark achievement. That peace deal brings
hope to the Horn of Africa.
I also wish to emphasize the importance of women
negotiators and mediators in peacebuilding processes,
as espoused in Agenda 2063 of the African Union. It is
apt for us that in 2000, during Namibia’s presidency of
the Security Council, the Council unanimously adopted
the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security. That resolution formally drew
global attention to the unrecognized, underutilized
and undervalued contributions of women in preventing
war and in peacebuilding and engaging individuals and
societies to live in harmony.
We need to identify innovative ways and means
to enhance holistic preventative approaches in efforts
aimed at promoting peace and security. My delegation
furthermore recognizes the ongoing peace efforts on
the continent, and we commend the efforts of the United
Nations, the African Union and SADC. We reaffirm
our commitment to silencing the guns by 2020. And to
put that into perspective for all of us, 2020 is next year.
Many speakers today have spoken about the
ambitious plan of silencing the guns. But I am happy
that some have reminded us of the wisdom imparted to
us by the late Nelson Mandela: that it seems impossible
until it is done. Allow me to remind us of a great
African proverb that teaches us that: if we want to
move mountains tomorrow, we must start by lifting
stones today. Let us not be scared away by the fact that
silencing the guns may be ambitious. Let us start now
to implement it.

19-0568245/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Stefanile (Italy): Let me join previous speakers
in commending Equatorial Guinea and you personally,
Mr. Minister, for having convened this open debate. I
also wish to thank the three briefers for their muchappreciated contributions.
Italy aligns itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union.
A new wind of hope is blowing in Africa. After
the historic rapprochement between Ethiopia and
Eritrea, the continent is moving towards a new phase of
regional stabilization and integration, as also shown by
the revitalized peace agreement in South Sudan and the
recent Bangui peace agreement for the Central African
Republic. That should encourage us to step up our
efforts in support of Africa, and should help African
States to reach the objective of silencing the guns in
Africa by 2020.
Notwithstanding those recent and inspiring
developments, there are still major threats and
challenges to peace and security in Africa — terrorism,
transnational organized crime, violence against
women and children in armed conflicts, poverty and
vulnerability to climate change, to mention only a
few. Addressing those challenges requires that the
United Nations and the African Union (AU) keep
working together closely, while involving regional and
subregional organizations.
The AU-United Nations partnership has already
proven to be of paramount importance. The successful
conclusion of the peace talks between the Government of
the Central African Republic and armed groups, which
took place in Khartoum, is just the most recent example
of how successful and effective that relationship can be.
We have consistently supported the new impetus given
by the Secretary-General to the further strengthening
of cooperation between the United Nations and the AU,
and we call on the two organizations to continue in that
direction. We also attach importance to advancing the
trilateral cooperation between the United Nations, the
African Union and the European Union.
Italy commends the progress already achieved
in operationalizing the African Peace and Security
Architecture, especially the Peace Fund of the African
Union, which is set to finance mediation and preventive
diplomacy activities. Let me recall, in that regard, that
46/75

27/02/2019

we remain in favour of using United Nations-assessed
contributions for African-led peace operations,
provided that appropriate standards are met in terms
of troop preparedness, training, equipment, financial
transparency, human rights compliance, conduct and
discipline. At the subregional level, we deem it crucial to
deepen the cooperation mechanisms between the United
Nations and the relevant subregional organizations on
the basis of complementarity and subsidiarity.
I now wish to focus on two major areas that we
consider essential to reaching the objective of silencing
the guns in Africa by 2020: the fight against the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and
improving governance throughout the continent.
On the first point, Italy is strongly committed to
multilateral efforts in fighting the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons, which contribute to instability,
violence and insecurity and undermine action towards
sustainable development. Italy attaches the utmost
importance to the universalization of the relevant
multilateral instruments, such as the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, the Arms Trade Treaty and the United
Nations Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components
and Ammunition — the so-called Palermo Protocol.
Let me recall that Italy is currently financing the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Global
Firearms Programme with a view to assisting States
in the Sahel region in the full implementation of
the Palermo Protocol. Moreover, Italy supports any
initiative taken and owned by the States of the region,
such as the Kinshasa Convention and the Economic
Community of West African States Convention on
Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition
and Other Related Materials, and fully supports the
efforts of the African Union to define a continent-wide
action plan to implement the Road Map of Practical
Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020.
On the second point — governance — we must be
aware that the weakness of States’ institutions and the
lack of good governance, combined with socioeconomic
inequalities, are recurrently indicated as major factors
in fuelling the cycle of instability. Italy is actively
engaged in capacity-building and training programmes
in many African countries with the aim of promoting
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV. 8473

political and economic partnerships, fostering peace
and sustainable development.

religious leaders, women, youth and civil society are
also important assets with whom we must engage.

In conclusion, let me reiterate Italy’s full
engagement alongside Africa in reaching the objective
of the African Union’s flagship initiative of Silencing
the Guns by 2020. In that spirit, we welcome the
unanimous adoption of this morning’s resolution 2457
(2019), which we were pleased to co-sponsor.

Secondly, strengthened cooperation, unity of
purpose and consolidation among all Member States and
international organizations are essential for a conflictfree Africa. That calls for a reinforced institutional
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union on peace, security and development. That
requires new modalities for joint analysis, planning,
assessment and reporting for a smoother and more
effective partnership.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would first of all like
to congratulate your delegation, Mr. President, on its
very successful presidency of the Security Council and
to express our appreciation to you, Sir, in continuing to
preside over this very important debate, which shows
your strong commitment to the signature event that
your delegation chose during its presidency. I also thank
the presidency of Equatorial Guinea for highlighting
the important strategy of silencing the guns to bring
peace and stability to Africa, as well as the leadership
of the United Nations and the African Union for
their insightful briefings. We are also honoured to
co-sponsor the important resolution adopted earlier
today (resolution 2457 (2019)).
Kazakhstan fully supports the Master Road Map
of Practical Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa
by 2020. Despite the immense challenges, we are
confident that the African Union’s aspirations for
a conflict-free Africa are achievable. Recently, the
African Union’s ability to resolve conflicts has been
internationally acknowledged, especially in conflicttorn countries such as Liberia, Côte d’Ivoire, Sierra
Leone, the Gambia, those in the Horn of Africa and
other places. The African Union is now paving the
way for peace in South Sudan and the Central African
Republic. My delegation would like to make the
following observations.
First, national and regional ownership is crucial
for success. We therefore need to carefully listen to the
guidance given by the African troika. At the same time,
we must harness the comparative advantages of regional
economic structures, such as the Economic Community
of West African States and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development. That is because of their
in-depth understanding of the dynamics and root causes
of conflicts and capability to mobilize local financial
and human resources. Likewise, parliamentarians,

Thirdly, conflict prevention and mediation are
priorities that require comprehensive, coordinated
action. That should be aimed at strengthening the
security-development nexus in order to implement
the Secretary-General’s reform of the United Nations
development system. That should be accompanied by
strengthening all existing African Union preventive
diplomacy tools, including the guidance of the Panel of
the Wise. For our part, we propose a three-fold strategy
to prevent and address conflicts through an enhanced
security-development nexus, a regional approach and
the United Nations delivering as one.
In order to contribute to the United Nations
reforms, we propose establishing an interregional
United Nations modelling centre for the Sustainable
Development Goals in Almaty, and look forward
to forming partnerships with African countries.
Through investments in education, health, welfare,
employment, climate mitigation and refugee and
migrant rehabilitation, we will be able to prevent illegal
trafficking in small arms and light weapons and human
beings and drugs, and combat transnational crimes,
which fuel conflicts.
Fourthly, enhancing peacekeeping is another
critical priority in preventing conflicts in Africa.
The African Union-led peace support operations have
been recognized as absolutely essential to the Security
Council’s responsibility for maintaining peace and
security. The African Union forces and hybrid missions
have also proven to be very effective owing to their
familiarity with their own terrain, local conditions
and the tactics of armed and militia groups. They
have provided invaluable reinforcement for our global
counter-terrorism action. We must therefore continue
capacity-building by way of training and providing
the latest equipment, as well as exploring different

19-0568247/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

sustainable predictable mechanisms for the financing
of African Union peace operations.
In conclusion, I would like to once again reiterate
that Kazakhstan, as an observer at the African Union,
is strongly committed to helping African countries
fulfil their vision for peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my sincere gratitude
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Equatorial
Guinea and his brotherly country for having convened
today’s meeting on silencing the guns in Africa
by 2020, which complements Equatorial Guinea’s
commendable presidency of the Security Council for
the month of February by focusing on priority topics
for the African continent and their implications for
international peace and security. I would like also to
convey to you, Mr. Minister, the greetings of your
brother Mr. Sameh Shokry, who would have liked
to participate in this debate but was unable to attend
owing to prior commitments.
I also extend my sincere gratitude for the valuable
briefings this morning by the Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo; the African Union High Representative for
Silencing the Guns in Africa, Mr. Ramtane Lamamra,
whom I congratulate on his recent well-deserved
appointment to a high-level post; and the Founder
and Executive Director of the African Centre for the
Constructive Resolution of Disputes, Mr. Vasu Gounden.
The launch, in 2013, of the African Union’s initiative
of Silencing the Guns by 2020 came about in the context
of the commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of
the Organization of African Unity and the subsequent
adoption of the Lusaka Master Road Map as a means
of implementing the initiative and achieving the
overarching goal of silencing the guns. That reflects the
principle of African solutions to African problems and
complements joint African action aimed at freeing our
continent of armed conflicts and focusing on economic
and social development efforts in achieving the goals
of Agenda 2063 of the African Union. In that context,
I would like to pay tribute to the tangible progress
made in resolving conflicts and achieving security
and stability on the continent. Most recently, I would
highlight the peace agreement between Ethiopia and
Eritrea and the revitalization of the peace agreement
48/75

27/02/2019

in South Sudan, as well as the signing of a framework
agreement for peace in the Central African Republic
and the peaceful elections held in Madagascar and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
But we must not stop there. Our continent still
faces major challenges that are not only related to the
continuation of traditional conflicts in certain regions,
but also to the emergence of non-conventional and
cross-border threats and challenges — mainly from
terrorism, organized crime and trafficking in human
beings. No country is safe from those new threats.
Experience has shown that effectively combating those
phenomena requires joint action at the international
and regional levels in order to address their root causes.
The Council might agree with me that, in recent
times, we have witnessed growing coordination between
the United Nations and the African Union in line with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations in the
areas of peace, security and sustainable development.
Agreements between the two organizations in that
regard have encouraged us to build on the comparative
advantages of each of them to push forward efforts for
peace and security on the continent and to assist with
the implementation of the African Union Agenda 2063
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
through joint action plans.
I would like to stress in that regard that, during
its presidency of the African Union this year, Egypt
will work to promote coordination between the two
organizations, both at the level of the Secretariat and
the African Union Commission, as well as between
the African Union Peace and Security Council and the
United Nations Security Council. We intend to organize
regular consultations between the two organizations to
deepen the ongoing partnership by undertaking joint
missions, exchanging information and strengthening
constructive dialogue on the perspectives and
assessments of each on issues of peace and security on
the African continent.
Moreover, the issue of long-term and predictable
funding for peacekeeping operations under the auspices
of the African Union still requires an effective and
innovative solution from the Security Council. That
should be done on the basis of the principle of shared
roles between the two organizations, while taking into
account the comparative advantages of each and the
primary responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV. 8473

The issue of reconstruction and development
in post-conflict countries is an essential link in the
chain of dealing with conflict phases. Egypt believes
in the importance of this issue given the close relation
between that link and the efforts to prevent countries
emerging from conflict from falling back into its
grasp, given that the goal of silencing the guns is not
only to achieve a political settlement but also to create
an environment conducive to building and sustaining
peace. In that connection, Egypt was honoured that,
at the African Union Summit held in February Addis
Ababa, its President was chosen to lead the work on
reconstruction and development in the post-conflict
phase in Africa.

convening this open debate on silencing the guns in
Africa by 2020, a noble objective to keep at the forefront
of the international community’s attention.

In coordination with the African Union Commission,
Egypt will inaugurate in Cairo during 2019 an
African Union centre dedicated to reconstruction and
development. The centre will be an African platform
to put reconstruction and peacebuilding policies and
programmes in place, taking into account the specificities
and priorities of the African countries concerned. In
that regard, we welcome further coordination between
the African Union, the United Nations and all other
partners to activate and implement the African Union’s
framework policy for reconstruction and development.

Looking at the current situation on the continent
of Africa, the winds of hope are blowing, as the
Secretary-General himself has noted. Among the more
demonstrative signs of peace is the historic agreement
between Ethiopia and Eritrea, resolving a decades-long
conflict and re-establishing diplomatic relations, as
well as the agreement among leaders in South Sudan,
restoring peaceful coexistence.

I would also stress the close link between our efforts
under the Silencing the Guns initiative and a particular
focus on the root causes of conflicts and instability
in different parts of the continent. That means giving
special consideration to socioeconomic development,
empowering young people and women, strengthening
the participation of civil society and building the
foundations of good governance.
In conclusion, allow me to renew our deepest
appreciation for your initiative, Mr. President, to
choose this vital topic as the theme of our debate today,
which led to the consensual adoption of resolution 2457
(2019). We hope that this resolution will contribute
to strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union, with a view to
achieving our common goal of silencing the guns and
strengthening the foundations of security and stability
throughout the African continent.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See to the United Nations.
Monsignor Camilleri: The Holy See thanks the
presidency of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea for

The African Union has also taken on the ambitious
determination to achieve the goal of a conflict-free
Africa and to make peace a reality for all our people
and rid the continent of wars and civil conflicts.
Indeed, this conviction corresponds to the frequent
petitions made by Pope Francis himself in favour of
peace and reconciliation:
“To all those who make unjust use of the weapons
of this world, I make this appeal: lay down these
instruments of death.”

While those are most surely encouraging signs of
hope for the African continent, there remain several
areas that suffer from fundamentalist violence and
other forms of conflict. There might be the temptation
to dismiss the African Union’s determination as
unattainable, even utopian. To do so, however, would
be defeatist. We must pay heed to the noble aspirations
of African youth, who thirst for justice, peace and
reconciliation, and to whom the African Union fiftieth
anniversary solemn declaration pledges not to bequeath
the burden of war. We must look for ways to work
towards consolidating, as well as building, peace.
To envisage an African continent free of war and
civil conflicts, we must first examine why it is that
people have recourse to the instruments of death in
the first place. The list is long, but among the most
devastating causes are social and economic disparities,
weak institutions, political instability and corruption,
where battles over conflicting interests, both domestic
and foreign, have the upper hand over social cohesion
and the common good. The inequitable exploitation of
Africa’s myriad resources and other scourges contrary to
human dignity — such as child soldiers and trafficking,
piracy and the illegal trade in wildlife — often
exacerbate those root causes. These are all sadly linked
to the proliferation of arms and ammunition.

19-0568249/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

To help the African continent reach its laudable and
ambitious goal to embrace non-violence and durable
peace, the international community must keep its own
commitments, particularly when it pledges help for
humanitarian emergencies and regular development
aid. In order to guarantee stability, financial and
technical support must be sustainable and predictable.
That works much better, however, when it is sensitive
to and genuinely aware of specific needs on the ground,
rather than imposed from outside in ways that are at
times alien to African cultures and values.
To this day, far too many young Africans are
more adept with guns and rounds of ammunition than
with pens and schoolbooks. They are prevented from
reaching their full potential, because their education is
interrupted by conflicts that are not of their choice or
making and they are caught up in self-perpetuating cycles
of violence that sadly become a way of life. That must
change. The proliferation of weapons simply aggravates
conflict situations and results in unimaginable human
suffering and material costs that profoundly undermine
development, human rights and the search for lasting
peace. Without greater international and regional
cooperation, especially among arms-producing States,
in controlling and strictly limiting the production and
movement of weapons, an Africa free of wars and
violent conflicts will remain an illusion.
While much remains to be done to silence the guns
in Africa, the Holy See believes that this open debate
is one more blow on the anvil towards the fulfilment of
the prophecy of Isaiah, whose words are inscribed just
across the street from these Headquarters.
“[T]hey shall beat their swords into ploughshares,
and their spears into pruning hooks; nation shall
not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they
learn war any more.”
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Mr. Amayo (Kenya): I would like to sincerely
commend you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting. I also want to thank all the briefers
today for their insightful remarks on silencing the
guns in Africa. My delegation welcomes resolution
2457 (2019), adopted this morning, as a useful road
map to be implemented alongside Aspiration 4 of
Agenda 2063 of the African Union (AU), on building
a peaceful and secure Africa. I have also noted with
appreciation that virtually all the speakers before me
50/75

27/02/2019

have expressed support for Africa’s quest to silence
the guns on the continent. The strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union will
continue to be crucial not only in stopping the guns but
also in eliminating wars and conflicts. It will also go
a long way to preventing human rights violations and
humanitarian disasters, as well as to addressing climate
change and other common challenges.
To some extent, the continued impact of the
illicit circulation and trafficking of small arms and
light weapons, as well as of governance and global
economic dynamics, relatively high unemployment
rates, particularly for the young, the marginalization
of various segments of society, competition for
political power, and cases of the mismanagement and
exploitation of natural resources, have all played their
part in ensuring that the guns are not fully silent in
Africa. But despite a picture that is far from rosy, we
have also seen many positive steps. There have been
major achievements in the area of mediation and support
for peace processes across the continent, particularly at
the subregional level in the Sahel, the Horn of Africa
and the Great Lakes region.
Kenya has been at the forefront in supporting and
promoting the objectives and activities of the AU Master
Roadmap of Practical Steps for Silencing the Guns in
Africa by 2020. We have signed and ratified the AU’s
and other regional instruments pertaining to peace
and security, the facilitation of peace processes and
efforts to achieve stability in our region. We have also
taken measures to stop the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons. We are currently in the process of
implementing the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and
its various protocols and regional mechanisms. In that
regard, Kenya’s national focal point on small arms and
light weapons continues to foster enhanced regional and
international cooperation in countering the problem of
illicit small arms and light weapons, particularly by
promoting good practices in marking, record-keeping
and tracing small arms and light weapons. As a result,
more than 98 per cent of firearms in Kenya are properly
marked and can be accounted for.
If we are to succeed in implementing the AU Master
Roadmap, there are three points that must be met and that
my delegation would like to emphasize. First, we have
to allocate more resources to address the root causes of
conflict, including by strengthening national governance
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

institutions responsible for conflict prevention and the
promotion of socioeconomic development.
Secondly, we must enhance national and
international cooperation at every level in implementing
the instruments available, as well as other measures.
It will be crucial to ensure the universality of our
collective efforts and proper outreach so that no
one is left behind, because weakness in one State or
region eventually weakens the entire system. This
calls for proper weapon and ammunition management,
effective legislative and regulatory frameworks
and, more importantly, effective data collection,
information-sharing, monitoring and evaluation. At the
local level, the full participation of young people and
women, civil society and other partnerships against
gun violence is crucial to addressing the problem of the
proliferation and use of illegal weapons, with a view to
bringing such activities closer to the people as part of a
general visibility and communications campaign.
Last but not least is the importance of capacitybuilding, so that African States can fully implement their
commitments to ratifying international instruments, a
crucial aspect of this issue. Our development partners
must ensure that the trade in conventional weapons is
properly regulated from the source countries in order
to curb unregulated flows of arms into conflict zones
inside Africa. At the same time, adequate support is
needed to help build resilient national institutions that
can regulate such flows.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I want to start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for all the initiatives that
Equatorial Guinea has taken during its presidency of the
Security Council. I do not want to miss this opportunity
to emphasize the role that your country has played since
its tenure as a member of the Council began. It should
make all Africans very proud. I would also like to thank
you for the work that you have been doing that, proof
of which we saw this morning with the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2457 (2019). Needless to say,
I am also grateful to Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, High
Representative of the African Union for Silencing the
Guns, for his informative briefing and shrewd insights.
My thanks also go to Mr. Vasu Gounden for his valuable
input and work.
We should never forget the simple baseline
proposition that our job, our raison de vivre, in the

S/PV. 8473

Security Council and beyond is to preserve and promote
peace and ensure it is durable and sustainable, but also,
now that awareness is sufficiently high, to prevent
conflicts from occurring. Peace is not an abstract
notion, and its meaning is as simple and as difficult as it
appears — no more deaths, no more suffering or trials
for the people. It demands that we work intensively
and stubbornly together with the tools, methods and
mechanisms that the Charter of the United Nations
and regional organizations such as the African Union
have defined. When they declared 2020 the year for
silencing the guns, the leaders of the African Union
leaders, while having no doubts as to the realities and
possibilities, were well aware of the powerful symbolic
nature of such a target. The message is clear and strong.
Africa wants to take its peace and security challenges
seriously and autonomously, with the uplifting goal
of ensuring that all the ills currently plaguing the
continent will not be bequeathed to the next generation.
Silencing the guns has several meanings and
requirements. First, Africa is doing its long-sought
homework by reshuffling its overall thinking, resources
and mechanisms. I want to remind the Council that
the starting blocks are the African Peace and Security
Architecture, through which Africa has unleashed new
ideas and new modes of action that are fit for purpose
in every case of conflict in the continent.
Secondly, Africa is regrouping its forces with the
aim of thinking and acting jointly at the regional and
subregional levels in order to confront and deal with its
dire realities. Here I would like to highlight the example
of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
whose mandate, nature and significance are to be
commended. By comparison with the many unfulfilled
endeavours of the past, AMISOM is moving forward in
the face of extraordinary adversities.
Thirdly, silencing the guns is definitely not meant to
eliminate arms, whether they are small or not so small,
but to make sure that all ordnance becomes redundant as
soon as possible. But that will obviously not suffice and
clearly highlights the necessity of tackling root causes.
Africa is not thriving, and the Sisyphean task ahead of
reaching a stage where the guns are silenced means that
we must look at social conditions, governance and the
welfare of our peoples. That does not depend solely on
Africans. Silencing the guns goes beyond this and calls
for the commitment of the international community,
for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the African Union Agenda 2063 and their corollaries.

19-0568251/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

27/02/2019

We need financing for development, disaster risk
management and prevention through the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda.

Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to begin by congratulating you, Sir, and your friendly
country on your presidency of the Council this month.

Fourthly, we must look at the areas of the global
context that are having a direct effect on Africa. Climate
change is one example, and I should remind the Council,
by the way, that Africa has the least responsibility for
the human-induced effects on the climate and yet is
most affected by them. The undue exploitation of its
natural resources and the forced migrations within or
out of the continent, coupled with transnational crime,
terrorism, arms smuggling and money-laundering mean
that the causes and consequences overlap one another
and continue to fuel both old and new conflicts.

We also thank you for convening this important
debate, as well as for the concept note on this topic
(S/2019/169, annex) and your valuable briefing this
morning. And I want to convey the apologies of Mr. Al
Dirdiri Mohamed Ahmed Al Dikhairi, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Sudan, whose commitments
prevented him from attending today’s important debate.
We thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs;
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, High Representative of the
African Union for Silencing the Guns in Africa; and
Mr. Vasu Gounden, Founder and Executive Director of
the African Centre for the Constructive Resolution of
Disputes, for their valuable briefings this morning.

I therefore want to conclude by stressing the truth
that must be spoken as long as being candid is not
considered a fault. Through its vow to silence the guns,
Africa took a bold initiative to open a new pathway
to solutions based on ownership and dedication to the
issues that beset peace and security on the continent.
Africa has therefore undertaken the responsibilities of
promoting peace and preventing conflict, something
that will surely benefit not just its own purposes but
those of others, too. Africa needs outside support in
achieving the solution it has arrived at for itself, and
that undoubtedly concerns us all. I should point out
that the pledges that remain unfulfilled with regard to
the mode of financing for African-led peacekeeping
operations already approved by the Security Council
can be viewed as a test that we must pass. At this point
we should not forget the hardships that still linger in
our minds and that resulted in the challenges inflicted
by the solutions imposed on African countries from
outside with catastrophic consequences.

On 1 July 2017, the African Union Peace and
Security Council announced its African Union Master
Roadmap of Practical Steps for Silencing the Guns in
Africa by 2020 on the ground. In that regard, we want
to express our full support for all the efforts of African
States to find African solutions to African problems.
That motto is evident in a number of African initiatives
and we would like to cite some of the most important
efforts that the Sudan has undertaken to achieve that
pivotal objective.
First, we made significant diplomatic efforts within
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
initiative for peace in South Sudan, which culminated
in the signing of the Khartoum declaration on 23 June
2018, followed by further progress in the form of the
signing in September 2018 of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan.

What is needed and long overdue is external
support for African solutions, not just so that Africa’s
unrelenting woes can be overcome but for the sake of
the whole world. By extending a hand to Africa when it
is needed, for example by supporting the African Union
Master Roadmap of Practical Steps for Silencing the
Guns in Africa by 2020 from the very beginning, such
efforts will serve as building blocks for the future. The
international community, with the Security Council
at its core, must extend this helping hand for the
preservation of peace and security everywhere.

Second, the Sudan has been contributing major
efforts in the context of the African Initiative for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, as a
result of which an agreement on peace and reconciliation
was initialled in Khartoum on 5 February and was
finally signed in Bangui the following day.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.

Fourth, the Sudan approved all the proposals
presented by regional and international partners for

52/75

Third, at the domestic level, an extended ceasefire
has continued throughout the Sudan with a view to
establishing an environment conducive to ensuring
continued political negotiations, the protection of
civilians and unobstructed humanitarian action.

19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the delivery of humanitarian assistance to areas under
the control of insurgent groups, which rejected all
these initiatives.
Fifth, the national weapons collection campaign in
Darfur has been a great success in helping to stabilize
the security situation, ensure the protection of civilians
and normalize economic and social life.
Sixth, the Sudan has welcomed its brothers
and sisters fleeing armed conflicts in neighbouring
countries and in the Middle East, and is currently
hosting more than 2 million foreign refugees.
Seventh, we signed a tripartite convention to
deliver humanitarian assistance to populations affected
by the conflict in South Sudan, an endeavour that
began through the Sudan’s territories in July 2014 in
cooperation with the World Food Programme and the
Government of our sister Republic of South Sudan.
With regard to enabling the initiative of Silencing
the Guns by 2020 to achieve the best possible results,
we want to highlight a number of important points.
First, we emphasize the close links between peace and
development. One is impossible without the other. In
that regard, my delegation calls on the international
community to strengthen its support for postconflict objectives, the most important of which are
the resettlement of displaced persons and refugees,
the restoration of infrastructure, demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration, the strengthening of
national reconciliation and the social fabric, and the
provision of job opportunities for young people.
Secondly, it will be vital to strengthen coordination
and the exchange of information between the African
Union Commission and the African Union Peace and
Security Council on the one hand, and the United
Nations Secretariat and the Security Council on the
other, while enhancing coherence and integration
between the work of the two organizations, as well as
avoiding any conflict of effort between them, such as
occurred during the peace process in 2018 in South
Sudan between the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the African Union on one side, and
the Security Council on the other. A similar situation
developed in Libya in 2011 between the African Union
and certain members of the Security Council.
Thirdly, appropriate and sustained financing for
the peacekeeping operations of the African Union
must be provided through the United Nations, and the

S/PV. 8473

obstacles that prevented consensus on a draft resolution
presented by the three African members of the Security
Council in December 2018 must be removed. We
must also take into consideration the fact that African
operations actually represent a significant investment
in international peace and security, one of the main
objectives of the United Nations.
Fourthly, we must work to effectively address
the root causes of conflicts and security threats in
Africa, foremost among them lack of development,
the discrepancies between development levels in
various parts of the continent, the impact of drought,
desertification and climate change, poverty and weak
State institutions in some of the African States.
Fifthly, the international community, as represented
by States, regional and international organizations,
should strengthen its contribution in terms of national
capacity-building in African countries in the areas
of conflict prevention, mediation, peacemaking,
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
In conclusion, my delegation hopes that all regional
and international partners can intensify their efforts
so that together we can achieve the grand objective of
silencing the guns on the African continent.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for organizing this meeting. My thanks also go to
Ms. DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, Mr. Lamamra, African Union
High Representative for Silencing the Guns in Africa,
and Mr. Gounden, Founder and Executive Director of
the African Centre for the Constructive Resolution of
Disputes, for their valuable briefings.
We welcome this open debate, focused mainly
on silencing the guns in Africa. The fact that the five
largest peacekeeping missions of the United Nations
are deployed in Africa proves the importance that the
United Nations attaches to preserving and promoting
peace and security in Africa. And the fact that more
than half of the top 20 countries that contribute troops
to United Nations peacekeeping operations are African
shows that African countries are playing a decisive
role in promoting international peace and security,

19-0568253/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

something that United Nations and the Council should
acknowledge and greatly appreciate.
At the same time, in order to ensure that African
countries and organizations can continue those
contributions, they should be helped to preserve and
promote their capacities for maintaining peace and
security in Africa and other parts of the world. That is
crucial, as some African troop-contributing countries
and African Union peace operations are constrained
in terms of financial resources and equipment,
which limits their ability to respond to peace and
security challenges.
However, when it comes to assisting African
countries in conflict prevention and the promotion
of peace and security, one basic principle should be
observed, which is that African problems require
African solutions. In other words, in order to promote
peace and security on the African continent and in
African countries, Africa’s leading role in resolving its
own security issues has to be fully respected.
From that perspective, one of the most important
tasks is assisting African States in addressing the
main sources of the occurrence, exacerbation and
prolongation of conflicts in Africa. One such source
is certainly the illicit manufacture, transfer and
circulation of arms, particularly small arms and light
weapons, along with their excessive accumulation and
uncontrolled proliferation. That has a wide range of
humanitarian and socioeconomic consequences and
poses a serious threat to peace, security, stability and
sustainable development in various parts of Africa. In
that context, African countries need help in fully and
effectively implementing the relevant international
instruments, the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects and the International Instrument to Enable
States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable
Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons. That
is important when taking into account the statistics
that show that the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons is one of the biggest obstacles to Africa’s
security and development. More important, taking into
account that there are also several relevant instruments
and initiatives in Africa, African countries must be
supported financially, technically and technologically
to effectively implement such instruments and realize
the goals of those initiatives.
54/75

27/02/2019

In that regard, rendering genuine and sustained
support to African States in realizing the objective of
such an important initiative as silencing the guns in
Africa should be accorded high priority. That would
greatly contribute to the ambitious goal established by
the African countries, namely, a conflict-free Africa,
which will not be easily achievable. However, it does
not mean it is impossible. Since African States have
indicated their strong resolve to reach that objective,
the international community should lend a helping
hand to Africa to make it become a reality.
In conclusion, a conflict-free Africa would indeed
be a place where durable peace, stability and prosperity
can flourish. That is what Africa wants, and we should
help it materialize.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Botswana.
Mr. Kelapile (Botswana): We congratulate the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea, Mr. President, on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of February. We thank you for convening
this very timely high-level debate on a theme that is
very important to the African continent. We also
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, the African Union (AU) High
Representative for Silencing the Guns in Africa and
the Founder and Executive Director of the African
Centre for the Constructive Resolution of Disputes for
their briefings.
Botswana places great importance on the overall
objective of achieving durable peace and stability on our
continent. We support the necessarily ambitious goal of
silencing the guns in Africa by 2020, which demands
the collective efforts of Africa and the assured support
of the international community and other relevant
stakeholders. We therefore welcome the unanimous
adoption by the Security Council of resolution 2457
(2019) on this matter.
We believe that creating an environment conducive
to addressing the root causes of conflict would obviate
the need to place peacekeepers in harm’s way, thereby
avoiding further loss of life among innocent civilians
caught up conflict situations. As we begin to approach
the year 2020, the deadline set by the AU, our delegation
finds this to be a rationale for engaging in a selfevaluative exercise to assess progress made in achieving
a conflict-free Africa. This debate is an important step
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

towards taking the corrective measures required within
the remaining time that we have leading up to 2020.
The questions raised in the concept note
(S/2019/169, annex) are therefore critical to enabling
us to re-strategize to ensure that Africa has its own
tools to do the job, and if not to adopt new strategic
partnerships to effectively dissuade our communities
from engaging in violence and criminal activities. It
is the difficult choices that those communities have
to make that in themselves generate the high demand
for guns. A proper diagnosis of the factors that create
human insecurity is key to addressing the root causes of
conflict on our continent.
The bigger picture of what constitutes Africa’s
existing challenges is already known. The intensity of
conflict has shown a decline; however, measured against
the Fragility States Index, the continent remains prone
to conflict, and global alert levels are significantly
high. We have observed marked improvements in
certain countries, while others show a slight decline.
Indications from comprehensive inequality studies
conducted by such competent United Nations bodies
as the United Nations Development Programme have
identified ungoverned territories that are pockets of
hardship and constitute conflict hotspots — big income
gaps and multidimensional poverty are among the
factors that drive conflict in Africa.
But to be fair, we must also acknowledge the positive
indicators on which we can build. There is no doubt
that Africa has great potential beyond its abundant
natural resources. Although growth has not always
been accompanied by meaningful social progress and
inclusiveness, in recent years we have seen a sizeable
number of African countries in the lead as some of the
fastest-growing economies in the world.
Africa is also home to a good number of
middle-income economies, including our own country
Botswana, following sustained development efforts.
The continent is blessed with a large population of
young people, who, if properly harnessed, constitute
a demographic dividend that is key to sustaining
additional strong economic growth for our continent.
We therefore share the concern that, if we do not
manage those contradictions well, dissatisfied groups
in our communities — including young people — will
make the wrong choice of resorting to arms.
A mix of prudent measures, ranging from leveraging
the potential of technological innovations to investing

S/PV. 8473

in proper education, is essential to create an enabling
environment for peace. We must empower women and
youth as agents of peace and development by promoting
participatory and accountable governance.
For Botswana an important part of achieving
effective governance and development is through the
effective management of the mineral sector as a catalyst
for economic and social development. We therefore
welcome the fact that, through the AU’s Africa Mining
Vision, Africa has recognized the need to work in
unison in this area, thereby providing an ideal platform
to share experiences. As the concept note before
us indicates, the task of silencing the guns cannot
always be delinked from the effective management of
natural resources.
In order to maintain the momentum on legitimate
trade in precious minerals, such as diamonds, our
delegation takes this opportunity to encourage keen
interest in the forthcoming Kimberley Process-driven
General Assembly discussions on the role of diamonds
in fuelling conflict. Action is expected on a draft
resolution on 1 March.
Overall, our delegation agrees that Africa is doing
its utmost through the AU and its regional mechanisms.
For instance, beyond establishing some early-warning
mechanisms and some standby forces, as I mentioned,
Africa itself has also acknowledged the need to harness
its demographic dividend through investing in youth.
The adoption of such relevant instruments as Agenda
2063, the fiftieth anniversary solemn declaration and
the AU Master Roadmap of Practical Steps for Silencing
the Guns in Africa by 2020, among others, represent
significant commitments. The ongoing implementation
of institutional reforms and the enhanced effectiveness
of AU peacekeeping operations are also key to the
sustainability of the efforts to promote and maintain
peace and security on the continent.
But beyond the existing threats that continue to fuel
conflict, a significant emerging threat is climate change,
which exacerbates conflict in Africa. We therefore
welcome the recently updated multi-year appeal for the
period 2018-2019 issued by the Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs. The acknowledgement
of this linkage is very important. Our delegation
encourages continued attention by the Security Council
to climate-related peace and security challenges.
In conclusion, the African Union and individual
African countries cannot silence the guns by

19-0568255/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

themselves. In addition to existing partnerships, we
welcome the recently concluded frameworks between
the AU and the United Nations on peace and security,
as well as on the Agenda 2063 and the 2020 initiative.
We wish to also highlight and express our appreciation
for the support of the United Nations for the AU Peace
and Security Council initiative to declare September of
each year until 2020 as Africa Amnesty Month for the
surrender of illegally owned weapons and arms, in line
with the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Angola.
Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): We wish to join our
colleagues and thank you, Mr. President, for presiding
over this debate. We also wish to congratulate Equatorial
Guinea for presiding over the Security Council for the
month of February. This debate is just another example
of the excellent work Equatorial Guinea has done with
regard to consolidating the efforts of the international
community to deal with some of the most pressing
challenges facing our world today. This is an important
step towards achieving our shared objective of ending
wars, civil conflicts and human rights violations on
the African continent, thereby allowing us to focus
our efforts and resources on education, health care,
social inclusion and economic development, among
others efforts.
The Republic of Angola views the spread of violent
extremism and terrorism in Africa and the humanitarian
and human rights crises caused by armed conflicts as
the most pressing challenges we face on the African
continent. In order to achieve the ambitious political
objective of silencing the guns in Africa, it is imperative
that we address effectively some of the root causes of
those conflicts, such as State fragility and weak State
institutions, the illicit arms trade, the effects of rapid
urbanization and youth unemployment, inequality and
social exclusion, as well as illegal resource extraction
and climate change.
To increase the chances of successful voluntary
civilian disarmament and eradicate non-State armed
groups in countries affected by conflict, the State and
its various organs have to be seen to operate within
a framework of good governance, the rule of law and
respect for human rights. Institutions responsible for
delivering justice and security in fragile and conflictprone States are often weak or dysfunctional. Civilians
56/75

27/02/2019

and armed groups will respond to a call for voluntary
disarmament only if they are guaranteed security.
In that regard, the African Union (AU), in line
with the African Peace and Security Architecture and
in cooperation with relevant Member States, should
increase its efforts to strengthen national and regional
mechanisms in order to halt the illicit flow of weapons,
especially small and light weapons, to non-State
actors, which contributes only to exacerbating
insecurity and violence and undermining social
cohesion, socioeconomic development and the effective
functioning of the relevant State’s security institutions.
One of the first steps needed to eradicate this
problem must be to ensure that States that manufacture
and export conventional arms work with affected nations
to ensure adequate control systems to safeguard against
the illicit diversion of those arms. More important, in
the context of non-interference in the internal affairs
of States, we as an international community must
be able to deal more effectively and severely with
countries that deliberately arm non-State actors and
armed groups in order to undermine democratically
elected Governments.
Guaranteeing security by stopping the illicit flow
of weapons and drugs is an important step towards
the effective functioning of security institutions. Such
measures, along with strengthening social cohesion and
socioeconomic development, have been the focus of the
new Government agenda of the Republic of Angola,
which stresses the importance of effective governance
by ensuring inclusive participation by women and
youth, strengthening the rule of law to combat impunity
and corruption, and promoting better management of
natural resources in order to foster inclusive growth
and reduce inequality.
That Government agenda is in line with Agenda
2063 — the AU’s strategic framework for achieving
growth and sustainable development — and the United
Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It
seeks not only to mount an effective policy response
to the economic, social and environmental changes
facing Angola but also to create a more resilient State
and society that is able to manage the pressures of rapid
urbanization, youth unemployment, inequality and
social exclusion.
Given that climate change and environmental
damage will act as multipliers of fragility, with the
potential of creating conflict over diminishing land and
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

water resources, the Government of Angola is investing
its human and material capacity not only to improve
the governance of our natural resources, which are
still our biggest source of revenue, but also to advance
regional cooperation on the cross-border management
and monitoring of natural resources, which is crucial
to shared peace and can serve as an important tool for
promoting greater regional integration.
In conclusion, our Government is fully committed
to the objective of silencing the guns by 2020 in order
to substantially contribute to achieving the goals of
the AU initiative on the African Peace and Security
Architecture roadmap for the period 2016-2020, a
strategic document for realizing a conflict-free Africa.
We are fully aware that it will not be possible to
end all conflicts on the continent by 2020, given the
continued presence of terrorists in the north and
the west and the illicit trafficking in human beings,
drugs and weapons in certain regions. Therefore, we
urge our partners on the continent to increase their
financial and operational support to structures such
as the African Standby Force, the Peace Fund and the
Continental Early Warning System, which are meant to
support the African Peace and Security Architecture
as a regional mechanism for preventing, managing and
resolving conflicts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to the United Nations.
Mr. Mardini: I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important and timely debate on silencing
the guns in Africa. This year we mark the seventieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions, the very first
article of which, common to all four Conventions,
obliges States to respect, and ensure respect for,
international humanitarian law. That duty frames the
rules that govern the international arms trade, including
the Arms Trade Treaty. Today’s adoption of resolution
2457 (2019) is an important step. It highlights Africa’s
determination to rid the continent of conflict and
strengthen arms control and disarmament, with the
support of the international community.
Today I want to address two points — first,
the humanitarian consequences of the uncontrolled
availability of small arms and light weapons, and,
secondly, ways the international community can reduce
those consequences.

S/PV. 8473

When conventional arms are poorly regulated
and widely available, the humanitarian consequences
are grim — prolonged conflicts, violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
and increased risk of death and injury for civilians.
Suffering continues even after hostilities are over, as
the widespread accessibility of arms fosters a culture
of violence, undermines the rule of law and threatens
reconciliation efforts.
The International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) witnesses those consequences at first hand on a
daily basis. Armed conflict in the Lake Chad basin has
forced more than 2 million people to flee their homes.
In Libya, large parts of arms stockpiles remain outside
any Government control, fuelling violence and exacting
a heavy price from the Libyan people, who suffer death,
injury, disability and displacement. In South Sudan, the
peace agreement brings hope of an end to a conflict that
had brought catastrophic humanitarian consequences.
Untold thousands of children have been deprived of
schooling, and many women suffered sexual violence.
Humanitarian organizations like the ICRC bring
much-needed relief to the many places in Africa and
elsewhere in the world where peace remains elusive.
But aid alone cannot solve the underlying causes of this
immense suffering.
That brings me to my second point, which is how
the Member States of the Security Council — and
in fact all States — can act to silence the guns in
Africa. They can do so by ensuring a responsible arms
trade and preventing the diversion of weapons to the
illicit market. To that end, solid frameworks, such as
the Economic Community of West African States
Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their
Ammunition and Other Related Materials and the
Central African Convention for the Control of Small
Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and All
Parts and Components That Can Be Used for Their
Manufacture, Repair and Assembly, and, at the global
level, the Arms Trade Treaty, provide a blueprint for
reducing human suffering. We urge States to join,
implement and support those treaties. Responsible
arms transfers improve the protection of civilians over
the long term and, more broadly, lay the foundation for
peace, security and stability.
We must make a difference on the ground. Words
alone will not prevent the devastating and irreparable
harms caused by weapons in the wrong hands. The
ICRC’s recent study The Roots of Restraint in War

19-0568257/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

found that integrating the law into doctrine, rules of
engagement, training and compliance mechanisms
increases restraint on the battlefield. The ICRC
encourages States to commit to this task and offers
its assistance to States wishing to promote respect for
international humanitarian law by arms bearers — a
role we have assumed, for instance, for the Group of
Five States for the Sahel.
The appalling humanitarian consequences I spoke
of earlier are preventable. When there is respect for
international humanitarian law, there is a better chance
for silencing the guns in Africa and in the world. The
ICRC stands ready to support States to achieve that goal.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): Let me start
by congratulating Equatorial Guinea for today’s
timely debate, and also to thank our briefers, Special
Representative Lamamra and Mr. Gounden.
Portugal aligns itself with the statement made by
the Head of Delegation of the European Union and
wishes to make some additional remarks.
Local security crises have global repercussions,
and they need to be addressed through joint efforts.
The African Union has assumed growing leadership in
the search for African solutions to African problems.
The strategic partnership established with the United
Nations is a crucial step towards strengthening the
chances of success, and it has already achieved
promising results, as in the recent case of the Central
African Republic.
We believe that the strong partnership among
the African Union, the United Nations and other
international partners, such as the European Union,
is the best way to achieve peace and security,
prosperity, environmental protection, gender equality,
human rights and democracy. Those elements are all
intertwined — when they concur, they are mutually
reinforcing. The framework is already in place. The
African Peace and Security Architecture, alongside
instruments such as the African Governance
Architecture and the African Union’s Agenda 2063,
provides a solid regional basis, which complements
the existing multilateral framework. All of us must
remain engaged and mobilized to provide the necessary
support. Resolution 2457 (2019), just adopted, is a
further contribution to that end.
58/75

27/02/2019

Silencing the guns will also require strong
determination in preventing future conflicts. We need
to strengthen the role of women and young people in
the prevention and management of conflicts, as well as
their civic and political participation at all levels. We
need to keep up our efforts to prevent the radicalization
of young people, and we need to combat the illicit
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. We
therefore encourage an active African participation in
instruments such as the United Nations Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All its
Aspects, its International Tracing Instrument and the
Arms Trade Treaty.
But security measures alone will not be effective
if they are not accompanied by an effort to achieve
social inclusion. Alongside more traditional threats,
Africa also feels the strain of such global challenges as
climate change, water and food insecurity, pandemics,
terrorism and transnational organized crime.
Therefore, we must tackle the root causes of conflict
through a positive agenda, while combating poverty
and promoting development. The implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) will be of
crucial importance in this process.
Portugal maintains a very close relationship with
Africa and remains engaged in contributing to these joint
efforts, both bilaterally and at the level of the European
Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP) and, of course, the United Nations.
Portugal currently participates in missions in Mali,
the Central African Republic, the Niger, Somalia,
South Sudan and Darfur. We have technical military
cooperation agreements with several African States,
and we are engaged in development projects, including
with the United Nations and the CPLP, aimed at the
implementation of the SDGs. We have made a longterm commitment to the security and development
of an African continent that is globally relevant at all
levels and which undoubtedly deserves to increase its
representation in the Security Council.
We will remain committed and mobilized. We must
indeed silence the weapons of the present so that we can
focus on the future, ensuring that the hands of young
people will not be holding guns, but the tools to build a
life that lives up to their legitimate aspirations.
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): I would like to commend
Equatorial Guinea for convening this timely meeting on
the theme “Silencing the Guns in Africa: cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations”.
Allow me also to express my deep appreciation for
the informative briefings of Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo; Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, African
Union High Representative for Silencing the Guns in
Africa; and Mr. Vasu Gounden, Founder and Executive
Director of the African Centre for the Constructive
Resolution of Disputes.
Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
I will now make a few remarks in my national capacity.
My country underscores the centrality of the
African Union-United Nations strategic partnership and
the trilateral cooperation between the United Nations,
the African Union and the European Union, as they
are essential frameworks for international security and
sustainable development in Africa. We also commend
the African Union Master Roadmap of Practical Steps
for Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 as a flagship
initiative that will contribute to making Africa a
conflict-free continent.
Romania co-sponsored resolution 2457 (2019) on
silencing the guns in Africa, which was adopted today.
We also encourage a tailored approach that has African
solutions for African problems as its guiding principle.
During Romania’s chairmanship of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) in 2018, that principle led to the
institutionalization of the annual meeting between
the Peacebuilding Commission and the African Union
Peace and Security Council.
In addition, during our chairmanship of the PBC,
Romania placed particular importance on conflict
prevention, including by promoting an enhanced
regional approach in the work of the Commission,
reinforcing partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations
and
supporting
conflict-affected
countries through actions ranging from stopping
the outbreak of conflicts to peacebuilding and postconflict reconstruction.
During the field visits I conducted last year to
West Africa and the Sahel and in all the meetings I had

S/PV. 8473

with relevant national and regional African actors, the
purpose was to identify ways to enhance cooperation
on financing for peacebuilding and to strengthen
cooperation, coordination and coherence in support of
the respective countries. Romania remains committed
to following the same path during our current mandate
as Vice-Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, as
we attach great importance to prevention, mediation,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and working on postconflict recovery and reconstruction.
Based on its deep understanding of the
multidimensional root causes of insecurity in the
region, Romania believes that the goals of the Silencing
the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative can be reached
through partnerships between African countries and the
international community. In that context, I hope that on
Friday 1 March, the General Assembly will adopt, by
consensus, the draft resolution on the role of diamonds
in fuelling conflict, breaking the link between the
illicit transactions and armed conflict as a contribution
to the prevention and settlement of conflicts, which
Romania will introduce in its capacity as President of
the Council of the European Union.
I believe it is high time to permanently switch
from the paradigm of blood diamonds to that of
peace diamonds. In that endeavour, the effective
implementation of 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and African Union’s Agenda 2063
for inclusive growth and sustainable development,
with the full participation of women and youth, will
remain fundamental.
Romania helps to increase opportunities for young
Africans through the scholarships we offer for higher
education and the training programmes we provide
for professionals. Currently, Romania participates
in United Nations missions in Africa on all relevant
security segments — in six United Nations missions
and operations in the Central African Republic, Mali,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Darfur, South
Sudan and Libya.
At the same time, we are the only Member State
that contributes close protection units to missions
coordinated by the Department of Safety and Security.
Starting on 15 October, Romania will provide the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali a military utility helicopter unit
comprising four Puma helicopters and 120 troops.

19-0568259/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Finally, we are glad that Equatorial Guinea has
proposed the topic of collaboration with regional
organizations on the Security Council agenda, since
it was my country that promoted the very first United
Nations resolution on cooperation with regional
organizations (resolution 1631 (2005)) under the
Romanian presidency of the Security Council.
Romania is now a candidate for a non-permanent
seat in the Security Council for the 2020-2021 period.
My country will remain fully engaged in sustaining
peace in Africa and in enhancing cooperation with the
African Union.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Djibouti.
Mrs. Hassan (Djibouti): At the outset, Djibouti
is very grateful for the opportunity to address the
Council on the theme “Silencing the Guns in Africa:
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations”. In that regard, we welcome resolution
2457 (2019), adopted this morning, which my delegation
co-sponsored. We are equally grateful for the quality of
the insights provided in the presentations made by the
briefers this morning.
(spoke in French)
Djibouti associates itself with the statements made
by the representatives of Benin and Lebanon, on behalf
of the Group of African States and the Group of Arab
States, respectively.
The greatest threat today to the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
African Union’s Agenda 2063 is undoubtedly conflict
and violence. The persistence of many hotbeds of tension
around the world continues to increase the death toll.
Addressing the specific challenges of each will require
the sustained attention of the international community.
Indeed, according to some sources, some 30 million
light weapons are in circulation in sub-Saharan Africa
and, every year, that arsenal increases by eight to ten
million weapons.
Unfortunately, those weapons are readily available;
they trigger and perpetuate violent conflicts in the
continent. It goes without saying that they constitute
a threat to international peace and security. That is
why we welcome the fact that the Council has agreed
to organize, under your presidency, a thematic meeting
devoted to analysing the challenges and identifying
sustainable solutions.
60/75

27/02/2019

The United Nations Conference to Review Progress
Made in the Implementation of the Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, chaired by France in June 2018, in which my
delegation participated, enabled us to make progress in
certain areas. The fourth Conference of States Parties
to the Arms Trade Treaty, which took place in Japan in
August, reiterated the need for material, technical and
financial support for developing countries.
Despite those tools, Djibouti is greatly concerned
about the spread of terrorism and international organized
crime, which complicate already fragile situations and
require different responses than those proposed by
conventional peace operations. That is why partnerships
in regional and subregional cooperation are so essential
if we hope to curb the cross-border movement of
illicit weapons. We welcomed the Silencing the Guns
in Africa by 2020 initiative, adopted by African Heads
of State at the thirty-second ordinary session of the
Assembly of the African Union commemorating the
fiftieth anniversary of the African Union, the noble
goal of which is to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war.
(spoke in English)
In response to your request to make specific
contributions today, Mr. President, Djibouti would like
to humbly make the three following observations.
First, we need to invest more in prevention
and mediation. It requires special skills honed by
experience. That is why Djibouti welcomes the creation
of a platform for experience-sharing and learning
among the members of the roster of mediators of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the African Union members of the Panel of the Wise
and members of the Pan-African Network of the Wise
from regional economic communities and mechanisms.
We take this opportunity to commend those
involved in the elaboration of the strategic guidelines
on mediation. Djibouti also applauds the SecretaryGeneral’s establishment of the High-level Advisory
Board on Mediation and urges the Council to lend it
full support. States and international organizations
called upon to mediate international disputes should
be encouraged to seek the active involvement and
assistance of the Secretary-General and the Highlevel Board.
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

(spoke in French)
Secondly, we need inclusive approaches to promote
peace, while considering all the relevant stakeholders at
all levels of society, including women, young people and
traditional leaders, as well as faith-based organizations.
To that end, there is an urgent need to mainstream the
work of the African Union, including through the Panel
of the Wise, the Pan-African Network of the Wise and
the Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention
and Mediation in promoting peace, security and
stability on the continent.
Thirdly, there is no longer any doubt that the
harmful consequences of the actions of groups
motivated by extremist ideologies are in no way limited
to national or regional spaces, but that they transcend
borders and affect the whole world. The goal of radical
extremists is to create what some writers have termed a
panic civilization, in which every terrorist act not only
destroys the lives of innocent civilians but also leads to
a vast number of living but terrified hostages. Their goal
is known and our determination must be unyielding.
In concert with the efforts of organizations, such
as IGAD and the African Union, to prevent and combat
violent extremism, the States of the region have quickly
realized the importance of initiating consultations to
develop a strategy to counter the ideas and narratives
disseminated by extremist movements. With that
perspective, we decided by mutual agreement to
establish a regional centre dedicated to preventing and
combating violent extremism in Djibouti.
(spoke in English)
In conclusion, Djibouti welcomes the recent
positive developments in the Horn of Africa, in
particular the historic rapprochement between Ethiopia
and Eritrea. For peace to be comprehensive, thorough
and sustainable, we emphasize the fact that it is urgent
to resolve the 11-year-long border dispute and other
related issues with the sisterly country of Eritrea.
To that end, Djibouti reaffirms its commitment to
negotiating in good faith with Eritrea through bilateral
engagement, mediation or binding international
arbitration. We should endeavour to maintain the
positive momentum and not allow the conflict to fester.
Djibouti underscores the importance of the continued
oversight role of the Security Council, as stipulated in
paragraph 57 of resolution 2444 (2018), until a full and
final agreement is reached between the parties.

S/PV. 8473

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): I congratulate
Equatorial Guinea on its very productive presidency
of the Security Council for this month, and I thank
you, Sir, for organizing today’s open debate, which
is of the utmost importance to Africa, as it should be
to the Security Council. I also thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, African Union High Representative for
Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020, and Mr. Vasu
Gounden, Founder and Executive Director of the
African Centre for the Constructive Resolution of
Disputes, for their valuable and informative briefings.
At the outset, Rwanda associates itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Benin on
behalf of the Group of African States.
The theme of this debate involves one of the
African Union’s aspirations under Agenda 2063 — a
peaceful and secure Africa. Africa’s quest is to build a
secure and peaceful environment that is conducive to
social and economic development for the benefit of all
Africans. Silencing the guns in Africa is an ambitious
yet achievable goal that can be reached by taking
integrated approaches that extend across the nexus
of peace and security, governance and development.
Success in meeting that goal will require greater policy
coherence and political commitment from all of us to
implement the available mechanisms and tools.
The African Union Master Road Map of Practical
Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 is an
important framework that, once implemented, will
contribute to an Africa free of violent conflicts. The
recent positive developments arising from conflict
resolution in the Horn of Africa and the recent
peace agreements in South Sudan and the Central
African Republic are important contributions to
silencing the guns in Africa, even though the latter
agreements have yet to be translated into the voluntary
disarmament of armed groups under inclusive national
security institutions.
Rwanda’s contribution to today’s debate will focus
mainly on conflict prevention and resolution, security
sector reform, peacebuilding and sustaining peace,
albeit very briefly.

19-0568261/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Preventive diplomacy and mediation are integral
parts of conflict resolution and prevention. It is true that
progress has been made in the prevention, management
and resolution of conflicts on the continent. In many
instances conflicts escalate or re-erupt as a result of
weak or less resilient institutions and non-inclusive
governance systems, which are not capable of taking
over the management of peace once it has been achieved.
We need to focus our efforts and actions on
the structural causes of conflict with the aim of
strengthening the institutions and social mechanisms
of States and communities, assisting affected States to
develop more robust and inclusive institutions that can
address the causes of conflict and prevent future ones.
Strengthening our efforts and strategies related
to demobilization disarmament and reintegration is
one such strategy that can significantly contribute to
silencing the guns in Africa. That is our own experience
as a country that has successfully reintegrated
more than 70,000 former combatants who operated
mainly — and some still operate — in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, causing chaos
and insecurity for local populations.
Our recommendation therefore is that demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration (DDR) need to be
carried out at all stages of conflict resolution and postconflict peacebuilding. Central to successful DDR is
effective support for former combatants to reintegrate
into civilian life. DDR is and should be perceived to be
part and parcel of the political process to consolidate
peace and stability.
Lastly, the illicit proliferation and possession of
small arms and light weapons in Africa, including
in countries on Security Council arms embargoes
and sanctions lists, help perpetuate armed conflict
on the continent. More effective monitoring of the
implementation of arms embargoes will certainly
contribute to creating an environment that is more
conducive to conflict resolution.
The guns cannot be silenced nor can peace be
sustained without development, inclusive governance
and inclusive and effective institutions, as has
been underlined by many speakers before me. The
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and Agenda 2063 of the African Union
remains the most effective way to prevent conflict and
build lasting peace.
62/75

27/02/2019

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing today’s debate and the work of the Council
on resolution 2457 (2019), which we are very happy to
co-sponsor.
We are here because we think that this debate
matters. Ireland believes that cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations is critical to conflict resolution and
prevention; to building peaceful, inclusive societies;
and, of course, as we have heard from many speakers, to
achieving our shared Sustainable Development Goals.
We have seen first-hand direct evidence of the
instrumental role that regional organizations in Africa
can play in ending crises and building lasting peace. The
role of the Economic Community of West African States
in mediating the post-election crisis in The Gambia and
the recent peace accord in the Central African Republic,
achieved after intense negotiations led by the African
Union, are for us both excellent examples of the success
that we can all hope for when regional efforts deliver
with wider international support.
On the island of Ireland, our own locally led peace
process has benefited hugely from the sustained,
generous and sensitive support of our own regional
organization, the European Union. Indeed, simply put,
our membership of the European Union played a key
role in putting us on the road to ending violent conflict.
Ireland applauds the African Union’s recent advances
towards silencing the guns through the development
of continental early warning systems, the Panel of the
Wise, special envoys and ad hoc mediation panels. We
see that such steps make a tangible and incremental
difference to conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
As Chair of the Commission on the Status of
Women, I want to recognize the unique role African
women play in silencing the guns. I am pleased to see
that role cited in resolution 2457 (1019), adopted today.
Specific reference to FemWise-Africa, the Network of
African Women in Conflict Prevention and Mediation
and the African Women Leaders Network strengthens
and gives force to our message. We know from our own
experience in Ireland that when women get involved,
things start getting done.
Peacekeeping operations are the most visible and
among the most powerful tools the United Nations
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

has to promote peace and stability. As the Member
State with the longest continuous service to United
Nations peacekeeping, of more than 60 years, Ireland is
acutely aware of the challenges facing United Nations
peace operations in different countries and regions.
The diversity of such challenges underscores the
importance of the work of coordinating with regional
partners, such as the African Union, and of empowering
local stakeholders.
The Secretary-General’s reform efforts to bridge
the peace-security-humanitarian nexus should also
be an ambition for our partnership with the African
Union. It is, of course, in step with the effective
implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.
We all know that the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons continues to inflame and prolong
conflicts. Our colleague from the International
Committee of the Red Cross underlined that point in his
remarks earlier today. We share the Secretary-General’s
goal of restoring disarmament to its central role in
building international peace and security. As a concrete
manifestation of Ireland’s support to the agenda for
disarmament, yesterday our Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Simon
Coveney, announced that Ireland will act as a champion
for three important actions outlined in the agenda. One
of those actions is specifically aimed at silencing the
guns by building understanding of the impact of arms
on conflict management. We look forward to working
with all States Members of the United Nations, and
particularly with the African Union, to make progress.
Through Ireland’s current membership of the
Peacebuilding Commission and as a sincere candidate
for a seat on the Security Council in under two years
from now, in 2021-2022, we want to reassure members
of our support. We would also like to say today that we
believe that Africa needs greater representation at this
table to correct the historic injustice that has been done
to Africa.
Finally, rest assured, Sir, that Ireland will also work
tirelessly to champion locally led, nationally owned
and internationally supported peace processes. In his
address to the African Union Summit in Addis Ababa,
the Secretary-General said if that you want to see the
winds of hope blowing, look to Africa. I think he is
right. Let me close by underlining Ireland’s unwavering
commitment to working closely with the African

S/PV. 8473

Union, the United Nations and all Member States to
seize the momentum to silence the guns and see the
great continent of Africa truly free from conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Sir, I would like to convey the apologies of your
sister Her Excellency Ms. Kamissa Camara, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of
the Republic of Mali, who was unable to travel to New
York owing to a scheduling conflict. She asked me to
convey her warm congratulations to you, Sir, and to the
entire delegation of Equatorial Guinea on a productive
and successful presidency this month.
Before continuing, on behalf of the President
of Republic of Mali, the Government and the people
of Mali, I would like to reiterate the most heartfelt
condolences to the Governments and families of the
personnel of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali who have died
in the line of duty in Mali. On this painful occasion, I
pay special tribute to the brave Chadian, Sri Lankan
and Guinean soldiers who were torn from our midst
from January to date, not to mention the many injured,
to whom I wish a speedy recovery.
I paid that well-deserved tribute to all of the
victims of conflict — Malian and non-Malian, civilian
and military — in order to highlight the relevance and
timeliness of the theme of today’s debate on silencing
the guns in Africa. In that regard, I would like to share
with members some food for thought as our contribution
to today’s debate.
I would like to start with peaceful options that I
believe are the most appropriate for ensuring lasting
peace and security. In my view, silencing the guns
requires good governance, first and foremost, including
justice and equity in the management of public affairs. It
further requires the right balance to be struck between
the issues of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States and the legitimate demands of populations
for respect for their identity, culture and active and
effective participation in the management of public and
local affairs. Our States must promote national unity
in diversity.
Secondly, another equation to be solved is to find
the appropriate measures to enable people in remote
areas, far from capitals, to truly live as part of the

19-0568263/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

national whole and feel part of the nation. In that way,
we will be able to strengthen the legitimacy of our
States in the eyes of our populations.
Thirdly, peacefully silencing the guns requires
comprehensive responses to the root causes and
aggravating factors of armed conflict, in particular
inclusive sustainable development. We must work
tirelessly to meet the basic needs of our populations,
including education, health care, food security,
water, energy and decent employment opportunities
for young people, who make up the vast majority of
African populations.
The ultimate peaceful tool to silence the guns
is speech. In some conflict situations in Africa, we
know that speech, when it encourages deliberate
mischaracterization, stigmatization, hatred and
violence, can lead to divisions by sowing the seeds
of long-term conflicts, and even worse, it can lead to
killing. We must convey messages of peace and national
cohesion in our words and deeds.
In that regard, the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, which was the outcome of the
Algiers process, reflects the common resolve of the
Malian parties to prioritize a peaceful settlement of the
internal dimension of the Malian crisis. I would like
to welcome Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, former Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Algeria, who was the principal
mediator in the negotiating process that led to the
signing of the agreement in Algiers in 2015.
I turn now to security solutions. Faced with
imminent and real threats, our States have no choice
but to take military action to secure populations and
their property, as well as their territories. That is
what we are doing in Mali and the Sahel, with the
support of international partner forces, including the
French Operation Barkhane and the Group of Five for
the Sahel, against terrorist groups, drug trafficking
and transnational organized crime, including
human traffickers.
Moreover, we must work towards the full
implementation of the various international instruments
on the flow of weapons, particularly small arms and
light weapons, with a view to helping to silence the guns
in Africa. I recall that, on behalf of the States members
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), Mali annually submits a resolution to the
General Assembly entitled “Assistance to States for
curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons
64/75

27/02/2019

and collecting them”, in support of the ECOWAS
Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their
Ammunition and Other Related Materials. We also
need to strengthen cooperation among States to combat
the illicit trade in those weapons, which are causing
more casualties on the African continent.
Lastly, the delegation of Mali welcomes the
strengthening of the strategic partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations, and remains
convinced that it will add value to ongoing national
and regional efforts to silence the guns, including the
United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel. I welcome
resolution 2457 (2019), which was adopted by the
Security Council this morning on that issue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ghana.
Mrs. Pobee (Ghana): Ghana joins previous speakers
in thanking the Equatorial Guinean presidency of the
Security Council for convening this open debate on
silencing the guns in Africa, a theme that underscores
the shared agenda of both the African Union (AU) and
the United Nations in building a peaceful, secure and
stable Africa. We also thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo,
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra and Mr. Vasu Gounden for their
briefings and useful insights into that important subject.
Ghana associates itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Benin on behalf of the Group of
African States.
The fiftieth anniversary solemn declaration
adopted by African Heads of State in May 2013 spelled
out the framework for achieving Africa’s vision of an
integrated, stable, peaceful and prosperous continent.
The fourth aspiration of the African Union Agenda
2063, on silencing the guns, pledged to end all wars in
Africa by 2020, thereby reaffirming peace and security
as critical enablers for sustainable development and
socioeconomic transformation.
My delegation is pleased to note that the African
Union, through consistent and collaborative efforts
with the United Nations and in keeping with its Master
Roadmap of Practical Steps to Silence the Guns in
Africa by 2020, has made progress in ridding the
continent of a significant number of conflicts and in
the management of others. While we applaud those
achievements, we recognize that much more needs to
be done to put Africa firmly on the path to achieving
its targets in peace and security. Africa continues to
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

grapple with existential threats, including extreme
poverty, the debilitating effects of climate change,
violent extremism and the growing menace of terrorism,
the illicit proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
transnational organized crime, poor governance,
inequality and marginalization, human rights violations
and poor justice institutions. Those must be tackled if
we are to consolidate the gains made so far.
The illicit manufacture and trade in small arms and
light weapons is, perhaps, one of the biggest threats to
peace and security in Africa. Addressing that challenge
will require commitment to multilateral instruments,
good practices, codes of conduct and standard operating
procedures on illicit small arms and light weapons.
We require new funding mechanisms and synergies in
the implementation of the United Nations Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects; the International Instrument to Enable States
to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner,
Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons; the Protocol
against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in
Firearms, Their Parts and Components and Ammunition;
the Arms Trade Treaty; and regional instruments, such
as the Economic Community of West African States
Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their
Ammunition and Other Related Materials, in order
to effectively address the illicit transfer, diversion,
destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small arms
and light weapons and their ammunitions.
Strategic and operational partnerships between
the United Nations and the AU remain crucial to
dealing effectively with the multidimensional nature
of conflicts and threats to peace and security. In that
regard, we welcome the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security, the Framework for Implementation
of Agenda 2063 and 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and the joint declaration on cooperation
in peace support operations. The convening of annual
conferences, joint field visits by senior officials, regular
consultations and coordinated action are welcome and
must be further enhanced.
Ghana calls for support for the ongoing efforts
of the African Union and subregional organizations,
within the framework of the African Peace and
Security Architecture, to strengthen capacity for peace
support operations on the continent, in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,

S/PV. 8473

particularly the African Standby Force and its Rapid
Deployment Capability.
The lack of predictable, sustainable and flexible
financing for AU-led peace support operations
authorized by the Security Council remains a concern.
Adequate resourcing of the peacebuilding components
of the relevant United Nations peacekeeping operations
and special political missions is critical to the continuity
of peacebuilding activities and the sustenance of peace
in countries coming out of active conflict.
We wish to reaffirm the role of women in conflict
prevention, mediation and peacebuilding. The
impact of the African Women Leaders Network and
FemWise-Africa on those efforts is being increasingly
recognized and must be supported as one of the
concrete areas of collaboration and joint action between
the United Nations and the African Union. The positive
contribution of youth in Africa to peace and security
must be given due currency in conflict prevention
and conflict resolution through capacity-building and
participation in peacebuilding.
The centrality of the rule of law, good governance
and functional democracy as a preventive tool and
in addressing the root causes of conflict cannot be
overemphasized. Ghana is of the firm belief that
measures to strengthen the rule of law, democracy and
good governance, building accountable institutions,
access to justice and respect for and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms should be at
the core of our efforts.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the commitment of
the Government of Ghana to peace and security within
its borders and to playing a key role in subregional,
regional and international efforts in mediation, the
peaceful resolution of conflicts and peacebuilding.
We see this as an important prerequisite for the
socioeconomic transformation of Africa and to enable
the continent to realize its potential and take its rightful
place in global affairs.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Arbeiter (Canada) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank Equatorial Guinea for having organized
today’s open debate on the African Union’s Silencing
the Guns initiative.

19-0568265/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

(spoke in English)
Guns are the weapon of choice in most conflicts
around the world. For many communities across
Africa, they are the true weapons of mass destruction.
While firearms can be found almost everywhere, the
specific reasons they pose problems in a given place
are often tied to regional or national circumstances. It
could be terrorism, organized crime, armed conflict or
a combination of these or other factors.
In the past, we as an international community
typically approached the firearms problem the same
way we approached other weapons, such as nuclear
or biological weapons, through broad international
agreements. Canada continues to support this
multilateral approach, but we have also learned that we
need to look at the regional challenges of small arms
and light weapons. They need a tailored and contextspecific response.
The Silencing the Guns initiative is such a
response, offering African solutions to problems faced
by African countries. But we know that many of the
challenges facing Africa did not start in Africa and
have effects that go well beyond Africa. We therefore
support local ownership of this initiative and recognize
that all Member States have a stake in its success.
Indeed, it is essential that all of us — Member States,
the United Nations system as a whole, regional and
subregional organizations — work together to realize
this vision. In practice, this means strengthening our
cooperation in conflict prevention, management and
resolution, and joining forces to fully implement the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security. As many
delegations have already attested to today, this is an
approach that enjoys full consensus. Moreover, we have
seen that this is the kind of approach that deliver results.
The recent signing of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic
very concretely demonstrated how close collaboration
between the United Nations, the African Union and
subregional organizations, working in partnership with
local actors, can advance peace.
(spoke in French)
In seeking to silence the guns, we need to
understand the disproportionate effect of conflict on
women and the important role that women can play in
the prevention and resolution of conflicts. In this regard,
as the Permanent Representatives of Ghana and Ireland
66/75

27/02/2019

have also underlined, we welcome the establishment
of the FemWise-Africa network to strengthen the role
of women in conflict prevention and mediation. It is
also important to take the steps needed to address the
financing issues related to peace operations led by
African States. We should consider the use of United
Nations-assessed contributions to address these issues.
Canada is actively engaged at the regional and
national level in working towards the ultimate goal
of silencing the guns in Africa. For example, with
Sierra Leone, Canada is co-chairing the International
Dialogue on Peacebuilding and State-Building. This
is a partnership of the Governments of 20 countries
affected by conflict and fragility, international
development partners and civil society. In Mali,
Canada has supported the Centre for Humanitarian
Dialogue to broker a ceasefire agreement that has
helped to facilitate a disarmament process for local
militias, in coordination with the Government of
Mali. In South Sudan, Canada is supporting women’s
participation in the implementation of the revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict. With
Ethiopia, Canada recently co-hosted a Peacekeeping
Ministerial preparatory meeting on women, peace and
security to increase women’s meaningful participation
in peacekeeping operations.
(spoke in English)
Canada was very pleased to co-sponsor resolution
2457 (2019), adopted earlier today. We will remain
committed to the long-term success of the Silencing the
Guns initiative. We share the principles underpinning
the African Union approach — working together,
including with multilateral organizations and regional
groups, to sustain peace and protect our rules-based
international order. This is an approach we hope to
bring to the Security Council if we are elected to a
non-permanent seat in 2021-2022. We are confident that,
by working together, we can create a more prosperous,
secure and inclusive world. We can silence the guns.
(spoke in Spanish)
Together, we can silence the guns.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Sir, for having organized this important debate.
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

(spoke in English)
Let me congratulate you on your successful
presidency of the Security Council and once again
thank you for convening this very important open
debate on the African Union Silencing the Guns in
Africa initiative.
While fully aligning myself with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European
Union, I would like to offer a few additional remarks in
my national capacity.
My delegation supports the African vision of an
integrated, stable, peaceful and prosperous continent.
It is in this context that we welcome the African
Union Commission’s decision to silence the guns
by 2020, which has great potential to contribute to
peace, security and stability in Africa. In this spirit,
we strongly support every opportunity to strengthen
the cooperation between the African Union and the
United Nations in support of African solutions to
problems facing the continent. Naturally, Slovakia
strongly supports every opportunity to strengthen the
cooperation between the African Union and the United
Nations in support of that particular endeavour.
In that context, we also decided to co-sponsor
resolution 2457 (2019), which the Council adopted
earlier. I would like to congratulate you, Sir, and all
other members of the Security Council on that important
step. Allow me to emphasize two points of substance.
First, we believe that all States should uphold
their responsibility to protect populations by taking
effective measures to address the root causes of violent
conflicts, including the detrimental impact of small
arms and light weapons trafficking. The consequences
of the devastating impact of the illicit transfer of small
arms and light weapons across Africa can be witnessed
today, for example, in the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and
elsewhere. I would like to highlight the importance of
the Arms Trade Treaty, which contributes to improving
regional security and stability, as well as the promotion
of accountability, by establishing better controls for
the transfer of conventional arms. Slovakia strongly
encourages all Member States to ratify the Treaty.
Weapons are force multipliers. If the weapons
situation is not consistently dealt with, exacerbation or
relapse into renewed fighting remains a paramount risk.
We therefore call for the full implementation of existing

S/PV. 8473

international, regional and subregional instruments
addressing the illicit trafficking and destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons in Africa, including the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects.
Today’s concept note (S/2019/169, annex) noted that
post-conflict countries’ increased risk of relapse into
conflict is also attributable to weak State institutions.
We very much welcome that focus, which brings me to
my second point. In that regard, I would like to highlight
the important role of security-sector governance in
conflict prevention and sustaining peace. In this respect,
Slovakia welcomed the second African Union Forum
on Security Sector Reform, convened in Addis Ababa
on 22 October 2018, which discussed key challenges to
moving this agenda forward in Africa. We were proud
to be one of the international partners of the Forum,
acting also in our capacity, together with our colleagues
from South Africa, as Chair of the Group of Friends of
Security Sector Reform, along with the African Union
itself, the European Union and other partners.
During that initiative, we focused for the most
part on similar issues, including the situation in the
Central African Republic, which many speakers
have mentioned today, and the recent signing of the
agreement there, but also other issues, such as the role
of women. In that context, I want to emphasize that in
the next couple of weeks, two Groups of Friends — of
Security Sector Reform and of Gender Parity — will
co-convene an important event on 13 March that will
focus on the issue of gender and the security sector and
the nexus between them.
Returning briefly to the second African Union
Forum on Security Sector Reform, I want to point out
that it also identified challenges for the implementation
of the security-sector reform component of the African
Union Master Roadmap of Practical Steps to Silence
the Guns in Africa by the Year 2020. The Forum
recommended that the African Union Commission
develop a three-year strategic plan on securitysector reform and establish a steering committee on
the subject, in coordination with regional economic
communities and regional mechanisms for conflict
prevention, management and resolution. Along with
the European Union, the United Nations is currently
focused on supporting the African Union Commission
in making progress in these activities in the context

19-0568267/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

of the triangular partnership that we have been very
supportive of.
I want to further highlight the importance of the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union on security-sector reform for the
implementation of the African Union Master Roadmap.
As a result of the Forum I just mentioned, the partnership
remains focused on assisting the Defence and Security
Division of the African Union Commission in finalizing
the three-year strategic plan on security-sector reform.
We welcome the development of the plan and urge all
partners to support its implementation. It will serve as
an important vehicle for advancing the African Union’s
leading role in security-sector reform. It will also
mobilize assistance for implementing related securitysector reform tasks and the linkage to the AU Master
Roadmap by 2020.
I want to once again congratulate you on this
important initiative, Mr. President. and to assure you of
our continued support in that regard.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Denktaş (Turkey): Turkey was a sponsor of
resolution 2457 (2019), adopted this morning, and
aligns itself with the statement made by the Head
of the Delegation of the European Union. I would
like to offer the following additional remarks in our
national capacity.
I would first like to express our appreciation to the
presidency of Equatorial Guinea for convening today’s
important open debate on an issue of great significance
for all States Members of the United Nations. It testifies
to the international community’s willingness to pursue
the ambitious but noble goal of creating an African
continent free of conflict. We value the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union and
other regional and subregional bodies on the continent.
Turkey encourages the expansion of the United NationsAfrican Union partnership in areas such as institutional
capacity-building, security-sector reform, the protection
of civilians, human rights, gender mainstreaming and
combating organized crime. This is crucial in tackling
the root causes of conflicts, terrorism and violent
extremism and fostering peace and stability. In that
regard, the African Union initiative on silencing the
guns by 2020 is a bold step in the right direction.
68/75

27/02/2019

Peacekeeping is one of the areas where the
collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union is most visible. Indeed, the African
Union has become an established player in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts. We all acknowledge
that restoring and maintaining peace in Africa is
challenging. These efforts are being conducted in
difficult security environments, as we have sadly seen
in the recent attack near Bamako on peacekeepers
from the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. Here I would like to pay
tribute to the United Nations peacekeepers who have
lost their lives in the line of duty or who continue to put
their lives at risk to that end.
We have already witnessed the positive effects of
tangible cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union in a number of cases. Nowhere is that
more evident than Somalia, where the African Union
Mission in Somalia, working in collaboration with the
Somali National Army, has created the political space
that has helped to enable an environment for Somalia to
lay the groundwork for restoring stability.
The international community must be vigilant in
order to protect the hard-fought gains and investments
in post-conflict areas recovering from devastating
wars. Our commitment to supporting the positive
changes on the continent should be unwavering. It will
have far-reaching effects in improving the stability of
the region, building a lasting peace and normalizing
relations among the countries in the region. Again,
the international community, the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations all have a
role to play in helping to forge conditions that enable
reconciliation through the various instruments at their
disposal, including prevention, mediation and other
conflict resolution approaches. We acknowledge the
collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union as a model of cooperation that will
offer useful lessons in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts. In that regard, we commend
the African Union’s efforts to further strengthen all its
existing tools for diplomacy, including the Panel of the
Wise and the Continental Early Warning System.
I also want to underline, as have other speakers, the
importance of the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, as
well as the Arms Trade Treaty, which Turkey has signed
and hopes to ratify in the period ahead.
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Mediation is at its best when we complement one
another’s efforts and facilitate ongoing endeavours
rather than competing and duplicating. Together with
Finland, Turkey co-chairs the Group of Friends of
Mediation. With our extensive diplomatic network
across the continent, we will continue to support
diplomacy, mediation and other tools in the peaceful
settlement of disputes in Africa. Turkey will continue to
be an active member of the United Nations and a close
partner of the African Union in the pursuit of silencing
the guns and ending conflict on the African continent.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Bougacha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to convey to you, Mr. President, and to our
brother country of Equatorial Guinea, my sincere
congratulations on your successful presidency of the
Security Council in February. We also thank you for
organizing today’s open debate on cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union for the
implementation of the initiative on silencing the guns
in Africa by 2020.
I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, and Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, African Union
High Representative, for their briefings. I also want
to thank Mr. Vasu Gounden, who introduced the
programmes undertaken in this area by the African
Centre for the Constructive Resolution of Disputes.
African leaders announced their determination to
put an end to wars in Africa by 2020 and make Africa
a conflict-free zone. At the beginning of this month,
they adopted the African Union Master Road Map of
Practical Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa by
2020, thereby reaffirming their collective political
determination to prioritize the defusing of conflicts
and overcoming other major challenges, such as fragile
development, terrorism, organized crime, climate
change and illegal migration, among other things.
Tunisia actively participates in the efforts of
the African Union (AU) and the Security Council,
in particular, and the United Nations, in general, to
establish peace in Africa — from the 1960 Peacekeeping
Mission in Congo to the deployment of an air transport
unit in Mali at the beginning of this year. We have been
contributing to the peaceful settlement of conflicts for
decades. For example, a regional initiative launched
in 2017 by President Essebsi, in coordination with

S/PV. 8473

the Presidents of Algeria and Egypt, to support the
comprehensive political settlement in Libya and give
momentum to reconciliation and dialogue between
Libyan brothers, as well as to support the efforts of the
United Nations envoy in this fraternal country.
In addition to aligning itself with the statements
made on behalf of the Group of Arab States and
the Group of African States, Tunisia would like to
underscore the following points.
First, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2457 (2019), on supporting peace and
security in Africa as well as supporting the African
Union’s Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative. That
is an important positive message from the Security
Council, and the United Nations in general, of the very
strong support for the African Union and the efforts
of Africa and its leaders in conflict management. We
co-sponsored the resolution to reiterate our support for
all initiatives that ensure effective Council measures to
maintain international peace and security, including in
the African continent.
Secondly, the African Union currently has in place
the necessary resources, mechanisms and political will
to work in partnership with the Security Council in
this vital area. It also works to further strengthen the
existing means of preventive diplomacy at the African
level, including the Panel of the Wise, the Continental
Early Warning System and the African Peace and
Security Architecture.
Thirdly, resolving the root causes of conflict is a key
lever for protecting peoples and countries. We therefore
reiterate Africa’s efforts to achieve comprehensive,
sustainable and inclusive development; to reaffirm
democracy, the rule of law and good governance; and
to promote human rights and the role of women and
young people in all aspects of life.
Fourthly, the success of the Silencing the Guns
by 2020 initiative is a sine qua non condition for the
African continent to be able to fulfil the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the African Union’s
Agenda 2063.
Fifthly, institutional dialogue between the United
Nations and the AU constitutes a solid foundation for
an effective partnership that will be able to implement
shared priorities. Undoubtedly, the genuine reforms
undertaken simultaneously by both organizations
demonstrate a shared vision and the importance

19-0568269/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

of adapting institutions to current situations at the
international level.
The African Union Master Road Map of Practical
Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 is one of
the components of Africa’s common action. The Road
Map reflects Africa’s aspirations to put an end to wars on
the continent and focus on economic and development
issues. We appreciate the Security Council’s support
for the efforts made towards the adoption of resolution
2457 (2019), which, we hope, will be followed by other
resolutions along the same lines.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Eritrea.
Mr. Giorgio (Eritrea): Let me take this opportunity
to thank Equatorial Guinea for organizing this open
debate on the theme of silencing the guns in Africa,
an important and timely topic for our continent. I also
wish to thank His Excellency Mr. Simeon Oyono Esono
Angue, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Equatorial Guinea, for presiding over
this Security Council meeting. Let me also thank
Ms. DiCarlo, Mr. Lamamra and Mr. Gounden for their
important briefings.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Benin on behalf of the
Group of African States.
Africa is endowed with huge human and natural
potential that can transform the lives of its people.
The wave of decolonization in the twentieth century
brought hope for collective work in the continent to
ensure peace, justice and development and safeguard
the independence and interests of African nations. In
the intervening years, conflicts, political instability and
undue external influence and interventions undermined
national, subregional and continental efforts to translate
that huge endowment into durable peace and sustained
and inclusive development.
In Africa, from the East to the West and in the
North, extremism and terrorism are spreading — taking
advantage of State fragility and insecurity. The result
is deteriorating conditions for millions of Africans,
including intergenerational poverty and inequality,
migration, environmental degradation and recurrent
droughts. Nothing is more descriptive of the
continent’s situation than the fact that over 75 per cent
of the Council’s agenda is focused on Africa. Without
discounting the complex challenges for the causes
70/75

27/02/2019

and dynamics of inter-State and intra-State conflicts,
Eritrea is a firm believer in Africa’s potential to silence
the guns and afford its citizens the life that they deserve.
It requires political will to reclaim the priorities and the
narrative of the continent.
There is a critical need for African nations to have
a political space to chart their own development and
political paths. What Africa needs is fewer external
interventions and more partnerships. The region has
to strengthen its own mechanisms for prevention, the
peaceful resolution of conflicts and peacebuilding in
order to avert violent conflicts and prevent post-conflict
States from sliding back into conflict. Moreover, while
the role of the Security Council in the maintenance of
peace and security remains critical, it needs to revisit its
approaches and interventions in Africa. There is a need
for a paradigm shift. Trying to use the same approaches
time and again will not help achieve better results.
The Horn of Africa is an example of a region that
experienced decades of human suffering as a result of
conflicts, with peace eluding many of its citizens for
several decades. Yet, in recent months, the historic
peace deal between Eritrea and Ethiopia has resulted
in rapid positive changes marking the dawn of a bright
era of peace, partnership and development for the
entire region. The new-found peace has so far resulted
in the opening of the border, allowed the movement
of the two peoples across the common border, united
families, sparked the resumption of trade, opened
up communication links and avenues for cultural
exchange, and more. An important takeaway from
the new developments in the Horn of Africa is the
importance of leadership, political will and ownership
of conflicting parties to resolve their conflicts and
move forward.
The recent peace has also opened doors for the
consolidation of peace in the rest of the region. In the
tripartite agreement signed among Eritrea, Ethiopia
and Somalia, the countries agreed to cooperate in
advancing the goals of their people, while promoting
regional peace and security and building close
political, economic, social, cultural and security ties.
Moreover, at a separate meeting between the Presidents
of Djibouti and Eritrea, they pledged to open a new
chapter of cooperation in their relations. Those
developments are the result of a courageous choice
made to close the era of conflict and zero-sum games.
The new peaceful dynamics in the Horn of Africa will
give a huge boost for the ambitious objectives of the
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative. The citizens of
the Horn of Africa have embarked upon an arduous
journey of transforming the region for present and
future generations. Determined to get it right this time
around and make up for the lost decades and missed
opportunities for peace and economic progress, there is
a sense of great responsibility to ensure that what has
been achieved so far is inclusive and sustainable.
In conclusion, while we hail the rapid progress of
the past few months, we are mindful of the challenges
in the region as also envisioned in Agenda 2063 in
terms of sustainable development. We will be counting
on the Council’s solidarity to sustain the peace while
yearning for the same for the rest of the African region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): Please
allow me to begin by commending your initiative,
Sir, to convene today’s open debate on this important
topic. I would also like to thank all the briefers for
their informative interventions. The Republic of Korea
welcomes today’s unanimous adoption of resolution
2457 (2019). As a sponsor of the resolution, we reaffirm
our strong support for the African Union’s (AU)
Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative.
Achieving a conflict-free Africa by 2020 is a
very ambitious goal. However, over the past several
years, much progress has been made in preventing
and resolving conflicts in Africa. The list of successes
includes peace agreements between the Government of
the Central African Republic and 14 non-State armed
groups and between Ethiopia and Eritrea, signed earlier
this month and in September 2018, respectively. The role
of the African Union in promoting peace and security
on the continent has shown remarkable progress with
its strengthened ownership and capacity in the context
of the African Peace and Security Architecture.
Regional economic communities and mechanisms are
also playing an increasingly proactive role, as we saw
when the Economic Community of West African States
took the lead to help overcome political crises in the
Gambia in late 2016 and deployed forces to maintain
stability in the country.
Of course, conflicts in Africa are far from over,
and the challenges facing peace and security on
the continent are becoming increasingly complex.
Persevering in confronting such challenges is a task
that no single country, the United Nations or the AU,

S/PV. 8473

can take on alone. Rather, it calls for collective efforts
under a comprehensive political strategy that reflects
individual region- and country-specific situations. It
is against that backdrop that we believe the following
three points should be highlighted in our efforts to
silence the guns in Africa.
First, the partnership between the United Nations
and the AU must continue to be strengthened. Both
organizations should synergize their respective
strengths. While welcoming the Joint United NationsAU Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security, we believe that sharper focus should be
placed on joint efforts to facilitate sustainable political
solutions. A more effective division of labour among
the United Nations, regional organizations and other
stakeholders, and a closer alignment of the agenda
between the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council, will help establish effective and
durable joint decisions and actions. Furthermore,
sustainable and predictable funding for AU-led peace
operations will enhance their effectiveness, as would
their compliance with the agreed norms pertaining
to human rights, accountability and oversight. The
Republic of Korea, for its part, is currently providing
financial contributions to the AU Peace Fund. We
are supporting the Office of the African Union High
Representative for the Silencing the Guns by 2020 and
the implementation of the AU African Union Master
Road Map of Practical Steps for Silencing the Guns
in Africa by 2020. We will continue to make our due
contributions in those and other areas in future.
Secondly, as stipulated in the AU Master Road
Map, more efforts should be made to address the root
causes of conflicts, including economic and social
disparities. Many of the crises and conflicts in Africa
are being driven by poverty, human rights violations
and inequality. Countries in transition to post-conflict
reconstruction often relapse into violence, thereby
finding themselves trapped in a vicious cycle of conflict.
It is therefore critical to holistically address the entire
peace continuum, from prevention to peacebuilding,
to reconstruction and reintegration and to long-term
development. It is also crucial to strengthen the nexus
involving peace, development, and humanitarian
assistance, thereby eliminating the structural factors
that contribute to groups and communities relapsing
into violence.
It is against that backdrop that the Republic of
Korea, as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission

19-0568271/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

in 2017, took the lead in assisting the Gambia in
its peacebuilding efforts during its critical time of
transition. The Commission also held a joint meeting
with the Economic and Social Council to address the
social and economic dimensions of the challenges of
the Sahel, deliberating on how to better work with other
stakeholders to bring about a cross-pillar, coherent and
integrated approach to peacebuilding. Working with
the United Nations, the AU and Mali, my Government
also deployed a level 2 hospital in Gao, Mali, last year.
The hospital, which treats both military personnel and
civilians, aims to help the Malian Government fight
violent extremism by winning the hearts and minds
of the local population through improved provision of
basic services. Furthermore, as a member of the Steering
Committee of the Global Coalition for Reintegration, as
well as the Group of Friends of Reintegration of Child
Soldiers, the Republic of Korea will continue to play
an active role in improving and garnering international
support for the reintegration of former child soldiers
in Africa.
Thirdly, priority should be given to addressing the
illegal trafficking, circulation and use of small arms and
light weapons (SALW). The proliferation of SALW puts
civilians at risk, destabilizes communities and limits
economic and social development. Furthermore, those
weapons spill over into neighbouring societies, fuelling
conflict and criminal violence. Over the past 50 years,
Africa has suffered no less than 5 million fatalities, of
whom 90 per cent were civilians, owing to the scourge
of SALW. As such, comprehensive and collective
efforts are urgently called for. We must spare no effort
to fully implement United Nations arms embargoes,
as well as the relevant international and regional
instruments, including the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. The
Republic of Korea, through its financial contributions
to the AU Peace Fund, will continue to support AU
programmes to tackle the illegal proliferation of SALW.
It is also important to empower the Arms Trade Treaty
(ATT), which establishes common standards for the
international trade in conventional weapons, to which
the Republic of Korea is one of the original signatory
States and a State party. We firmly believe that the ATT
is a powerful tool against the illicit and destructive
trade in SALW.
As we hold today’s open debate, a significant effort
towards achieving a nuclear-free and peaceful Korean
72/75

27/02/2019

peninsula is taking place in Hanoi, Viet Nam. In
hoping that regional peace initiatives in various parts
of the world will inspire everyone in the quest for a
peaceful and prosperous future, the Republic of Korea
is committed to working closely with African States as
well as the United Nations, the AU and other regional
and subregional groups in moving towards our shared
goal of silencing the guns in Africa.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Woldeyes (Ethiopia): We express our
appreciation to the Equatorial Guinea presidency for
organizing this open debate on an important agenda
item the implementation of which has paramount
significance for the peace and stability of our continent.
We also commend your delegation, Mr. Minister, for its
important role in facilitating negotiations on resolution
2457 (2019), which was unanimously adopted by the
Council today. As a former African member of the
Security Council and Chair of the initial debates on
the issue of the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative
at the African Union (AU) level in 2013, Ethiopia is
pleased to have worked with you, Sir, in that endeavour.
We thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, and
Mr. Vasu Gounden, Founder and Executive Director of
the African Centre for the Constructive Resolution of
Dispute, for their briefings. We are also very grateful
for the briefing by Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, High
Representative of the African Union for Silencing the
Guns in Africa, whom we have always appreciated for
his distinguished service in the field.
Ethiopia associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of Benin on behalf of the Group
of African States.
The issue of silencing the guns in Africa is very
important. It is one of the building blocks of the African
Union’s Agenda 2063, its 2013 fiftieth-anniversary
solemn declaration, and its strong Vision 2020, aimed
at ending all conflicts on African soil by 2020. Today’s
debate builds on the important discussions held at
the level of the Council’s Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa, which
Ethiopia chaired in 2017 and 2018. We should also
recall that the three African members of the Security
Council, together with other partners, organized
an Arria Formula meeting on the topic last year.
Furthermore, the issue was on the agenda of the twelfth
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

annual consultation between members of the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council, in which the two Councils exchanged views
on their possible cooperation in implementing the AU
Master Roadmap of Practical Steps to Silence the Guns
in Africa by the Year 2020.
Achieving the goal of a conflict-free Africa — making
peace a reality for all our people, freeing the continent
of wars, civil conflicts, human rights violations,
humanitarian disasters and violent conflicts, and
preventing genocide — is an important commitment that
our leaders have made. As the concept note (S/2019/169,
annex) rightly indicates, that is indeed the overarching
objective guiding the efforts of the African Union to
ensure a peaceful and secure Africa while laying a solid
foundation for the implementation of Agenda 2063, the
AU’s strategic framework for inclusive growth and
sustainable development. The AU Agenda 2063 is in
line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the sustaining peace agenda, and it will contribute
significantly to helping to realize the solemn pledge in
the Charter of the United Nations to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war.
We note the measures so far taken to implement the
goal of silencing the guns in Africa by African Union
member States and regional mechanisms, as well as by
other relevant stakeholders. We particularly appreciate
the adoption of the African Union Master Roadmap in
the context of the implementation of the African Peace
and Security Architecture and the African Governance
Architecture. While we know that many have their
doubts about the realization of this noble objective,
there have indeed been recent positive developments
that have rekindled our hope and optimism about the
possibility of achieving the objective of silencing
the guns in Africa. In our region, the signing of the
revitalized peace agreement between the parties in
South Sudan has restored belief in the possibility of
ending the fighting that has been going on there for
the past five years. We are confident that the recently
reported clashes will not lead to an unravelling of the
situation in that sister country.
The rapprochement between Ethiopia and Eritrea
has not only ended the long-standing no-war-no-peace
situation between our two countries, it also heralds a
new era of regional peace and stability in the Horn of
Africa. Our two countries are working to solidify the
recent gains by taking concrete steps to cement the
relations between our peoples. Djibouti and Eritrea

S/PV. 8473

have also started to restore their bilateral relations,
thereby also strengthening regional peace and stability.
Ethiopia and the entire region remain actively engaged
in facilitating the normalization of relations between the
two countries. As the United Nations and the African
Union have recognized, those positive developments
represent a significant milestone with far-reaching
positive consequences for the Horn of Africa and in the
context of Vision 2020.
Besides this, the recent signing in Khartoum of a
global agreement for peace and national reconciliation
between the Central African Government and 14 armed
opposition groups is an essential and decisive step
forward, as Special Representative Parfait OnangaAnyanga recently told the Council (see S/PV.8467).
The peaceful holding of elections and transfer of
power in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
also a welcome development. Those and other positive
developments are not only encouraging us to do more
but also enabling us to renew our efforts to silence the
guns on our continent.
We know full well that there are no quick fixes
or easy solutions to the complex peace and security
challenges that we are facing., and that situation is
further compounded by new and emerging challenges.
That said, we have no option but to continue striving
to achieve this noble objective in order to realize our
aspirations for socioeconomic development. It requires
that we strengthen the African Peace and Security
Architecture, and the ongoing reform efforts in the
African Union are also expected to help strengthen
Africa’s capacity in the areas of peace and security. In
particular, the efforts being made to mobilize resources
from within the continent through the revitalized
Africa Union Peace Fund in order to finance Africa’s
needs in the area of prevention and mediation to ensure
long-term peace and security are a significant step in
the right direction.
We of course recognize that the building of a
conflict-free Africa essentially rests with us Africans.
That is why we will continue to strive to find home-grown
solutions to our problems. That notwithstanding,
international cooperation and partnership are vital
to effectively addressing every threat to peace and
security in Africa and to accelerating progress towards
silencing the guns. That is the fundamental reason
that we believe the partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations is an absolute necessity.
Implementing the important resolution (2457 (2019))

19-0568273/75

S/PV.8473

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

27/02/2019

that the Council adopted earlier today will certainly go
a long way to enhancing the partnership of the African
Union and the United Nations in the areas of peace and
security by strengthening their efforts to coordinate
their engagement in a mutually supportive manner
across the range of possible responses to conflict,
from prevention and mediation, to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, and to post-conflict recovery and,
subsequently, development.

The fluid collaboration in the Central African
Republic between the United Nations and the
African Union was paramount in the signing of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
Bangui earlier this month. The support given by the
Peacebuilding Support Office to the mediation, led by
the African Initiative, illustrates the commitment of the
United Nations to more flexible engagement in building
and sustaining peace in Africa.

In conclusion, we very much hope to see our
organizations’ enhanced cooperation and partnership
in the coming years, and we appreciate the dedicated
leadership of both Secretary-General António Guterres
and Chairperson Moussa Faki Mahamat in that regard.
We also hope the Council will move from rhetoric
to action by taking concrete steps to strengthen its
cooperation and partnership with the African Union
Peace and Security Council. The adoption of resolution
2457 (2019) is a very important step. We trust that the
Council will take a further decisive step towards the
financing of African-led peace support operations in
due course.

We wish to highlight the indispensable role played
by women in conflict prevention and resolution, as well
as in peacebuilding. In that regard, Brazil welcomes
the appointment of a Special Envoy on Women, Peace
and Security by the African Union to facilitate the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We also
hail the fact that 23 African countries have already
developed their own national action plans to implement
that agenda. Heeding the calls of civil society and
young people can also contribute to better-tailored
engagement efforts and more inclusive agreements,
which will surely last longer.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Giacomelli Da Silva (Brazil): At the outset,
allow me to thank the Permanent Mission of Equatorial
Guinea for organizing this open debate, as well as all
the briefers and delegations for their valuable inputs
reflecting on the ways in which the United Nations
can contribute to the high aspiration of silencing the
guns in Africa. I would like to highlight two positive
innovations in the way that the United Nations is
contributing to the peace process in Africa — the
acknowledgement of the primacy of politics and the
commitment to more continuous engagement aimed at
improving the structural foundations of peace.
Brazil has always been a resolute supporter of the
primacy of politics. We welcome the fact that there
are currently peace agreements serving as platforms
for reconciliation and political dialogue in all the
Unites Nations peacekeeping settings in Africa. As
shown during the negotiations of the peace agreements
in Mali and South Sudan, regional actors and
neighbouring countries often have a unique perspective
of conflict dynamics and can play a decisive role in
facilitating discussions and bridging positions between
conflicting parties.
74/75

In a growing number of debates at the United
Nations we are finding overwhelming support for
yet another important innovation in our collective
contribution to peace efforts in Africa — a shift from
a crisis-oriented approach towards more continuous
engagement in longer-term efforts to build lasting
peace. For instance, it is essential that, after the signing
of peace agreements, their implementation receive
strong support from the international community.
When peace dividends are concretely experienced by
local communities, the risk of a relapse into conflict
decreases considerably.
From our experience presiding over the GuineaBissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
we can attest that communities that have experienced
conflict often have pressing and structural demands
in terms of reconstruction and development. They
therefore benefit greatly from sustained international
support during a sequence of election cycles and
Government administrations.
That is why it is so important that we remain
committed to the strengthening of the peacebuilding
architecture, in particular to achieving a quantum leap
in the Peacebuilding Fund, and in that regard as well
there is room for deepening our collaboration with
African institutions that specialize in peacebuilding,
19-05682

27/02/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

such as the recently created African Union Post-Conflict
Reconstruction and Development Centre in Cairo.
The ideal of silencing the guns in Africa indeed
seemed to be an ambitious goal when it was established
back in 2013, during the celebration of the fiftieth
anniversary of pan-Africanism. Brazil is proud of
having participated in that process at the highest level
and having witnessed such an inspiring demonstration
of African solidarity.
It is even more inspiring to know that we have
already come a long way since then and to realize that

S/PV. 8473

the Vision 2020 finally appears to be within our grasp.
Through the innovative cooperation channels between
the United Nations and African institutions, we have
achieved functional tools to meet peace and security
needs across all phases of the peace continuum. Our
best hope is that, by reinforcing our cooperation and
strengthening non-military means to address security
challenges, we might well realize the promise of an
African continent free of conflict. What better legacy
could we leave for generations to come.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

19-0568275/75
