United Nations

S/PV.5512

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-first year

5512th meeting
Tuesday, 15 August 2006, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Nana Effah-Apenteng . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Estremé
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Gayama
Mr. Faaborg-Anderson
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Oshima
Ms. Tincopa
Mr. Al-Nasser
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Matulay
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Manongi
Ms. Wolcott Sanders

Agenda
The situation in Timor-Leste
Report of the Secretary-General on Timor-Leste pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1690 (2006) (S/2006/628)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

06-46776 (E)

*0646776*

S/PV.5512

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Timor-Leste
Report of the Secretary-General on TimorLeste pursuant to Security Council resolution
1690 (2006) (S/2006/628)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Brazil, Cape Verde, Cuba,
Finland, Indonesia, Malaysia, New Zealand, the
Philippines, Portugal, Singapore and Timor-Leste, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Guterres
(Timor-Leste), took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: On behalf of the Security
Council, I extend a warm welcome to Mr. José Luis
Guterres, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of Timor-Leste.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the course of the Council’s prior consultations, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Ian Martin, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Martin to take a seat at the Council
table.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 11 August 2006 from the
Permanent Representative of Cape Verde to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:

2

“In my capacity as the Permanent
Representative of Cape Verde and a member of
the
Community
of
Portuguese-Speaking
Countries (CPLP), I have the honour to request
that the Executive Secretary of the CPLP, His
Excellency Ambassador Luis Fonseca, be allowed
to participate, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the
United Nations Charter and the provisional rules
of procedure of the Security Council, in the
Council’s public meeting on Tuesday, 15 August
2006, regarding the item entitled ‘The situation
in Timor-Leste’.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite His Excellency Mr. Luis Fonseca, Executive
Secretary of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries, to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Fonseca to take a seat at the side of
the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2006/628 and S/2006/580, which contain
the reports of the Secretary-General on Timor-Leste
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1690 (2006)
and on justice and reconciliation for Timor-Leste,
respectively.
I should like to draw the attention of members to
documents S/2006/620 and S/2006/651, which contain
the texts of letters dated 4 and 14 August 2006 from the
Charge d’affaires ad interim of Timor-Leste addressed
to the President of the Security Council and to the
Secretary-General, respectively.
At this meeting the Security Council will hear a
statement by Mr. Ian Martin, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste. I now give him the
floor.
Mr. Martin: The Council is being asked to
mandate a larger United Nations mission in TimorLeste after successive downsizing — from the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor to

06-46776

S/PV.5512

the United Nations Mission in East Timor to the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste and its previously
proposed successor office. This might be seen as a
reversion to an earlier stage of United Nations
engagement with Timor-Leste, but I want to stress that
that is not the case. Timor-Leste is today a sovereign
State that struggled hard for its right to selfdetermination and its independence. Its second
constitutional Government, headed by Prime Minister
José Ramos-Horta, represents a political compromise
forged by Timorese to manage the most serious crisis
faced by the new State and to steer the country towards
its first post-independence parliamentary and
presidential elections.
The international support provided to the young
institutions of Timor-Leste has achieved a great deal.
Increasingly, it is being provided not only through the
successive missions but by United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes and by bilateral and multilateral
donors. The proposals in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2006/628) would not reverse that process.
What they envisage is a more effectively coordinated
partnership between Timor-Leste and the international
community: a compact, which will be Timorese-led, to
ensure that its Government’s own programmes, funded
by its growing budgetary resources, are complemented
in the most helpful ways by international assistance
and advice. The compact should ensure too that the
international community, in providing that assistance
and advice, does so in a context of coordination and
complementarity, not one of confusion or competition
among donors. Within the United Nations mission
itself only a small group of civilian advisers would
promote that coordination, principally in areas most
crucial to the mission’s key roles: the governance of
the security sector, the administration of justice and the
functioning of democratic institutions.
Assisting and ensuring the credibility of the 2007
elections will be a central task for the new mission’s
first year. But we are by now well aware that even the
most successful elections are only one element of
building a democratic State. We are aware too that the
time-scale for developing institutional capacity,
especially in areas such as policing and the justice
system, is a long one.
The central failure revealed by the recent crisis
has been in the security sector, and the reconstitution
of the police service of Timor-Leste is the core task
requested and proposed for the new mission, together

06-46776

with executive international policing in the interim.
Regrettably, the task is a substantial one, because the
diagnosis undertaken by our assessment mission made
clear the weakness of the police throughout the
country, and not only in Dili, where it is so keenly felt
by internally displaced families today. But it is a task
that must also be seen in a wider context. A
fundamental review of the whole security sector is
required to clarify the roles of the defence force and
the police in relation to each other, together with
strengthened Ministries of the Interior and Defence, to
ensure sound institutional development and civilian
oversight.
The challenge to the justice system as it confronts
serious crimes, old and new, is greater than ever. The
role of both official institutions and non-governmental
organizations to protect human rights needs further
strengthening. Our proposals would ensure that
international assistance to those key related tasks is
coordinated in one pillar of the new mission.
Timor-Leste’s new Government, aided by the
Church and civil society, is embarking upon the twin
challenges of dialogue across political divisions and of
community reconciliation, which must address societal
tensions, in particular between those from the west and
those from the east of the country. The new mission
must be ready to support that process.
The demand for accountability for those
responsible for crimes committed in the course of the
crisis, as part of the necessary basis for reconciliation,
is a strong one. The crucial work of the Independent
Special Commission of Inquiry will provide an
objective starting point. Some have drawn a connection
with the unfinished business of both justice and
reconciliation for the serious crimes of 1999 and
before. The proposals for the new mission incorporate
a role in assisting with the implementation of the
recommendations of the Secretary-General’s separate
report (S/2006/580) on justice and reconciliation.
The moments when Timor-Leste is in the
international spotlight are rare and fleeting. But in each
of its discussions of the response of the United Nations
to the recent crisis, members of the Council have been
united in their willingness to assist the country at a
time of difficulty. Today I urge the Council to send a
strong message to the people of Timor-Leste that the
renewed determination of the international community
to stand by them will indeed be a sustained

3

S/PV.5512

commitment, by supporting this and all other
recommendations set out in the Secretary-General’s
report for a new mission — which correspond, I
believe, to the appeal of Timor-Leste’s Government
and people.
The President: I thank Mr. Martin for his
statement.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes,
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate a text in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council.
Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): We
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
his briefing. We also wish to congratulate His
Excellency Mr. José Luis Guterres on his new
appointment as Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Timor-Leste, and we welcome him to
the Council.
The United Republic of Tanzania witnessed the
agony of the people of Timor-Leste following the
events of the past three months. Those regrettable
events have also focused international attention on the
urgent needs of Timor-Leste. What has become clearer
through the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2006/628) and the briefing that we received this
morning is that, even without those sad events, TimorLeste’s needs would be immense and challenging. The
magnitude of the challenge is such that Timor-Leste
cannot confront it alone.
It is true that the people of Timor-Leste need
committed friends and partners; but they also need the
United Nations. This Organization, and especially the
Security Council, can be proud of the way they have
assisted the people of Timor-Leste on their march to
self-determination and independence. It was a
worthwhile investment.
But if that invaluable investment is to make a
lasting contribution to the growth and stability of
Timor-Leste, the work aimed at supporting effective
and credible security, administration and judicial
institutions will have to be carried to its conclusion.

4

We believe the United Nations has an important role in
this regard.
It was therefore with great relief that we took
note of the letter (S/2006/620, annex) from the Prime
Minister of Timor-Leste, His Excellency José RamosHorta, informing us that the emergency facing his
country is at an end. His appeal that it is now important
to focus attention on the establishment of a new United
Nations peacekeeping mission in Timor-Leste is, in our
view, the most desirable way of providing Timor-Leste
with the support of the international community and of
preserving its sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Peacebuilding and the building of effective
national institutions of governance and administration
can be a daunting task. Nonetheless, it is one in which
the United Nations has significant expertise, based on
country-led and country-owned initiatives. In this
regard, the future of Timor-Leste and its well-being
very much depend on the support the international
community can extend to it through the United
Nations.
The assessment mission has established that this
future will require the reconciliation of communities
deeply divided by violence; the building of a truly
national army and police force; the establishment of
the rule of law, with a competent and impartial system
of justice; the addressing of human rights abuses; and a
focus on what could be the core of the problem:
poverty.
Obviously, this is a daunting job — a complex
responsibility that will require contributions of
resources and expertise from the international
community. However, the United Nations must play a
central role in the support of Timor-Leste while urging
individual Governments and regional and international
organizations to do likewise. The Council can show the
way. Moreover, the United Republic of Tanzania will
support such a course of action.
Mr. Estremé (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste, Ambassador José Luis
Guterres. We congratulate him on the assumption of his
new post, and we wish him all the best in his future
tasks. I would like to assure Mr. Guterres that
Argentina will continue to support Timor-Leste as it
strives to achieve its fullest potential, as we have done
since 1999.

06-46776

S/PV.5512

I would like to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, Mr. Ian Martin, for
his briefing, as well as for his efforts over recent
months to resolve the crisis in that country.
The
report
of
the
Secretary-General,
(S/2006/628), introduced by Mr. Martin, offers a
comprehensive and precise account of the situation in
Timor-Leste and contains detailed proposals on a
United Nations future presence there with which my
country, in general, agrees. Argentina fully supports the
recommendations of the Secretary-General and
endorses the establishment of a multidimensional
integrated United Nations mission in Timor-Leste for
the period of one year, with the mandate, concept of
operations and structure proposed in the report.
We welcome the fact that those recommendations
adequately reflect the request made by the Dili
Government, through Prime Minister Ramos-Horta in
his letter of 4 August (S/2006/620, annex). The United
Nations presence should fully respect the sovereignty
of Timor-Leste and the specificities of that country. It
is essential that the entire process be led by the
Timorese people themselves.
The fact that we are considering the
establishment of a new mission in Timor-Leste should
not be interpreted to mean that earlier efforts failed. On
the contrary, the achievements since 1999 were
noteworthy. However, we have learned that
peacebuilding and nation-building processes are longterm tasks. The international community has the
responsibility not only to renew its commitment to
Timor-Leste, but also to continue that commitment in
the long term.
The forthcoming months will be of the greatest
importance for the consolidation of the Timorese
institutions. The general elections to be held in 2007
will be the principal milestone in that process. The
support of the United Nations will be essential if
success is to be ensured.
The justice sector and the police were two of the
areas most affected during the recent crisis. For that
reason, we believe that most of the international
assistance efforts should focus on those areas.
We warmly welcome the Secretary-General’s
report on justice and reconciliation (S/2006/580),
requested by the Council in September 2005. Argentina
supports the inclusion in the mandate of the new

06-46776

United Nations mission concrete provisions regarding
the implementation of the recommendations contained
in the report. We believe that the draft resolution to be
considered by the Council in coming days should
adequately reflect those aspects.
We support all the efforts being made by TimorLeste and Indonesia to achieve reconciliation. The
Commission of Truth and Friendship could be a
valuable mechanism in this regard. However, we
believe that both Governments should make every
effort to further strengthen the credibility of the
Commission, in particular by reviewing the amnesty
clause, in order to ensure that that mechanism
conforms with international human rights standards.
The events of April and May demonstrated that
the security situation in Timor-Leste continues to be
extremely fragile. We are pleased to note that the
recommendations of the Secretary-General envisage
the establishment of a mission comprising all the
components necessary to face those complex security
challenges.
The emphasis of the new mission should be
placed on the deployment of a robust police component
to support the maintenance of internal law and order
and to contribute to the training of the Timorese
national police. Given that elections are scheduled for
2007, the continued presence of that component will be
of the utmost importance. For that reason, we should
consider its deployment for at least one year.
I wish further to state that Argentina supports the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that the new
mission include a small military capacity under United
Nations command and control; we believe that the
proposed numbers and mandate are appropriate.
In retrospect, we can say that the Security
Council’s decision to accelerate the withdrawal of the
previous peacekeeping operation in Timor-Leste was
premature. Drawing from these lessons, the Council
should speedily respond to Timor-Leste’s current needs
and should act on the basis of the recommendations of
the Secretary-General. That would send a clear
message of support to the people and the Government
of Timor-Leste.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
should like to begin by aligning myself with the
statement to be delivered later by the Permanent

5

S/PV.5512

Representative of Finland on behalf of the European
Union.
In welcoming our former colleague José Luis
Guterres, I should like to congratulate him on his
elevation to the post of Foreign Minister of TimorLeste. Like others, we are grateful to Ian Martin for
leading the assessment mission to Timor-Leste, and to
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2006/628).
We welcome the Secretary-General’s proposal for
a compact between Timor-Leste and the international
community in order to reorient the existing national
economic plan and coordinate the activities of the
Government, the United Nations and other actors in
building the capacity of State and Government
institutions. A revised approach will be essential to
address the political origin of the recent crisis. We
therefore support the recommendation made by the
assessment team for United Nations support during the
elections, in order to reassure the population and the
international community that the elections are free and
fair. We can thus endorse the proposal for a mission to
coordinate a comprehensive review of the security
sector, assessing options for the development of both
the defence force and the police service. That will be
vital in achieving sustainable peace in Timor-Leste.
We agree that the reconstitution of the police
service of Timor-Leste is the core task. We therefore
support the proposal for a temporary blue-hatted
executive police force within the mission. That police
component should be of an appropriate size. Following
the recent crisis, police forces outside of Dili have
continued to function reasonably well, so there should
be no need to return to the levels of international police
that were seen in 2001. It is important that a clear
timetable be established for handing back executive
functions to the police service and for a drawdown
following next year’s elections.
As a bridging measure, we need the continued
presence of an international stabilization force in the
short term to provide support to the follow-on mission
which we will be deploying, I hope, as a result of this
discussion.
The Australians and others are making a valuable
contribution on the ground. The national command
structures allow them to respond flexibly to changes as
they take place.

6

Putting in place the force-generation mandate of a
United Nations force would, in our view, inevitably be
time-consuming and, in practice, unnecessary given the
presence on the ground of the partners and the
requirements for the interim. We welcome the
coordinated efforts between partners on the ground
involved in the international stabilization force and the
United Nations mission. We favour its providing
appropriate guarantees to the mission; but it should be
left there.
It is not clear to me that a United Nations military
liaison office needs to be included in the mission to
assist the Border Patrol Unit in the planning and
conduct of border security operations. Border tensions
seem no longer to be a source of instability in TimorLeste, as evidenced by the absence of incidents during
the recent crisis. Given that the initial focus of the
mission will be on policing and security-sector reform,
it will be important that the mission have strong
leadership with an appropriate background in that area.
The United Kingdom endorses the findings and
the recommendation in the Secretary-General’s report
on justice and reconciliation. The follow-on mission
should assist the Timorese authorities to ensure
accountability for human rights abuses and redress for
victims. We support the Secretary-General’s intention
to establish a human rights and transitional justice unit
that would ensure effective follow-up to and
implementation of the recommendations of the
Independent Special Commission of Inquiry for TimorLeste and other transitional justice mechanisms,
including the process relating to the Commission on
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation (CAVR). The
transition of all justice-sector actors currently working
under the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste
(UNOTIL) should go ahead, but I note of course that
there are concerns regarding potential duplication with
the United Nations Development Programme.
Since both gender and youth issues have the
potential to lead to future instability, it is important
that gender and youth aspects be incorporated into the
work of a follow-on mission.
I would conclude by underlining the importance
of a public information component in the new mission
to avoid a repetition of the escalation of panic that
occurred during the recent crisis, which was partly
caused by rumour filling the void left by a lack of
reliable information.

06-46776

S/PV.5512

In support of Ian Martin’s concluding remarks, let
me say that we all need the Security Council to send a
signal of continuing commitment to Timor-Leste, a
signal that that commitment will be sustained until the
job of the international community is done.

President of the Security Council. That is true also of
the objectives of most of the proposals contained in the
report of the Japanese Government mission, which was
recently introduced by the representative of Japan and
of which my delegation takes note.

Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Ian Martin for introducing the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2006/628); his
briefing was illuminating for Council members in the
context of this debate. We take this opportunity also to
welcome Mr. José Luis Guterres, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Timor-Leste, who is here representing his
Government. His presence attests to the strength of the
contacts between the United Nations and his country.

My delegation also expresses its support for the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
report on justice and reconciliation in Timor-Leste
(S/2006/580) and for any other approach taken to
provide the new United Nations mission with the
resources it needs to accomplish its tasks in order to
ensure a swift and methodical transfer of full
responsibility for the conduct of national affairs to the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste.

Despite all the caution engendered by the recent
sad experience in Timor-Leste, my delegation wishes
to note recent positive developments, seen in particular
in the gradual return to peace and the swearing in of
the new Government just a few days after the swearing
in of Mr. José Ramos-Horta as Prime Minister. These
positive developments are due to the sense of
responsibility demonstrated by the authorities and the
entire people of East Timor and to the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, the entire staff of the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL), United
Nations
agencies
and
non-governmental
organizations — without whom this progress would not
have been made.

It is clear that the success of the mission to be
established will depend not only on the resolve of the
people who will lead it, but also on an assessment of
past actions and the hoped-for results. In other words,
while it is understood that the United Nations must
help this new member of the international community
take its first steps, not direct it, the United Nations —
and thus the Security Council — still has the
responsibility to avoid any obstacles that could arise in
its path.

We must also recall the decisive action by
international forces deployed at the request of the
Government of Timor-Leste and with the agreement of
the international community, in particular those
deployed by the Governments of Portugal, Australia,
New Zealand and Malaysia.
Thanks to the common effort of the international
community, Timor-Leste has been put back on track.
Today, the main challenge that the Government and the
people of Timor-Leste must face together is that of
consolidating what has been achieved, sending strong
signals in order to prevent a repetition of past errors.
My delegation supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to set up a new multidimensional,
integrated United Nations peacekeeping mission in
Timor-Leste. Indeed, the structure and mandate of the
mission as proposed by the Secretary-General are
consistent with the wishes of the expressed by the
Government in its recent correspondence with the

06-46776

Therefore, with regard, for example, to the
judicial proceedings against the perpetrators of crimes
in Timor-Leste who are currently living in Indonesia,
we should have discussions with the country’s
authorities to identify the best ways to combat
impunity while respecting both international norms in
that area and the sovereignty of every country.
As for the security problems in Timor-Leste,
which we know are a sensitive issue, my delegation
earnestly hopes that consideration will be given to the
proposal to gradually replace the international forces
now on the ground with a strong presence of United
Nations police supported by a military unit under
United Nations command — which in turn will be
replaced eventually by the Timorese national police
and army.
We must not only take account of the experience
acquired on the ground by the international forces, as
has been said, but also better meet the expectations
expressed by the Government of Timor-Leste by
seeking consensus on the best way to ensure security in
the run-up to the critical period of next year’s
elections — a way that is in the interests of the

7

S/PV.5512

Timorese people and that is agreed by all the parties
concerned.

prevent further
peacebuilding.

In conclusion, we believe it is important to stress
that, in the context of the new United Nations mission,
the importance of the security aspect should not
obscure the need to combat the deep-seated causes of
the crisis — particularly unemployment and poverty,
which affect a significant portion of the population,
especially young people and women. Timor-Leste also
needs schools and hospitals — in short, social
infrastructure. My delegation therefore supports any
proposal to establish an international assistance
programme, including through the initiative of a
“compact” for Timor-Leste.

In that context, the Chinese delegation believes
that the Government, national leaders and other social
and political forces in Timor-Leste should put their
national interests first and engage in good-faith
dialogue within the constitutional framework, seeking
common ground and setting aside differences in order
to create favourable conditions for next year’s
presidential and parliamentary elections. Here, the
United Nations and the international community must
play an active and constructive mediating role.

Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2006/628) and
Special Envoy Ian Martin for his briefing. We would
also like to welcome His Excellency Mr. José Luis
Guterres, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of Timor-Leste, who is here among us once again at
this meeting. We wish to pay a special tribute to
Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, who was unable to
attend this meeting, and to the entire staff of the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) for
continuing their work under extremely difficult
conditions. We also express our appreciation and
thanks to the military police from Australia, Malaysia,
New Zealand and Portugal for helping to maintain
order in Timor-Leste.
It was with the assistance of the United Nations
that Timor-Leste achieved independence and began the
process of nation-building. People often refer to TimorLeste as the child of the United Nations. The United
Nations thus bears special responsibilities and
obligations with regard to Timor-Leste.
Over the past few months, the Security Council
has been closely following the developments in TimorLeste and has often held discussions and consultations
about the situation, from which the Council has sought
to draw lessons. The Council has also been working
out appropriate decisions as to what actions should
now be taken in Timor-Leste by the United Nations and
the rest of the international community to help the
country maintain stability and promote development so
as to consolidate as much as possible the progress it
has made since independence and nationhood and to

8

reversals

in

the

momentum

of

Secondly, the United Nations and the
international community must work out an effective
long-term assistance plan for Timor-Leste. It must be
said that for some time, while the success story of
Timor-Leste was being enthusiastically told and retold,
people easily overlooked the fact that the country had
existed for only four years. In effect, it was starting
from scratch in terms of human resources and
institutional capacity-building and could not possibly
stand on its own overnight. Therefore, China is in
favour of sending a new multidimensional integrated
mission to Timor-Leste and helping to establish a
“compact” between Timor-Leste and the international
community.
Thirdly, with regard to the new mission’s
composition and mandate, we must configure the
mission so that it will be able to address the root causes
of the crisis. The views of the Government of TimorLeste must also be fully respected and taken into
account. In the short term, in order to improve and
maintain security, it is imperative that we urgently
address the potential danger of widespread weapons,
help to reorganize the military and police sectors and
rationalize their relationship, supporting the new
mission by providing it with robust police functions
and a small military component.
Fourthly, the international community should
continue to encourage and support Timor-Leste in
developing long-term friendly relations with its
neighbours. It is gratifying to note that two of its large
neighbours have played a positive role in calming the
unrest in Timor-Leste. We hope that the Truth and
Friendship Commission will continue to work actively
to achieve results at an early date and appropriately
resolve the outstanding issues.

06-46776

S/PV.5512

As an Asian country, we are very concerned about
the stability and development of Timor-Leste, but also
about how the situation in the country might affect the
South-East Asian region as a whole. During the
turmoil, the Chinese medical team continued to carry
out its duties and remained at its post. Our two
Governments recently signed an agreement to send a
second medical team to Timor-Leste. In the future, we
will continue to provide assistance within our capacity
and to play our part in helping to achieve stability and
development in Timor-Leste.
Mr. Faaborg-Andersen (Denmark): I would like
to thank the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy, Ian
Martin, for his briefing. I would also like to welcome
José Luis Guterres to the Security Council and to
congratulate him on his assumption of the post of
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste.
Denmark fully associates itself with the statement
to be made shortly by Finland on behalf of the
European Union. I would only, at this stage, like to add
a few points.
The security situation in Timor-Leste has
stabilized, thanks in large part to the troops provided
by Australia, Portugal, Malaysia and New Zealand, and
thanks to the recent reconciliation efforts and political
progress. Nevertheless, Timor-Leste’s security and
political situation remains fragile and some of the key
institutions, including the Timorese police, are no
longer functioning. Significant international assistance
is therefore required to bring the peacebuilding effort
in Timor-Leste back on track, and we support the
Secretary-General’s idea of a Timor-Leste compact.
It is clear that the future mission in Timor-Leste
will need to be sufficiently large to effectively address
such urgent issues as the need for a United Nations
police force, training of the national police and support
to ensure that next year’s elections will be free and fair.
There is also an urgent need for institutional support,
particularly in the justice sector, the rapid
implementation of quick-impact projects and
sustainable economic development, in large part
through assistance from traditional development
agencies and bilateral donors. Despite the increase in
the international presence, it is, at the same time,
important that the Timorese remain in the driver’s seat
and that any advice and assistance be provided on a
sustainable basis.

06-46776

We strongly support the Secretary-General’s
recommendations on the issues of human rights and
justice and reconciliation, including the proposal for
the mandate of the new mission to include assistance
for the resumption of the investigative functions of the
former Serious Crimes Unit. However, we believe that
the international support and legitimacy provided to the
bilateral Commission of Truth and Friendship should
be conditioned on a revision of its amnesty clause. As
mentioned by the Secretary-General, that clause is
currently inconsistent with the requirements of
international law, which bars amnesty for serious
violations of international law. The new mission should
support efforts that ensure that justice will prevail for
past and future crimes, including those that took place
earlier this year and led to the recent crisis.
Many challenges remain, including to address the
root causes behind the recent violence. It is our hope
that the future United Nations mission will allow
Timor-Leste to establish sustainable institutions as well
as sustainable peace and development.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): Like others, I wish to thank
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ian
Martin, for his briefing. I welcome the presence in this
Chamber of our former colleague, Ambassador
Guterres, and wish him well in the discharge of his
new important duties as Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Timor-Leste.
I wish to reiterate our appreciation to the four
Governments — Australia, New Zealand, Malaysia and
Portugal — for the contribution they are making with
their security forces to the stabilization of Timor-Leste,
as well as to the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste
(UNOTIL) in Dili, led by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Hasegawa, for its
contributions.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
with his recommendations on the shape and mission
mandate for a post-UNOTIL United Nations presence
in Timor-Leste in the aftermath of the recent turmoil in
the country. We also commend the assessment task
carried out by Mr. Martin of the political, security,
social and economic situation in the country, which
formed the basis for the conclusions of the SecretaryGeneral’s report.
The report of the Secretary-General concludes
that the recent series of violent incidents were
triggered by political conflict in the Government,

9

S/PV.5512

which expanded and came to involve the security
organs of the country and caused extensive
displacement of innocent civilians. Significantly, the
report noted that, while there have been some gains in
certain areas, including the promotion of democratic
institutions and governance since the independence of
the country four years ago, the Government and society
still face enormous challenges, such as, among other
things, institution-building in the security sector and in
the judicial field, establishment of the rule of law,
fighting poverty, and dealing with the high degree of
youth unemployment, which contributed to the crisis
and aggravated it once it began.
The Japanese Government, for its part, sent a
mission to Timor-Leste following the turmoil and
issued a report whose conclusions match in large
measure the assessment and conclusions contained in
the Secretary-General’s report.
We believe that, in considering the appropriate
shape, size and mandate of a successor mission to
UNOTIL, it is important to fully take into account
those conclusions and the assessment of the SecretaryGeneral. In that context, we wish to emphasize a few
points as particularly important.
First, we consider that the basic assumptions of
and the policy line followed by the Security Council in
Timor-Leste for the past few years have proved in the
main to be a correct approach. That policy is aimed at
promoting, as much as possible, the independence,
self-reliance and ownership of the Government and its
people as much as possible; fostering the gradual
transition from a peacekeeping to a peacebuilding
mission, while taking local conditions fully into
account; and encouraging broad-based partnership with
various actors for sustainable development. We do not
believe that the recent turmoil occurred because of the
United Nations policy, which, in our view, helped the
people of Timor-Leste to make important gains within
a relatively short period of time, starting almost from
scratch.
However, that is not to say that what the United
Nations has done in all its areas of involvement has
been perfect. There were obvious shortcomings, and it
is important to recognize them and learn lessons from
the experience. For example, we believe that we could
have prevented the recent outbreak of violence, or at
least minimized its consequences, if we had been able

10

to discern and promptly address the fragility of the
political and security system of Timor-Leste.
Secondly,
the
Secretary-General’s
report
underlines the importance of not trying to reverse,
because of the recent internal disturbances, the transfer
of responsibilities that has already taken place. The
responsibilities have been gradually handed over to the
Government of Timor-Leste, to United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes and other
development partners, as appropriate. That transition,
the Secretary-General reports suggests, should
continue to be encouraged. We fully endorse that
notion, which we believe should inform, as an
important guiding principle, the consideration of the
follow-on United Nations mission.
Thirdly, Japan fully supports the proposal of the
Secretary-General to develop the idea of a compact and
to promote the conclusion of such a compact between
Timor-Leste and international development partners
upon the initiative of Timor-Leste.
We also believe that, in order to ensure the
effective operation of a follow-on mission in TimorLeste, and even to ensure optimal coordination and
cooperation among key participants within the
framework of such a compact, an appropriate
mechanism, such as a policy consulting council, would
need to be considered. The Japanese Government
mission’s report mentioned previously has made such a
recommendation as a useful facilitation tool for
effective coordination and cooperation among actors,
which should include the United Nations, the
Government of Timor-Leste and other international
partners. We would like to encourage the United
Nations to consult with the Government of Timor-Leste
on such an idea at an appropriate time.
UNOTIL’s mandate will expire on 20 August, and
the Council will need to agree on a draft resolution on
a follow-on mission. The Core Group countries on
Timor-Leste have been discussing elements of the draft
resolution, drawing on the Secretary-General’s report.
Japan, as the lead country on that issue in the
Council, will continue to facilitate those discussions in
the Core Group and to conduct consultations as well
with the members of the Council, in order to proceed
with the preparation of a draft resolution. Our aim is to
work on the draft resolution with a view to its adoption
by consensus by the end of this week.

06-46776

S/PV.5512

Currently, there appears to be a broad agreement
of views on establishing a multidimensional mission,
largely
based
on
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendations, including the police and civilian
adviser components of the new mission. There is still
some significant divergence of opinion on how to
handle its military component. Some argue that it
should remain under a bilateral arrangement, while
others contend that it should be brought under the
United Nations Blue Helmets.
Japan’s view is that, for the sake of ensuring
operational effectiveness, it would be preferable to
utilize, to the fullest extent possible, the international
security forces that have been provided on a bilateral
arrangement. Nevertheless, we will continue to
facilitate discussions on the issue, aimed at arriving at
an option that is agreeable to all the partners.
Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): France
aligns itself with the statement that will be made by
Finland on behalf of the European Union.
France would like to express its appreciation for
the report of the Secretary-General and to thank
Mr. Ian Martin, his Special Envoy, for the excellent
work he has carried out on behalf of the United
Nations.
Timor-Leste
experienced
violent
security
disturbances immediately following the withdrawal of
the United Nations presence from its territory. Those
disturbances led to the complete disintegration of the
police force in Dili. Mr. Ian Martin has also informed
us that the Timorese police has also been much
weakened in the provinces and that Timorese society is
more divided now than it was following independence.
That bitter assessment leads us to the conclusion
that there is a need for a long-term recommitment by
the United Nations in Timor-Leste. In that respect,
France supports the recommendation made by the
Secretary-General in his report, which we believe to be
consistent with what is needed in terms of the mandate
and the composition of the mission, as well as with the
requests that have been made by the Timorese Prime
Minister, Mr. Ramos-Horta, in his letter dated
4 August.
We are, of course, now prepared to draft and
adopt a resolution. As the Ambassador of Japan pointed
out, there are still some outstanding questions with
regard to the form that an international military

06-46776

presence should take in Timor-Leste. I would like from
the outset to express our gratitude for the action led by
Portugal, Malaysia, New Zealand and Australia on the
ground.
We will adapt our proposal essentially in the light
of the expectations of the Government of Timor-Leste
itself. In that regard, I would like to say that we will
not establish our final position until we have heard the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of TimorLeste, Mr. José Luis Guterres, whose presence we
welcome here.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me first of all to thank Mr. Ian Martin, the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General to Timor-Leste, for his
praiseworthy efforts. We would also like to thank him
for the important briefing he gave us this morning.
I would also like to welcome my friend, Mr. José
Luis Guterres, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Timor-Leste, who is here with us in the
Council. I congratulate him on his appointment to his
post and wish him every success.
Certainly, the circumstances facing Timor-Leste
are extremely sensitive. The recent chaos in that
country reflects the delicate nature of that explosive
situation, given the worsened economic situation and
the precariousness of resources, as well as the
country’s recently gained independence.
The deteriorating security situation and the
generalized chaos demonstrate once again that TimorLeste sorely needs the assistance of the international
community. The crisis in that country is complicated; it
involves political, historical, social, economic and
institutional issues. The weakness of the political and
Government institutions and the great disparity in the
performance of several of those institutions led to an
unleashing of the crisis. Moreover, the wounds of the
past have not yet been healed, while unemployment
among young people is rampant. All of this has led to a
weakened security situation and chaos.
The international response to the security crisis in
Timor-Leste was positive and swift. We therefore
extend our thanks to all those who sent forces to help
stabilize the country at the request of the Timorese
Government. The international community worked
swiftly to respond to the need to stabilize the situation,
provide economic assistance to Timor-Leste, increase

11

S/PV.5512

investment and create increased opportunities for youth
employment.
We must continue to focus heavily on reform of
the administrative, political and economic institutions
and to give the country a healthy and solid new
momentum. We therefore reaffirm the important role to
be played by the United Nations in the important task
of creating of a new mission to work side by side with
the Timorese Government, provide advice and
expertise in rebuilding Government institutions and
establish long-term plans for building a modern State.
In that respect, my delegation supports the
recommendations set out in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the creation of a mission for a preliminary
period of 12 months, until the results of the 2007
elections are known. Reports will be submitted
periodically to the Security Council during that time to
keep it abreast of the need for reducing or expanding
the mission.
The international community has learned an
important lesson in Timor-Leste with regard to newly
independent countries. We must not abandon them in
precarious or weakened political and economic
situations. We hope that this experience will help us to
get down to the serious work of helping Timor-Leste to
overcome the crisis.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the presence in the Chamber of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Timor-Leste, Mr. José Luis Guterres. We thank the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ian
Martin, for his report on the United Nations future role
in Timor-Leste.
We believe that the main conclusions and
recommendations contained in the report are correct.
We welcome the formation of a new Timorese
Government headed by Mr. José Ramos-Horta and we
take note of the measures adopted by the new
leadership, aimed at stabilizing the situation in the
country and enhancing dialogue with Timorese
political movements and society. Thanks to those
efforts, the situation has recently improved
considerably. We note the important stabilizing role
played by the international force made up of
contingents from Australia, New Zealand, Portugal and
Malaysia. We are grateful to the Governments of those
countries for their rapid response to the request for
assistance made by the Timorese authorities.

12

At the same time, it is clear that the situation in
Timor-Leste remains fragile and that many problems
facing the country are still far from being resolved. Of
particular concern for the near future are the situation
with regard to the disarming of former participants in
the recent crisis and the still unresolved problem of the
tens of thousands of internally displaced persons.
The recent crisis clearly showed the extent and
complexity of the problems in Timor-Leste. Given its
own continuing inadequate capacities, Timor-Leste
requires long-term substantial external support. We
support the recommendation of the Secretary-General
to establish, for an initial period of 12 months, an
integrated United Nations mission in Timor-Leste. It is
important that the planned mission should include a
strong police component to deal with the important
task of supporting law and order in Timor-Leste and
helping with the creation and strengthening of the
national police force which has practically
disintegrated.
We agree that the civil-sector priorities of the
future mission should be support for national
reconciliation, support for the upcoming election
process, assistance in the design and implementation of
national socio-economic strategies and support in
creating a justice system and other State structures.
Given the diminished capacity of the Timorese
armed forces and the clear request from the TimorLeste authorities, we support the recommendation of
the Secretary-General to include a small military
capacity in the future mission.
With regard to the report of the Secretary-General
on justice and reconciliation for Timor-Leste
(S/2006/580), we believe that the approach proposed in
the report is the correct one, given the position of the
interested States and the fact that the approach is aimed
at strengthening Timor-Leste’s capacity in the justice
sector. We believe that the proposal of the SecretaryGeneral with regard to the force’s format and
international composition is acceptable.
Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Let me start,
Mr. President, by thanking you for organizing a very
pertinent meeting on Timor-Leste following the critical
situation the country experienced recently and with a
view to a Security Council decision on a follow-up
United Nations presence there. It is a particular
pleasure for me to welcome amongst us Foreign
Minister José Luis Gutteres. I would also like to thank

06-46776

S/PV.5512

Mr. Ian Martin, the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Timor-Leste, for his insightful briefing.
Greece fully aligns itself with the statement to be
made later by Finland on behalf of the European
Union. I would like, though, to make a few additional
comments.
We are pleased to note that the security situation
has calmed down after the unfortunate violent incidents
of recent months. Greece once more commends the
immediate dispatch and deployment of defence and
police forces by Portugal, Australia, New Zealand and
Malaysia in response to the relevant request by the
President and the Government of Timor-Leste.
At this juncture, we must not relax our vigilance.
The recent crisis demonstrated how fragile the stability
of that newly independent country is. In many ways,
the crisis itself further weakened State institutions,
such as the police. Clearly, the root causes underlying
the recent crisis — namely, youth unemployment and
unhealed wounds of the past — may yet reappear, so a
robust international security presence is needed.
Having played a crucial role in the creation of
Timor-Leste, the Security Council has, in our view, a
moral obligation to sustain the viability of the country
until such time as it can provide for its own security
and development.
As requested by Prime Minister Ramos-Horta, the
new mission to succeed the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) should have a police force of
considerable strength, backed by a small military force,
under the command and control of the United Nations.
That request is taken on board by the SecretaryGeneral in his latest report (S/2006/628).
We cannot fail to agree. Bilateral arrangements to
reinforce the internal security situation, though
welcome in the short term, cannot be a viable longterm solution. The United Nations is in a unique
position to help stabilize security in Timor-Leste, while
at the same time providing aid for its economic
development. There are already many United Nations
agencies on the ground helping national authorities in
various
humanitarian
and
development
aid
programmes. What needs to be upgraded is the level
and quality of security provided to them, in order for
them to function in a stable environment. That can be
done only by a new United Nations mission that has
police and military components, as already suggested.

06-46776

In any case, we are talking about a relatively small
force — nothing of the proportions of those that have
been dispatched to other parts of the world.
Such an arrangement would be in line with the
respect we have expressed for Timorese ownership,
would encourage the new Government of Prime
Minister Ramos-Horta in its endeavours and would
provide the necessary security umbrella for other
United Nations and humanitarian actors in the field. It
would thus underline the determination of the United
Nations not to let a nation with teething problems go it
alone.
The presence of an upgraded, multidisciplinary,
integrated new United Nations mission will also
provide the necessary help for the reform of the police
and the justice sector and would also serve to promote
national political dialogue and reconciliation. It would
also boost the sense of confidence of the Timorese
people in view of the presidential and parliamentary
elections to be held next year.
In closing, allow me to recall that we have to
learn from past experience. If we rushed to close down
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) — as is the prevailing sense right now —
we have to be very careful and not hurry this time.
Greece looks forward to working with the other
members of the Council towards achieving consensus
in formulating the most appropriate solution
concerning the United Nations mission that will
succeed UNOTIL.
Ms. Wolcott Sanders (United States of
America): We thank Mr. Martin for his presentation
and would like to express our appreciation for his
efforts to bring about reconciliation in Timor-Leste. We
also welcome Foreign Minister Gutteres to today’s
proceedings.
The recommendations of the Secretary-General
take a comprehensive and detailed approach addressing
the root causes of the crisis in Timor-Leste. The United
States particularly appreciates the recommendation that
United Nations advisors work closely with the
Timorese Ministries of Defence and Interior to ensure
that there is an integrated approach to the armed forces
and police. That will be critical in building a
democratic security sector.
We remain unpersuaded that there is a need for
United Nations troops. Security concerns in Timor-

13

S/PV.5512

Leste are internal. The international force is in place, is
well equipped and well staffed, and is prepared to
respond if there should be any need for military action.
The United States supports a strong United
Nations police operation in Timor-Leste, engaged both
in law enforcement and in training. That is a critical
issue, both for security and to build a police force
which respects the rule of law and is responsible to the
elected Government. We note that credible policing is
only one element in restoring tranquillity and creating
an atmosphere in which people feel safe to return
home. The social and political issues which underlie
the violence must also be addressed.
We fully agree that there must be accountability
for the crimes committed in Timor-Leste during the
violence last spring. The United States appreciates the
work being done by the Special Commission of
Inquiry. We hope that the Special Commission will
address both individual and institutional accountability,
as well as factors contributing to the violence,
including allegations of illegal arms distribution by
former and current officials.
We strongly support reactivation of the Serious
Crimes Unit to complete investigation of the atrocities
of 1999. The United Nations and the international
community should also consider what assistance they
might give to the judicial systems of Timor-Leste and
Indonesia to bring to trial those arrested since the
Special Panels for serious crimes were closed, or who
may be brought to trial in the future.
The judicial and legal sectors in Timor-Leste
need our support, and we urge Timor’s partners to
respond to that need. We support the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation that reconciliation be a key
element in responding to such crimes. Timor-Leste’s
own institutions should be the primary planners and
implementers of reconciliation efforts, with the United
Nations facilitating and lending its good offices.
The critical work of the expert advisers placed in
key ministries and offices of the Government must
continue so that Timor-Leste’s friends and partners can
help the Government to develop the expertise it
requires.
Finally, the work of the electoral unit will be a
vital element in assisting the Government and people
of Timor-Leste to hold free, fair and transparent

14

elections in 2007. The Electoral Assistance Division
should lead that effort.
Ms. Tincopa (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to thank Mr. Ian Martin, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing. We also
welcome the presence in the Chamber of Minister for
Foreign Affairs José Luis Guterres.
Moreover, we wish to express our thanks for the
reports of the Secretary-General.
Peru firmly supports the Government and people
of Timor-Leste in their quest to ensure a State that will
be peaceful and sustainable in the long term. In that
regard, we would highlight the measures adopted in the
past month to halt the violence and insecurity
experienced by that country in May and June 2006. We
welcome the appointments of Mr. José Ramos-Horta as
Prime Minister and of other members of the cabinet on
10 July, creating an atmosphere of tranquillity and
hope following a series of unfortunate events. We
believe it essential for the Government and the various
political forces to work on the basis of dialogue and
reconciliation and with the support of the international
community and, of course, of the United Nations in
implementing defined objectives to ensure stability,
development and security in Timor-Leste.
The Secretary-General’s report pursuant to
resolution 1690 (2006) provides a complete and
objective assessment of the situation in Timor-Leste,
along with specific recommendations for the
establishment of an integrated and multidimensional
United Nations mission. Peru supports many of those
recommendations, among which I would highlight the
following.
We support the Secretary-General’s proposal to
deploy a maximum of 1,608 United Nations police
personnel to Timor-Leste in the period leading up to,
during and after the 2007 elections, and gradually to
draw it down following the elections.
We support a small military component under the
control and command of the United Nations with a
maximum of 350 armed and unarmed troops of all
ranks, to be concentrated in Dili, with the exception of
unarmed liaison officer teams in the border districts, as
described in paragraph 118 of the Secretary-General’s
report.
We support the inclusion of the civilian
component and its various mechanisms, including units

06-46776

S/PV.5512

for political affairs, elections, human rights and
transitional
justice,
democratic
governance,
humanitarian affairs and gender, to mention but a few.
We also support the joint operations and joint mission
analysis centres.

effective and productive. If that challenge is to be met,
it is essential for the Government and the national
social actors of Timor-Leste to work together and
responsibly in drafting policies and programmes to that
end.

In brief, we would stress that Peru supports the
strong and robust mandate for the new United Nations
mission in Timor-Leste described in paragraph 110 of
the Secretary-General’s report. We would wish the
elements and activities described therein to be included
in the draft resolution to be adopted by the Council in
the coming days.

Mr. Matulay (Slovakia): Let me thank you, Sir,
for calling this meeting and for giving us the
opportunity to speak on this vital issue at a very critical
juncture. We welcome the presence here of
Mr. Guterres, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Timor-Leste, to participate in this
debate, and we thank Mr. Martin for his statement.

With regard to the civilian component, we would
like to focus on the gender unit. Its relationship to
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security is essential in a country like Timor-Leste,
where women need an opportunity to participate fully
in all aspects of the promotion, maintenance and
building of peace and where they need to be
empowered in order to participate in the political
decision-making and development of their country.

Since the representative of Finland will make a
statement on behalf of the European Union with which
we associate ourselves, we will confine ourselves to
making some supplementary remarks.

We also believe it important to have a human
rights and transitional justice unit to monitor the
human rights situation and assist the Timorese
authorities in ensuring that those who are responsible
for violating human rights are punished and that
victims will enjoy individual and collective redress.
Along the same lines, we would refer to the
Secretary-General’s report on justice and reconciliation
in Timor-Leste, in which emphasis is placed on
recognizing the efforts undertaken by Indonesia and
Timor-Leste in the area of truth and friendship. We
believe, however, that it is important for both
Governments to continue to strengthen the capacities
of their respective judicial systems, in particular with
respect to bringing to justice those responsible for
serious violations of human rights committed in TimorLeste in 1999.
In conclusion, I wish to underscore the
importance of continuing to promote economic
development in Timor-Leste and for income to reach
those most in need. To a great extent, the long-term
success of Timor-Leste will depend on the success of
economic and social development. In that regard, I
would point to the reference in the Secretary-General’s
report to a “compact” between Timor-Leste and the
international community to reorient the existing
national development plan in order to make it more

06-46776

We share the concern of others over the incidents
that have occurred in the past three months in TimorLeste, and note with concern that the population is still
suffering the consequences of violence and destruction
that arose from them. We agree that the security
situation in Timor-Leste has changed visibly, thanks to
the presence of the international police and military
forces from Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand and
Portugal. It is necessary to emphasize that many of the
elements that gave rise to the original crisis are merely
dormant, while the crisis itself has created new
potential sources of instability that add to the
complexity of the situation, including the large number
of missing firearms. The Secretary-General has duly
noted that fact in his latest report.
A new Government was sworn in a month ago. In
the short term, it will have to deal with the instability
and disgruntlement of various groups in society in the
aftermath of a traumatic crisis. In the long-term, it will
be confronted with the complex challenge of building a
new nation.
The United Nations has achieved a great deal in
Timor-Leste, but significant challenges remain in
realizing
long-term
security
and
sustainable
development. The emerging institutions in that country
are still fragile. With the upcoming parliamentary and
presidential elections next year, Timor-Leste is rapidly
approaching yet another crucial crossroads in its
history. The elections will be of the utmost importance,
although we agree with Mr. Martin that they are only
one of the elements in building a successful democratic
society. The elections will be important for the future

15

S/PV.5512

stability and democratic development of Timor-Leste
and must be conducted in a fair and free procedure. In
that respect, we fully recognize the need for the
continued involvement of the international community
to help Timor-Leste to restore order and build a
democracy.
A new international presence in Timor-Leste is
needed to meet the changed circumstances. We support
the establishment of a new, robust and complex United
Nations mission in Timor-Leste. Its role would be to
consolidate the gains that the United Nations has
already achieved in the country, help the Timorese
Government ensure political stability, support the 2007
presidential and parliamentary elections and maintain
public security. It would also help Timor-Leste to
rebuild its whole security sector and its economy, fight
poverty and promote and protect human rights. At the
same time, it is important to note that the Timorese
Government and the Timorese people must assume full
ownership and responsibility for the transformation
process, with the continued support of the international
community.
As a final note, we also wish to underline that an
important element of peacebuilding and peace
consolidation in Timor-Leste includes fostering
national reconciliation. Prime Minister Ramos-Horta
and President Gusmão have both committed
themselves to that goal, without sacrificing
accountability for crimes committed during recent
months. We note with satisfaction that the Independent
Special Commission of Inquiry for Timor-Leste has
completed the first of two visits aimed at establishing
the facts and circumstances surrounding the incidents
of April and May, including their causes. We would
also like to highlight the need for continued attention
to the necessity for accountability for past human
rights crimes in Timor-Leste.

highlighted the challenges facing the country, but have
also provided very useful insights and suggestions
concerning the way forward.
Among the priority areas deserving close
attention are the consolidation of democratic
institutions, electoral support, national reconciliation,
law and order, the promotion and protection of human
rights, humanitarian assistance, rehabilitation, poverty
alleviation and the provision of basic services. Meeting
those challenges effectively will require a combination
of local initiative and international support, with the
United Nations in the vanguard. More important, they
also serve to remind us forcefully that six years are not
enough to transform this newly independent country
into a stable and prosperous democracy. As stated in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2006/628), nationbuilding and peacebuilding are long-term tasks.
Therefore, in trying to prune down the partnership
between the international community and Timor-Leste,
with the aim of making it more focused, we must also
be careful to strike the right balance, taking into
account the vital lessons we have learned from the
disturbances that broke out in Dili on 28 April 2006.
At the same time, we recognize that the support
of the international community cannot be a substitute
for the determination and commitment of the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste to build a
united, democratic and prosperous nation of their own.
Therefore, we urge that maximum effort be exerted to
develop local capacity as quickly as possible.

The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Ghana.

On the future role of the United Nations, we
recognize that it is clearly well-placed to define and
manage the role of the international community during
Timor-Leste’s transition into a more stable and capable
State. We support the call for a robust United Nations
police, military and civilian mission that would
guarantee law and order pending the reorganization and
restructuring of the Timorese police and armed forces
in order to raise their level of professionalism.

At the outset, let me welcome to the Council my
friend and former colleague Ambassador José Luis
Guterres, as well as to wish him well in his new
assignment as the Foreign Minister of his country. Let
me also reiterate our appreciation for the invaluable
contributions of Special Representative Sukehiro
Hasegawa and Special Envoy Ian Martin with regard to
putting Timor-Leste back on track after the unfortunate
disturbances of April 2006. They have not only

Obviously, no meaningful development can take
place in a climate of lawlessness and impunity. On the
other hand, there can be no lasting security where the
basic needs of the people are not met. In Timor-Leste,
as in other countries in similar circumstances, the link
between poverty and insecurity cannot be denied. Nor
is it easy to reconcile a society in which people find
themselves scrambling for the little that is available.
Inevitably, poverty tends to breed a privileged

16

06-46776

S/PV.5512

minority, and to reinforce a sense of discrimination
among the most deprived. Consequently, in addition to
security-sector reform and institutional capacitybuilding, the highest priority must be accorded to the
delivery of basic services such as health, education,
water and sanitation, as well as the creation of
meaningful livelihood opportunities, especially for
young people.
In the short term, however, the humanitarian
consequences of the recent disturbances must be
urgently addressed, in order to prevent internally
displaced persons from aggravating the discontent in
society. Every able-bodied person must be actively and
productively involved in the nation’s development.
Not only have recent events exposed the
inadequacies of the governance structures of TimorLeste; more important, they underscore the urgency of
alleviating youth unemployment and its attendant
poverty and deprivation. Consequently, the idea of a
Timorese-led “compact” based on the national
development plan should define the depth of
engagement between the international community and
Timor-Leste. Hopefully, next year’s elections will
serve as an opportunity for the people of Timor-Leste
to begin afresh with renewed determination to forge
ahead.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Mr. José Luis Guterres,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of TimorLeste.
Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): It is a great honour
to see you, my dear friend Ambassador Nana EffahApenteng, presiding over the Security Council for this
month. I wish you and your country, Ghana, every
success during these very challenging times.
Today I would like to share with the Council my
Government’s views on the role of the future United
Nations presence and of international assistance in
Timor-Leste beyond the completion of the mandate of
the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL),
on 20 August 2006. Let me start by reiterating, on
behalf of the Timorese people, our gratitude to the
troop-contributing countries — Australia, Malaysia,
New Zealand and Portugal — for having so promptly
and efficiently re-established and maintained law and
order and saved many Timorese lives. That

06-46776

intervention was made at the request of the President of
the Republic, Mr. Xanana Gusmão; the President of the
national Parliament, Mr. Francisco Lu’Olo Guterres;
and the Prime Minister of the first constitutional
Government, Mr. Mari Alkatiri.
We welcome the report of Secretary-General Kofi
Annan (S/2006/628) and we commend the great
contribution of Special Envoy Ian Martin and his team
on the assessment mission. The report was the product
of wide consultation in Timor-Leste. In that respect, we
concur with its recommendations, which are in line
with the spirit of the letters of President Xanana
Gusmão and other key leaders calling for the
establishment of a robust United Nations police,
military and civilian mission to assist the people of
Timor-Leste. That was followed by a letter
(S/2006/620, annex) by Prime Minister Ramos-Horta
dated 4 August 2006, to you, Mr. President, and to the
Secretary-General calling for the establishment of a
multidimensional and integrated peacekeeping mission,
with a police force of considerable strength and a small
military force under the command and control of the
United Nations.
The Secretary-General’s report provides a good
account and a sound analysis of the events that took
place in April and May of this year. For the sake of
brevity, I shall not elaborate any further in that regard.
Those events revealed the institutional failures of the
security forces and the fragility of democratic
institutions. It also revealed an acute need for
continued long-term international assistance in the
building of viable State institutions, notably in the
areas of security, justice and development.
Cognizant of the fact that institutional failures in
the Timorese national police (PNTL) and the Timorese
armed forces (F-FDTL) are at the core of the recent
crisis in Timor-Leste, a holistic approach to securitysector reform will be required. International advisory
support is important in reviewing the future role and
needs of the defence sector, including both the F-FDTL
and the Ministry of Defence.
In the area of justice, the funds made available
under the Justice System Programme of the United
Nations Development Programme are not sufficient to
cover the support needed for the Office of the
Prosecutor-General, particularly in the light of the
recent violent incidents and the expected increase in
the number of cases that the national judicial system

17

S/PV.5512

will have to handle. Also, a significant number of
human rights officers are needed to support our
national institutions, including the Office of the
Provedor and the national Parliament, as well as civil
society, in monitoring, promoting and protecting
human rights and promoting justice and reconciliation.
It is of vital importance that the international
community remain engaged in fostering the genuine
commitment to justice and human rights that exists in
the Government, in civil society and among the
Timorese people.
At the same time, I wish to assure the members of
the Security Council that the Government will
expeditiously search for a solution to the grievances of
the 594 petitioners by means of the recently
invigorated national Commission of Investigation.
I wish to express my Government’s greatest
appreciation for the work of the international
Independent Special Commission of Inquiry, which is
currently undertaking an investigation into the events
of 28 and 29 April, 23 to 25 May and related events
that contributed to the crisis. The establishment of the
facts and circumstances relevant to those events will be
critical if Timor-Leste is to achieve reconciliation and
uphold the rule of law. The Commission will submit its
findings and recommendations by 7 October. The
Government considers the domestic justice system to
be the primary avenue of accountability for any
criminal acts and human rights violations identified by
the Commission. We therefore welcome the report of
the Secretary-General on justice and reconciliation
(S/2006/580). The Government is considering the
recommendations contained therein, and will take
appropriate measures.
We believe that a strong international police
presence will be vital if executive policing functions
are to be performed in Dili and throughout Timor-Leste
while the PNTL is being reconstituted. United Nations
police officers will be equally important in assisting
and further enhancing the capacity of our national
police in the maintenance of law and respect for human
rights throughout the districts and subdistricts. While
the national police have been trained by United
Nations police and bilateral partners and have the basic
know-how to carry out routine policing, the most
recent events demonstrated the inability of the PNTL to
adequately deal with developments that are of a
political nature. The impartiality of the PNTL in a
tense political environment will be tested again when it

18

deals with the first nationwide elections. The presence
of United Nations police will be vital in providing
advice and in supporting the national police in
planning and carrying out their electoral-related
security responsibilities, including through training and
assistance in the development and implementation of a
comprehensive election security plan aimed at
forestalling volatility and possible violence throughout
the electoral period.
The Government is moving to prepare for the
upcoming elections. The draft electoral laws on
presidential and parliamentary elections, which were
submitted to the national Parliament for a broad public
debate, are expected to be approved, after the
Parliament’s annual recess, in mid-September. The
President and the Government have agreed to hold both
the parliamentary and presidential elections before
May 2007.
The Government of Timor-Leste is committed to
a free, fair and credible electoral process. Having
consulted internally and having
taken due
consideration of concerns raised by civil society, the
Church and other stakeholders, we have called upon
the international community to assist us in that
endeavour, including through the provision of technical
and logistical support. We intend to continue
discussions with the United Nations regarding the most
appropriate type of assistance.
Timor-Leste is one of the poorest countries in the
world. While the primary underlying causes of the
current crisis are political and institutional, poverty and
the related high urban unemployment and the absence
of any prospects of employment opportunities,
especially for young people, also contributed to the
crisis. In order to ensure coordinated support for the
economic development of our country, the new mission
should work closely with the Government and its
partners and provide assistance in the design of
poverty-reduction and economic growth policies and
strategies so as to promote the goals of our national
development plan and work towards the achievement
of the Millennium Development Goals.
The 2006-2007 budget was adopted yesterday by
the national Parliament; it represents an increase of 122
per cent compared with the previous fiscal year. As
Prime Minister Ramos-Horta has said, the budget is
pro-poor and pro-job-creation. We hope and pray that
the combination of better economic and social policies

06-46776

S/PV.5512

and continuing international support in all areas will
help us to overcome today’s crises.
We acknowledge that there are differences of
opinion among Member States, but I am hopeful that
the Council will take into account the seriousness of
the situation confronting our people and our country
today. While there are no more gunshots, many guns
remain in civilian hands, and the underlying causes of
the conflict have yet to be fully addressed. It will take
time for us to reconstitute the defence and police
forces. It will take many more years for those
institutions to regain the confidence and trust of our
people. We therefore believe that the recommendations
of
the
Secretary-General,
including
the
recommendations relating to the presence of a very
small military force under the command and control of
the United Nations, are important. That is the best
option that we have in facing the current crisis in East
Timor.
As a colleague who has for many years shared
with Council members the corridors and meeting
rooms of this House, I appeal to the Council to work
with us in ensuring that Timor-Leste does not relapse
into conflict again.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
express our deep appreciation to UNOTIL and all of its
staff, and, in particular, to Special Representative
Hasegawa, for the excellent cooperation and support
given to the Government and people during the crisis
that we recently faced. We would also like to thank the
international community for its support, and the
embassies in East Timor for their cooperation and
support during the crisis. We will work with
determination with all of you to guarantee that our
people have a great future — a future in peace,
stability and development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Finland.
Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
following countries align themselves with this
statement: Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey, Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina,
Montenegro,
Serbia,
Iceland,
Liechtenstein, Norway, Ukraine and the Republic of
Moldova.

06-46776

Two months ago the Council held a public
meeting on Timor-Leste (see S/PV.5457); the situation
in the country seemed critical at that time. Sporadic
violence, arson, looting and gang clashes continued to
take place and the direction of events still seemed
unclear. Since then, the overall security situation has
been stabilized and the emergency phase has passed.
The European Union commends the countries that
responded positively when they were asked for help.
The quick reaction of Australia, Portugal, Malaysia and
New Zealand has been of immense importance.
In political terms, very significant steps forward
were taken when Mr. José Ramos-Horta was appointed
as Prime Minister on 10 July 2006 and when the new
Government was formed soon after that. The European
Union welcomes that political progress and wishes to
congratulate Prime Minister Ramos-Horta and Mr. José
Luis Guterres, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation, for their challenging assignments. The
European Union wants to assure the Security Council
of continuous European support for Timor-Leste and
the new Government.
It is necessary to emphasize, however, that it
would be erroneous to believe that the situation in
Timor-Leste is now stable and in order. The tension is
still there, and the humanitarian needs of a significant
part of the population are still clearly not being met.
More than 150,000 people are still internally displaced;
many refuse to return to their homes. Numerous
weapons remain unaccounted for and are presumed to
be under the control of both individuals and organized
groups. That climate of fear is a clear sign of the
prevailing fragility of the situation and of the need to
address the underlying factors of the crisis, which is far
from resolved.
The events of recent months will have to be
analysed with seriousness and honesty. The real
problems under the surface will have to be addressed in
order to achieve national reconciliation. The European
Union is pleased to note that that seems to be exactly
what the new Prime Minister intends to do. The
Independent Special Commission of Inquiry for TimorLeste, as requested by Mr. Ramos-Horta and
announced by the Secretary-General, will have a
significant role in that effort. The Commission is
expected to report its findings by early October 2006.
The European Union also underlines that the
demand for justice and accountability for the serious

19

S/PV.5512

crimes committed in 1999 remains a fundamental issue
in the lives of many Timorese. The Union therefore
welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on
justice and reconciliation in Timor-Leste and its
recommendations aimed at completing investigations
into unresolved serious-crimes cases and promoting
reconciliation and community healing. The presidential
and parliamentary elections in 2007 naturally underline
the importance of political and national reconciliation.

Commission’s Special Envoy to Timor-Leste,
Mr. Miguel Amado, visited Dili quite recently to assess
the current situation and to consider ways to strengthen
European Commission cooperation with Timor-Leste,
including by establishing a Commission delegation in
Dili. The European Union is committed to continuing
to support Timor-Leste and is confident that, in these
times of difficulty, the United Nations will respond to
Timor-Leste’s call for help in an adequate manner.

The urgent goal of the international community is
to support Timor-Leste in consolidating public order
and pursuing reconciliation among all stakeholders and
all levels of society. It is obvious that the United
Nations will have a central role in that process.
Consequently, it is obvious that a strengthened and
long-term United Nations engagement will be needed
as we ensure Timorese ownership and the sustainability
of United Nations efforts.

The President: I now call on the representative
of Singapore.

The views of the Timorese Government —
clearly expressed in the letter dated 4 August 2006
from Prime Minister Ramos-Horta addressed to the
President of the Security Council — and the
assessment presented in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on Timor-Leste pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1690 (2006) must be among the guiding
factors when a decision is made on the size and form of
the future United Nations mission after the mandate of
the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL)
expires in a few days’ time.
The United Nations should commit itself to
providing substantial support in various sectors,
including the rule of law, human rights, gender,
institutional capacity-building, conflict resolution and
comprehensive security-sector reform. It is essential
that the core functions of the new multidimensional
and integrated United Nations mission be carefully
identified and that the mission’s mandate be decided in
a manner that avoids any unnecessary overlapping with
current United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes and other development partners, which are
already making very valuable contributions to the
development of Timor-Leste. Efficient coordination,
clear responsibilities and a clear division of labour are
preconditions for success.
The European Union and its member States have
been major development partners of Timor-Leste for
years, and the Union continues to pay close attention to
the situation in the country. The European

20

Mr. Cheok (Singapore): We express our
appreciation to Special Envoy Ian Martin for his
briefing and congratulate Foreign Minister Guterres. It
is good to see him again.
Timor-Leste is in a time of need. The
international community has responded to such need
before. In 1999, the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor was established; it was
followed by the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor and, recently, by the United Nations Office
in Timor-Leste. The question is, of course: What
happens next?
It is our view that the Secretary-General’s report
provides the answer. It is an insightful and
comprehensive piece with sensible recommendations.
It was not conceived in a vacuum; it was based on the
assessment mission led by Special Envoy Ian Martin.
Mr. Martin and his team consulted a broad cross
section of Timorese society and international
stakeholders. It is clear that their observations and
analysis contributed greatly to the quality of the report.
This is not just about the United Nations; TimorLeste’s leaders have also spoken. In a letter dated
4 August 2006, Prime Minister José Ramos-Horta said
that
“a robust police, military and civilian element is
indispensable to our hard-won peace and
freedom. There is a consensus among all
stakeholders that the situation in Timor-Leste
requires the establishment of a United Nations
multidimensional and integrated peacekeeping
mission” (S/2006/620, annex).
He also spoke of a strong civilian component, a police
force of considerable strength and a small military
force that would all be under the command and control
of the United Nations. If those are the views of Timor-

06-46776

S/PV.5512

Leste’s leaders, then we should listen. The people of
Timor-Leste are the ultimate stakeholders in this
exercise.
Nation-building is a delicate process. TimorLeste’s troubles are a vivid reminder that reverses are
possible, but that is no reason for discouragement. We
should take setbacks in our stride, as rarely has there
been a case of absolutely smooth sailing in nationbuilding. Indeed, this is motivation for us to stay the
course and ensure success in the face of difficulty.
The
Secretary-General’s
report
rightfully
identified priority areas. Ensuring security and stability
is crucial. Here, we must thank Australia, Malaysia,
New Zealand and Portugal for their superb efforts.
Security-sector reform is also key. To a large degree,
institutional failures in the National Police Force of
Timor-Leste and in the Armed Forces of Timor-Leste
were at the core of this crisis; they need to be rebuilt.
Moreover, there is a need for political reconciliation.
Timor-Leste will also need electoral support in the runup to and during the 2007 elections. Timor-Leste is in a
transitional phase, and having both a large United
Nations police presence and a smaller military
component is essential. Those two components will
contribute to the restoration of stability and law and
order until the Timorese themselves are ready to fully
reassume those roles.
Albert Einstein once said, “I never think of the
future. It comes soon enough.” Let me be a bit
presumptuous and disagree. We need to think about
Timor-Leste’s future. We need to help it to put
conditions in place to allow for its development as a
stable and cohesive nation. In tandem, we need to
assist with capacity-building for its institutions and its
people. The Secretary-General’s report correctly states
that this will be a long-term commitment. The United
Nations has been at the core of those efforts since
Timor-Leste’s independence. It will remain at the core
of those efforts for the next few years. We should
remain committed. If we get this right, we can all look
forward to a brighter future for Timor-Leste.
The President: I give
representative of Portugal.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to address the
Security Council. Before I start my remarks, I would
like to greet Foreign Minister José Luis Guterres. It is
an enormous pleasure to see him here again in this

06-46776

building and especially in the Council. I would also
like to thank Mr. Ian Martin for his presentation of the
Secretary-General’s report on the situation in TimorLeste (S/2006/628) and his recommendations for a new
United Nations mission. I also take this opportunity to
commend the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Hasegawa, and his staff for their work in
Timor-Leste.
Portugal concurs with the statement which the
representative of Finland has made on behalf of the
European Union. But in my national capacity, I would
like to add the following.
Regarding the ongoing discussions on the
mandate and the composition of a new United Nations
mission in Timor-Leste, the Portuguese position is
consistent with three main elements. First, we respect
the sovereign will and the political independence of
Timor-Leste. In this regard, Prime Minister RamosHorta sent a letter (S/2006/620, annex) to the President
of the Security Council on 4 August 2006, which
clearly sets out the expectations of Timor-Leste
concerning the need for the establishment of a United
Nations multidimensional and integrated peacekeeping
mission.
Secondly, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
thorough assessment and the recommendations
contained in the report. We praise the Secretariat’s
professionalism, which we have come to know very
well since the days when we were negotiating the selfdetermination of Timor-Leste.
Thirdly, our own assessment is based on our deep
bilateral commitment towards Timor-Leste, and
especially on the fact that Portugal remains, by far, the
largest donor to Timor-Leste, with cooperation
programmes in many areas including justice,
education, health, social protection, police, armed
forces, customs, finances, and so on.
Although the situation has been stabilized
overall, we still face the very serious security and
humanitarian repercussions of the crisis. Thousands of
weapons remain unaccounted for and could be used in
further actions to wreak violent destabilization. A
climate of fear still prevails, with about 150,000
internally displaced people, which is a huge number for
such a small country. In regard to the police and
military weapons that have not been accounted for, we
must acknowledge that the international forces have
achieved only modest results. It will be difficult to

21

S/PV.5512

achieve sustainable political reconciliation in an
environment where individuals and groups with
political grievances are in possession of illegal arms.
At the Council’s last open meeting on TimorLeste, on 13 June 2006 (see S/PV.5457), I stated that
Timor-Leste needed the universality and impartiality of
the United Nations, which must once again take a
leading role. The reality on the ground has reinforced
our belief. Only the United Nations can successfully
lead the efforts to facilitate political dialogue and
reconciliation, restore and maintain security and ensure
that the 2007 elections will be peaceful, free and fair.
In line with the expectations of Timor-Leste, as
expressed by Prime Minister Ramos-Horta in his letter
of 4 August, and as reiterated today by Foreign
Minister José Luis Guterres, Portugal will review the
current bilateral arrangement regarding the presence of
its gendarmerie force in Timor-Leste, with a view to
have that force and other elements ready to serve under
the command and control of the United Nations.
I recall here that one of the key recommendations
in the Report of the Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations, which is widely known as the Brahimi
report, regarding the importance of clear, credible and
achievable mandates, is that
“Security Council resolutions should meet
the requirements of peacekeeping operations
when they deploy into potentially dangerous
situations, especially the need for a clear chain of
command and unity of effort.” (S/2000/809, para.
64(c)).
Portugal fully supports the recommendations of
the Secretary-General’s report regarding the police and
military components of the follow-on mission in
Timor-Leste. Also, and as a future contributor to the
mission, we attach great importance to the security of
all United Nations personnel, including our nationals,
and we consequently deem it necessary that this
mission be backed by an adequately sized military
force under the command and control of the United
Nations.
For both political and operational reasons, we
would have great difficulty in understanding any
solution which ignored the sovereign will of TimorLeste, the recommendations of the Secretary-General
and the lessons learned of the recent past concerning
the need for a clear chain of command and adequate

22

security for United Nations personnel in peacekeeping
missions.
We welcome the establishment of an Independent
Special Commission of Inquiry for Timor-Leste, as
outlined in the letter of 8 June 2006 from Foreign
Minister Ramos-Horta to the Secretary-General
(S/2006/391, annex), and especially the fact that all
relevant actors considered this to be a necessary step to
reach a political settlement and uphold the rule of law.
The demand for justice and accountability for
serious crimes committed in 1999 remains a
fundamental issue in the lives of many Timorese.
Portugal welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
on justice and reconciliation in Timor-Leste
(S/2006/580), and particularly its recommendations
aiming at the completion of investigations into
outstanding cases of serious crimes and the need for
reconciliation and community healing.
Much remains to be done in this regard, as the
recent outbursts of violence have demonstrated,
namely the attacks on several key Timorese judicial
institutions, causing serious concern regarding the
potential loss of vital records with the attendant
security implications for victims, witnesses and
suspects alike. The prevailing climate of impunity is a
major obstacle to long-lasting social reconciliation and
political stability. It is imperative to establish the truth
and achieve accountability, in keeping with
international human rights standards.
Portugal recalls the responsibility of the
international community and of the Security Council in
relation to Timor-Leste. Portugal will remain
committed to the consolidation of peace, democracy
and the full political independence of Timor-Leste.
The President: I give
representative of Indonesia.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): Mr. President, let me start
by congratulating you on your assumption of your
important post and by expressing my pleasure at seeing
you in the Chair. We are confident that, under your able
stewardship, the Council will effectively discharge its
tasks, dealing with the issues of high importance being
brought before it in this very busy month.
My appreciation goes to the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2006/628) and to the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Envoy, Mr. Ian Martin, for his
informative briefing.

06-46776

S/PV.5512

Permit me to join the previous speakers in
welcoming His Excellency Foreign Minister José Luis
Guterres of Timor-Leste to today’s Council meeting.
His statement before the Council provides guidance for
the creation of a new mission of the United Nations in
his country.
We continue to follow closely the situation in
Timor-Leste, and we are heartened that the country has
managed to emerge from the recent crisis there. The
new Government, which enjoys support from a wide
spectrum of Timorese society, has been installed. In
this regard, words of appreciation go to Australia,
Malaysia, New Zealand and Portugal for their valuable
efforts.
In order to achieve sustainable peace and stability
in the country, we continue fully to support TimorLeste in advancing political dialogue and community
reconciliation, particularly by addressing the
underlying causes of the recent crisis. We are confident
that, under the wise guidance of its leaders, TimorLeste will be able to put its democratization process
back on track and resume its national development on a
stronger foundation.
Despite all the hardships being faced by TimorLeste on account of the recent crisis, that country
continues to enjoy an excellent level of bilateral
relations with Indonesia. The rapport between leaders
of the two countries is firm, assured and growing.
President Xanana Gusmão of Timor-Leste flew to Bali
to meet his counterpart, President Susilo Bambang
Yudhoyono of Indonesia, on 17 June 2006, to brief the
latter on the situation in his country and the actions
being taken by his Government to address the situation.
Indonesia has shown its full understanding of the
situation and is demonstrating its commitment to help
Timor-Leste to address the crisis, including by
providing humanitarian aid. As Timor-Leste’s closest
neighbour, we are very interested in seeing a stable,
prosperous and democratic Timor-Leste. We are fully
aware that dealing with the daunting challenges it faces
is beyond that country’s existing national capacity.
Hence, it is the responsibility of the international
community to continue assisting that country to
achieve self-sufficiency. In this regard, we support the
establishment of a new United Nations mission in the
country.
We believe that the United Nations mission,
which is recommended for an initial period of 12

06-46776

months, should focus on helping the country to meet
the pressing challenges ahead and the real needs of the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste. These
include the promotion of national reconciliation and
social cohesion; capacity-building of various State and
Government institutions, including the enhancement of
further public confidence in them; poverty reduction
and humanitarian assistance; and democratization,
which includes electoral assistance for the presidential
and parliamentary elections in 2007.
Let me now turn to the issue of justice and
reconciliation for Timor-Leste. We hope that the
Secretary-General’s report on this subject (S/2006/580)
provides a new departure for the Organization in
dealing with this issue in a practical and feasible
manner. As has been stated on many occasions, the
Governments of Indonesia and of Timor-Leste are
committed to resolving residual problems from the past
and to opening a new chapter by developing forwardlooking relations and cooperation. In this spirit, the
two countries agreed to settle the human rights
violations reported in East Timor in 1999. Due to the
complexity of the problem, an innovative and creative
solution has been devised that would also strengthen
further good relations between the two countries in the
future.
The Commission of Truth and Friendship (CTF)
has achieved meaningful progress. It has agreed on the
elaboration of basic issues relating to its terms of
reference and has adopted a glossary of terminology as
the operational reference; these constitute clarification
and the CTF’s creative interpretation of various
provisions in its terms of reference, including the one
on amnesty, on the basis of relevant international
norms, standards and practices that take into account
local needs and challenges. It has also adopted guiding
principles as the overarching guide to document
review, fact-finding methods, information clarification
with respect to relevant parties, naming names and
standards of evidence.
As mentioned in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, the CTF has identified 14 groups of priority
cases. These consist of high-profile cases that are often
referred to in media reports; events that continue to be
commemorated emotionally by Timor-Leste society as
a collective memory; cases that reflect crimes as
defined in article 7 of the Rome Statute on the
International Criminal Court (ICC) regarding crimes
against humanity; and cases referred to in the final

23

S/PV.5512

report of the Indonesian national Commission of
inquiry into Human Rights Violations in East Timor in
1999, and other documents, as mandated in article 14
of its terms of reference.
The CTF is currently focusing on completing
document review through document matching,
corroboration and analysis, based on the report of the
Indonesian national Commission of inquiry into
Human Rights Violations in East Timor in 1999, the
documents of the proceedings of the Indonesian Ad
Hoc Human Rights Court, the documents of the Special
Panel for Serious Crimes and the report of the TimorLeste Commission on Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation.
While completing the document review and
analysis, the CTF has now moved into the second stage
of its work programme, namely, fact-finding, which
employs four methods: statement taking, submission,
investigation and hearings.
In order to garner support and input, the CTF has
carried out consultations with other stakeholders in
both countries, including parliaments, civil societies
and Government officials. With a view to expanding its
vision and getting inputs, the CTF has invited
international experts and prominent figures to share
their knowledge and experience.
On a regular basis, and as required in its terms of
reference, the Commission reports to the two
Governments on progress, as well as on challenges and
obstacles it encounters in implementing its mandate.
The heads of State of Indonesia and Timor-Leste, on
7 February 2006, agreed to extend the CTF’s mandate
until July 2007. My Government has strong confidence
in the work of the CTF and is very much committed to
continuing to ensure its credibility.
In conclusion, Indonesia, as a neighbour which
shares a common vision with Timor-Leste, based on
the principles of peaceful coexistence, forwardlooking, reconciliatory and mutually beneficial
relations, will, for its part, continue to assist TimorLeste to make further progress in consolidating peace,
stability and democracy in the country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Tarragô (Brazil): I would like to thank the
Ghanaian presidency for convening this debate on the
situation in Timor-Leste. That country, as a new

24

member of the international community, continues to
deserve the support of the United Nations in its
struggle to consolidate its independence.
I wish to extend my warmest welcome to His
Excellency José Luis Guterres, the new Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste. I also acknowledge the
presence of Ambassador Luis Fonseca, Executive
Secretary of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries, with whose statement we associate
ourselves.
May I also mention the remarkable work done by
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Ian
Martin, and his team. Their thorough and insightful
report must serve as the basis for the deliberations on
the future of the United Nations presence in TimorLeste.
The situation in Timor-Leste in the last few
months has reminded us of some valuable lessons in
the field of peacekeeping. We have had bad
experiences when the presence of the United Nations
was shortened for budgetary reasons or to comply with
artificial time frames. The drawdown of peacekeeping
operations should only be carried out upon
achievement of real progress in recovering from
conflict and in building institutions. One cannot but
recall that the precipitous decision to leave TimorLeste might have contributed to the security troubles of
the past few months.
The second mistake is not to give proper attention
to national ownership in the peacekeeping and
peacebuilding processes. While the support of the
international community is valuable — indeed,
indispensable — in order to be effective and welcome
by the people, it must respect the sovereign decisions
of the Timorese.
Planning and deciding on the mission are also
essential features not to be dismissed in the case of
Timor-Leste. Suffice it to recall the words of the
Brahimi report just cited by the Permanent
Representative of Portugal. The new mission should be
endowed with a clear mandate and adequate means to
fulfil it. Depriving the mission of the necessary
means — personnel, financial or other — would only
hamstring it in discharging its mandate and would
probably entail further suffering and be more costly in
the future.

06-46776

S/PV.5512

My Government believes that the Council has a
clear responsibility to ensure the safety and security of
the people of Timor-Leste. We think that the Council
will honour its commitment to Timor-Leste by taking
the decision to create a new mission in line with the
report of the Secretary-General, which has accurately
captured the meaning of national ownership and taken
on board the will of the Timor-Leste Government.
May I refer to the Brazilian Government’s
concern at a tendency to transfer responsibilities of the
United Nations, and of the Security Council, to
individual countries? While such expediency may help
and be salutary in emergencies, it carries many risks if
it is prolonged; risks that range from associating the
United Nations with the condoning of “neotrusteeship”, to prejudicing the image of the United
Nations as a neutral and impartial provider of
assistance.
It will be critical for the credibility and
implementation of the Council’s decisions that the
establishment of the new mission be made in full
agreement with the Timorese authorities and that,
whatever its configuration, the mission report to the
Security Council periodically. It is our view that the
new peacekeeping operation must comprise elements in
all relevant areas. In particular, it should have a
civilian component, including a strong electoral unit; a
police component capable of ensuring public safety;
and a small military component under United Nations
command and control. Brazil is, at present, considering
seriously the possibility of contributing troops to the
military component of the mission, alongside
contributions it can make to the other elements. But it
would do so on the understanding that the mission will
be truly multilateral and fully accountable to the
Security Council.
Creating the mission is only part of the work. It is
highly necessary that countries reinforce their bilateral
cooperation with Timor-Leste in areas that are essential
to a newly born State, such as capacity-building,
electoral assistance, development planning and civil
administration. The Brazilian Government has already
taken steps to start new projects and to continue with
the previous ones.
The
efforts
of
the
Timorese
towards
reconciliation and their search for justice should be
equally acknowledged. We should support the
Timorese Government’s decisions that are meant to

06-46776

tackle the acute problems of development and to find
ways to improve the well-being of its people.
Instability and unrest will fade only once poverty,
unemployment, illiteracy and other root causes of
conflict are effectively addressed.
The ultimate responsibility for settling the present
crisis lies with the Timorese Government and people.
But the United Nations and its Member States have a
share of the responsibility to assist that country in
setting itself on the path towards peace and
development. The way to do this is through respecting
the will of Timor-Leste, as so ably expressed here by
Minister Guterres.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Baja (Philippines): I congratulate the
Ghanaian presidency, which is in the midst of its
successful leadership of the Council. We welcome His
Excellency José Luis Guterres, and congratulate him
on his new role as Foreign Minister of Timor-Leste. We
thank him for his important statement this morning. We
also thank Special Envoy Ian Martin for his briefing.
The Council is engaged in the discussion of
Timor-Leste in the context of the morning after the
morning after. We therefore have the opportunity to
apply lessons learned not only from recent
developments in the country, but also from similar
situations in other parts of the world.
As the international community, particularly the
United Nations, ponders its subsequent involvement in
Timor-Leste, my delegation believes that the following
factors have to be taken into account. First, TimorLeste ownership must be ensured in any peacebuilding
plan for the country. It is important that the views,
aspirations and sentiments of the Government and the
people of Timor-Leste be factored into any decision to
be taken by the Security Council, particularly when it
concerns the deployment of a United Nations mission.
We acknowledge and endorse Timor-Leste’s
desire for the establishment of a new multidimensional
integrated United Nations peacekeeping mission,
which is also the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral contained in his report of 8 August 2006
(S/2006/628). That will ensure sustained domestic
support and eventual success in the long run. However
great outside efforts in support of Timor-Leste may be,
they can only succeed to an extent based on the

25

S/PV.5512

effectiveness of the cooperation of Timor-Leste’s
Government and its citizens.
Secondly, the root causes which precipitated the
latest crisis should be addressed. The SecretaryGeneral’s report describes in comprehensive detail the
events of the past three months as a complex crisis
with political, institutional, historical, social and
economic dimensions. Action should therefore be
geared towards providing solutions to the problems in
those areas. Foremost is assistance in building and
strengthening institutions of State. Progress in that area
could have been maintained if the United Nations
presence in Timor-Leste had not been prematurely
diminished. The economic difficulties and deficiencies
of Timor-Leste should also be addressed. We note that
the new mission recommended by the SecretaryGeneral includes components which will specifically
tackle those issues.
Thirdly, it is necessary to listen to the views of all
the major stakeholders in the issue — Timor-Leste,
States in the region, friends of Timor-Leste, donors and
troop contributors — so that the international
community, specifically the United Nations, can make
an informed decision on the next course of action for
Timor-Leste. Today’s meeting fulfils that need.
We need once again to invest time, effort and
resources in Timor-Leste. We commend the immediate
response of Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand and
Portugal in deploying troops to quell the violence and
maintain law and order in the country. Their actions
show what countries in the region and friends can do to
assist in alleviating crises and preventing them from
further expanding. We hope that their valuable
contributions will find a role in the new mission.
Ultimately, the future of Timor-Leste depends, to
a large extent, on the Timorese themselves. Having
gained hard-won independence, they should now get
their act together. That means maintaining meaningful
dialogue among national players, addressing factionridden splits, searching for employment opportunities
for young people and focusing on developing new
orientations and values that would promote tolerance
and openness. Timor-Leste can remain on track if it
follows a focused post-conflict peacebuilding
development framework with the assistance of the
international community. Also, the new mission should
serve as an early warning device to alert the Timorese
authorities and the international community about

26

developments which could lead to an impending crisis.
In that context, we believe that Timor-Leste is a prime
situation for consideration in the Peacebuilding
Commission. We wish to recall that several speakers,
including the Secretary-General and the President of
the General Assembly, mentioned Timor-Leste at the
inaugural meeting of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Despite the events of the past months, TimorLeste is still one of the best examples of a successful
international enterprise engineered through the
combined cooperative efforts of the United Nations and
regional partners and players. The international
community should continue to make Timor-Leste a
success story. We will maintain our presence in the
country and we are ready to contribute to successful
peacebuilding programmes there.
The President: I give
representative of Malaysia.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Hamidon (Malaysia): My delegation joins
others in congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. We also wish to pay tribute to your predecessor,
the Permanent Representative of France, for his
stewardship of the Council last month.
I wish to thank you and members of the Council
for convening this public debate to consider the report
of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 1690
(2006). I would like to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste, Mr. José Luis
Guterres, for his invaluable briefing, and the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ian Martin, for his
comprehensive presentation of the report.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General.
It is clear from the report that the process of nationbuilding and reconciliation is a highly complex and
sensitive matter. At the same time, the formation of a
sustainable democratic State will require a higher level
of maturity on the part of the people of Timor-Leste. In
that regard, we hope that the leaders of Timor-Leste
will place great emphasis on the issue of the rights of
the people. Given current developments, we firmly
believe in the will and ability of the leadership and the
people of Timor-Leste to tackle the crucial issues
facing the country. Malaysia believes that, with
political stability and sound economic and social
planning, the economy will gradually progress and
develop.

06-46776

S/PV.5512

We would also like to commend the Security
Council for coming to the aid of Timor-Leste in its
hour of need, and especially for supporting the
deployment of the international security force, which
has played a significant role in maintaining peace and
security in the country. As the Council prepares to reengage in Timor-Leste, in establishing a follow-up
mission it is crucial that the quality as well as the
duration of the international presence be evaluated and
improved. In that regard, Malaysia supports the
establishment of a multidimensional and integrated
United Nations peacekeeping mission, prioritizing the
long-term needs of the people of Timor-Leste, and in
that regard recognizes their immediate humanitarian
and security concerns. We have confidence that the
United Nations is able to meet Timor-Leste’s need for
economic
development,
education,
recovery,
transparency, capacity-building and justice in a
comprehensive and effective manner.
Timor-Leste is an independent, sovereign
member of the community of nations. In the exercise of
its rights, the request contained in the letter dated
4 August 2006 addressed to the Secretary-General from
the Prime Minister of the Republic of Timor-Leste
should be the basis for serious consideration by the
Security Council and the international community. The
request for a strong civilian component, with a police
force of considerable strength backed by a small
military force under the command and control of the
United Nations, is a matter of vital urgency for the
mandate of the new mission, in conformity with the
will of the Timorese people. The call was a
manifestation of Timor-Leste’s exercise of its rights as
a sovereign nation. In that regard, we call on the
United Nations and other international agencies,
including the international security forces, to respect
the spirit and decisions of the people of Timor-Leste.
Malaysia will continue to uphold its commitment
to the collective attainment of global peace through its
unwavering support of the central role of the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security. In August 2003, the Royal Malaysian Police
deployed a self-sustained unit consisting of 125
personnel to serve in the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor to form the international police
unit in support of the Timor-Leste national police.
Currently, the Royal Malaysian Police continues to
deploy a formed police unit of up to 250 police
personnel under a bilateral agreement between the

06-46776

Government of Malaysia and the Government of
Timor-Leste.
The Government of Malaysia is continuously
reviewing its position with a view to being further
involved in Timor-Leste. In that regard, Malaysia looks
forward to and is ready to meet our obligations in the
form of making available a formed police unit of up to
140 police personnel for the new mission in TimorLeste. Malaysia shall continue to provide competent
and well-trained police officers to that component.
Finally, it is clear to Malaysia, judging from the
Secretary-General’s report, that the international
community must assess and take stock of the progress
and challenges faced by the Government and people of
Timor-Leste, and that it has a common responsibility to
contribute to Timor-Leste’s progress and development
in the period following the draw-down of the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste. It is crucial for us to
meet the urgent and indispensable requirements of the
country in its time of need. In that connection, my
delegation looks forward to the adoption of a
comprehensive draft resolution to meet the urgent
needs of Timor-Leste.
The President: I give
representative of Cape Verde.

the

floor

to

the

Mrs. Lima da Veiga (Cape Verde): May I thank
you, Sir, and, through you, the members of this Council
for allowing the delegation of Cape Verde to
participate in this debate, which is so important for
Timor-Leste and for all those who genuinely wish to
see that country treading the path of peace, stability
and progress. Since this is the first time my delegation
is addressing the Council under your presidency, let me
congratulate you on assuming that important position.
We wish you continued success in discharging your
mandate.
My delegation expresses its appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his two very informative reports,
and to Mr. Ian Martin, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, for his insightful briefing and assessment of
the situation in Timor-Leste.
We also thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Timor-Leste, Mr. José Luis
Guterres, for his important statement.
Furthermore, we associate ourselves with the
statement to be made by Ambassador Luis Fonseca,

27

S/PV.5512

Executive Secretary of the Community of PortugueseSpeaking Countries.

mission will be given the necessary resources and
means to successfully carry out its mandate.

Sharing significant historical, political and
cultural ties with Timor-Leste, Cape Verde has always
supported the struggle of the Timorese for a free,
independent and prosperous country, coexisting
peacefully with its neighbours. We have therefore been
following very closely the evolution of the situation on
the ground.

Lasting peace and stability in Timor-Leste will be
achieved only when the country’s development
challenges are addressed in a comprehensive way. In
that context, we are heartened by the political
determination and leadership of the Timorese
authorities in launching long-term initiatives and plans
with a view to reinforcing the still-fragile internal
stability, consolidate and maximize the major progress
achieved in State-building and meet the challenges
ahead in the political, judicial, legal, economic and
social sectors. Those efforts deserve firm, generous and
sustainable support from the international community.

Concerning the security situation, we are
heartened to learn about the positive measures adopted
by the Timorese authorities in order to foster
reconciliation, confidence and dialogue within the
population and among the main political stakeholders.
Yet the root causes of the recent crises are still to be
tackled. That is a prerequisite for the success of the
State-building process and the holding of the first
presidential and parliamentary elections in 2007. We
therefore encourage the authorities and all stakeholders
to demonstrate perseverance, tolerance and cooperation
in order to speed up the process. Furthermore, steady
back-up from the international community is much
needed if that huge task is to succeed.
As part of the international effort to restore
normalcy to the country, we commend the role played
by Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand and Portugal.
However, as the Timorese authorities have themselves
acknowledged, the current situation requires that the
prevailing arrangements regarding the international
forces be reviewed.
Therefore, and in line with the common position
of the Community of Portuguese Speaking Countries,
the Capeverdian delegation supports the call of the
Timorese authorities for a robust, multidisciplinary and
integrated mission that is adequate to the situation
prevailing in Timor-Leste. With a small military
component placed under the control and command of
the United Nations, such a mission would be very
instrumental in consolidating peace and stability and in
assisting in the preparation of the electoral process, in
full respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Timor-Leste.
We are pleased to note that the Secretary-General
has given due consideration to that request and has
incorporated it into its report. We are confident that the
proposals made in the report deserve the indispensable
adherence of the members of this Council and that the

28

That is the reason my delegation welcomes the
recommendations of the Secretary-General on the ways
and means to reinforce security and to assist the
authorities in promoting development that is pro-poor,
gender-sensitive, youth-focused and aimed at
enhancing
institution-building,
governance
and
democracy. Cape Verde stands ready to continue to
cooperate with Timor-Leste and the international
community towards the achievement of those goals.
Cape Verde experts are already assisting the Timorese
authorities in capacity- and institution-building in the
fields of justice and public administration, under a
framework of international cooperation. On the
bilateral level, Cape Verde and Timor-Leste have
already agreed on plans and programmes to foster a
fruitful partnership in areas of common interest.
The President: I
representative of Cuba.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Malmierca Díaz (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, on behalf of the Cuban delegation, allow
me to commend you, Sir, on the work you and your
team have been carrying out in the presidency of the
Security Council this month. I would also like very
much to welcome the presence at this meeting of
Mr. José Luis Guterres, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Timor-Leste. We thank him for his
valuable statement he made this morning. We also
welcome the presence and statement of Mr. Ian Martin,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for TimorLeste.
The situation in Timor-Leste is the result of the
structural underdevelopment of that Asian nation and
one of the most telling cases of the nefarious
consequences of colonialism and of the unjust and

06-46776

S/PV.5512

exclusive current international order. When it comes to
the situation in Timor-Leste and other third world
countries, attention in the United Nations is almost
always focused exclusively on security issues. In
practice, little or no attention is given to the urgent and
serious structural, economic and social problems
afflicting those countries. The eradication of poverty
and underdevelopment is a key prerequisite in the
maintenance of international peace and security. There
can be no peace without development or development
without peace.
With regard to security issues, the efforts of the
international community in Timor-Leste, as in any
other country, should fully respect the sovereignty and
independence of that State. The Government of TimorLeste has clearly stated its position as to the form that
the presence of international actors in the country
should take under a United Nations mandate. Cuba
believes that the wishes and interests expressed in that
regard by the Government and people of Timor-Leste
should be duly taken into account by the Security
Council.
The challenges to be overcome by the people and
Government of Timor-Leste in the coming years
require enormous resources that are far beyond the
capacities of a State with limited resources. Genuine
international cooperation with that country, based on
respect for its sovereignty, will be one of the main
ways to prevent conflict and strengthen peace. The
international community has a moral obligation to help
Timor-Leste to build a future of political stability and
sustainable socio-economic development. It must
undertake a serious commitment to assist TimorLeste’s Government in training human resources and
establishing the infrastructure that this Asian country
so urgently needs.
Cuba, a small country that has for more than 45
years been subject to the most brutal and merciless
economic, financial and commercial blockade ever
suffered by any country, has continued its modest
cooperation with Timor-Leste. Cuba’s cooperation with
that country extends to various sectors, but primarily to
the area of health care. Cuba’s medical assistance has
included treating 440,849 patients, assisting in 3,620
births, carrying out 2,198 surgical operations,
administering vaccinations to 7,496 persons and saving
over 6,000 lives.

06-46776

Despite the situation experienced by that country,
Cuban aid workers, who are strictly committed to the
principle of non-interference in Timor-Leste’s internal
affairs, have remained at their posts. In particular,
Cuba’s medical brigade — which is made up of 274
health workers, of whom 206 are medical doctors —
has been a model of selfless cooperation, saving lives
under the most difficult conditions. In addition to
providing basic and specialized health services, that
team is holding classes and running the recently
opened school of medicine, which began classes in
December 2005 with 60 students. Moreover, 40 clinical
laboratory technicians are finishing their studies and 22
x-ray technicians are currently being trained. As a
complement to that effort, 470 young people from
Timor-Leste are studying in Cuba, most of them
preparing to begin their medical studies in our country
and others to enrol in other specialties.
We are not here to lecture. What Cuba is doing
today for Timor-Leste is just a modest example of how
much more could be achieved in that country through
international cooperation and solidarity, mainly by
those States with larger economic and financial
resources. We are certain that more could also be done
for Timor-Leste in the context of the United Nations.
We hope that this Security Council debate will
contribute to defining short-term strategies that are in
line with the real needs of the people of Timor-Leste.
Lastly, my delegation would like to reiterate that
the people of Timor-Leste can always count on Cuba’s
unwavering determination to continue to strengthen its
assistance and solidarity. In so doing, we will be
meeting a duty and honouring a debt of gratitude to the
peoples of the third world — in this case to the people
of Timor-Leste, who have always demonstrated their
resolute and constant friendship and solidarity with my
country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Ms. Banks (New Zealand): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report on Timor-Leste
and for his recommendations on the future involvement
of the United Nations. I would like to commend in
particular the work of Special Envoy Ian Martin and
his assessment team, who have produced a thorough
and comprehensive analysis of the challenges facing
Timor-Leste today. While there are some elements of
the report that do concern us, on the whole we believe

29

S/PV.5512

it provides a very sound blueprint for United Nations
engagement with Timor-Leste in the coming years.
Given the lateness of the hour, my statement will
be a shortened version of the statement that is being
circulated.
The security situation in Timor-Leste has begun
to stabilize. It remains clear, however, that outbreaks of
violence are still possible and that international
assistance will be required for some time to guarantee
the safety of the Timorese people. The stability that has
been achieved has allowed initial steps to be taken
towards political and social reconciliation, a process
that must be protected and encouraged.
The Secretary-General’s report highlights the
multitude of difficulties that the new United Nations
mission in Timor-Leste will face. Against that
background, New Zealand wholeheartedly endorses the
report’s emphasis on a sustained commitment and a
coordinated approach. We believe that we should
articulate that commitment by giving the new United
Nations mission an extended initial mandate and
strongly affirming that that mandate must be renewed.
Our long-term commitment to Timor-Leste is likely to
be counted in years, not months.
We support the call for a compact between TimorLeste and the international community to ensure
coordination between the mission and Timorese
Government priorities, plans and budgeting processes.
The building of the new mission in Timor-Leste must
be done in a carefully coordinated way with the United
Nations funds and programmes, multilateral donors and
bilateral partners.
It is clear that the new mission must have strong
and
dynamic
leadership.
The
new
special
representative will need flexibility in his use of
resources and must convey a sense of vision and
authority to the Government and people of TimorLeste.
As the report notes, the failures of the Timorese
defence and police forces are interconnected. We
welcome, therefore, the call for a holistic review of the
security sector encompassing reform of both defence
and police. That should involve “first principles”
discussions with the Timorese Government and civil
society on the nation’s real security needs and the
structures that are best suited to meeting those needs.

30

In terms of military support for the new United
Nations mission, New Zealand is comfortable with the
recommendations contained in the report. We realize,
however, that consensus has not yet emerged around
those arrangements, and we look forward to working
closely with all interested stakeholders to find a
solution that meets all of our concerns. From New
Zealand’s perspective as one of the contributors to the
current stabilization force, it is important that the
military presence in Timor-Leste, however it evolves,
enjoy broad-based support and clearly recognized
international legitimacy.
The report proposes a substantial United Nations
policing component. New Zealand remains concerned
that the number of police being sought may be too
great. The United Nations police will have a short-term
role in front-line policing, but we hope they will be
able to move quickly to working with the National
Police Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL), aiding in its
reform and recovery.
We note that the placing of United Nations police
in front-line policing positions and the subsequent
gradual increase in the numbers of PNTL patrolling
alongside them will not of itself lead to the creation of
a new and robust PNTL. That process has been relied
on in the past and has failed. The rebuilding of the
PNTL must be a deliberate process based on one
training model and led by police trainers from a single
bilateral partner.
The recommendations in the report relating to
justice and human rights are of crucial importance.
New Zealand has consistently supported the work of
the Serious Crimes Unit, and we are pleased that its
investigations will resume.
We also consider it vital to address the problems
confronting the day-to-day functioning of the criminal
justice system. To be effective and durable, all the
institutions of government must connect with all
Timorese. We hope that, as part of its work on
institutional capacity-building and governance, the
mission will encourage the full functioning of
government, including the justice sector, in both
official languages — Portuguese and Tetun.
Finally, we continue to urge the Timorese
leadership to work together to regain the confidence of
its people. Now is the time for strong and united
leadership. In that context, may I congratulate Foreign
Minister Guterres on his appointment and thank him

06-46776

S/PV.5512

for his update and for his words of determined
commitment.
We are relying on Timor’s political leaders to
take responsibility for the future of their nation and to
rebuild respect for the political process. We are
encouraged by the first steps; they must continue, and
we must do all we can to provide sustained support.
The President: I give
representative of Australia.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Hill (Australia): We would like to take this
opportunity to thank Special Representative Hasegawa
and the staff of the United Nations Office in TimorLeste (UNOTIL) for their dedicated efforts. We also
thank Ian Martin and his team, and congratulate them
on a thorough and professional investigation into the
situation in East Timor. We congratulate Minister
Guterres on his appointment and wish him well for the
future. The international community was quick to
respond to the deterioration in the situation in TimorLeste with the dispatch of an international stabilization
force, which has successfully restored security and
stability.
We have now all had the opportunity to consider
the Secretary-General’s comprehensive report and must
focus on moving forward, in partnership with TimorLeste, to secure that country’s future stability, security
and prosperity. Australia has been at the forefront of
efforts by the international community to assist TimorLeste. Along with Malaysia, New Zealand and
Portugal, we dispatched troops and police to TimorLeste in response to the crisis. We contributed
8 million Australian dollars to address humanitarian
aspects. We have provided 450 million Australian
dollars in development assistance to the country since
1999. We will provide an estimated 43 million
Australian dollars during 2006 and 2007. That will
involve a strong focus on strengthening governance
institutions, including in law and justice, public
administration and public sector financial management,
and improving delivery of services to rural
populations. And we stand ready to contribute to a new
United Nations mission in Timor-Leste.
As a close friend and neighbour of Timor-Leste,
Australia has a vital interest in ensuring that it develop
as a stable democracy, and we are willing to take a
leading role in the international community’s efforts to
ensure a better future for the Timorese people.

06-46776

The United Nations must also continue to play a
robust role in supporting Timor-Leste. The United
Nations should focus its resources on those areas of
key concern where the United Nations can make a
difference.
We welcome the emphasis on support for political
and community reconciliation contained in the
Secretary-General’s report. To ensure long-term
stability, it is vital that the United Nations assist TimorLeste in resolving political difficulties. We welcome
the proposal to provide electoral assistance to TimorLeste ahead of next year’s elections. Those elections
represent an important step in the country’s political
maturation, and it is in the interests of all of us to
ensure their success. It is important, however, that
efforts to support elections give priority to ensuring
that Timor-Leste establish electoral institutions which
are, and are accepted by all stakeholders as being,
politically neutral, independent and professional in all
respects.
We are pleased with the priority given to policing
in the report. Public security is a prerequisite of
building both a democracy and an economy. We accept,
for the time being, the need to have a force with an
executive capability. We are pleased with the emphasis
on the community policing model, which will not only
best address local needs but also help build public
confidence.
We are pleased with the acceptance of the need to
help build a sustainable Timor-Leste police force that
will have the confidence and culture to be able to deal
with any future crisis of law and order in a fair and just
way. We will offer a significant contribution to
policing.
The security task for the future is primarily a law
and order one, but to be addressed by civilian police.
However, we accept that for some time there will be a
need for a military back-up to the police and for the
additional security of the United Nations personnel and
property that a military force can give. We also accept
the desirability of support from a military force while a
significant number of high-powered weapons remain
unaccounted for.
We are currently contributing up to 2,000 troops
to the international stabilization force. While we are
gradually drawing down our contribution as conditions
improve, we have indicated that we are prepared to
continue to provide a force that is required to meet

31

S/PV.5512

both of the needs to which I referred. In consultation
with Timor-Leste, we would seek regional participation
in such a force, which would provide both a rapid
deployment capability and security for the United
Nations. That would ensure a flexible force with its
own air mobility, which could, at short notice, be
bolstered to meet unexpected circumstances — a force
familiar with the environment and the tasks with
proven command and control. It would be cost-saving
and would enable the United Nations mission to focus
on the tasks that can be best done by the United
Nations and where a real need exists. With regard to
both the policing and the military tasks, we believe it is
important that the Security Council provide authority
under Chapter VII to permit the effective functioning
of the forces, together with the support that they are
entitled to expect.
The international community is again ready to
come to the assistance of Timor-Leste, and Australia
will play its part. A new United Nations mission
represents an important opportunity to repair and
rebuild those institutions which have been damaged or
destroyed during the recent crisis and to further
strengthen those institutions which have shown
resilience.
Above all, the United Nations and the many
friends of Timor-Leste in the international community
must lay the groundwork that will enable the Timorese
people to take responsibility for their own affairs.
The President: I now call on Mr. Luis Fonseca,
Executive Secretary of the Community of PortugueseSpeaking Countries.
Mr. Fonseca (Community of PortugueseSpeaking Countries): At the outset, let me thank you,
Mr. President, and the other members of the Security
Council for inviting the Community of PortugueseSpeaking Countries (CPLP) to take part in this
important meeting, which is expected to form the basis
for decisions crucial for the future of the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste.
The CPLP welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2006/628) and its conclusions, which
coincide to a large extent with the views that have been
expressed in various United Nations forums on this
subject.
I wish to commend Mr. Ian Martin for his efforts
to help find a sustainable solution to the crisis in

32

Timor-Leste. I would also like to express support for
the statement delivered to the Security Council by
Mr. José Luis Guterres, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Timor-Leste.
Like the numerous other friends of Timor-Leste,
CPLP member States followed with great concern the
events that led to the situation now under consideration
by the Security Council and were deeply saddened by
their tragic results. On 18 June 2006, in the wake of
those events, the CPLP Council of Ministers held an
emergency meeting in Lisbon and adopted a political
declaration expressing their countries’ solidarity with
the Timorese people, offering assistance and endorsing
the request of the Timorese authorities for the
establishment of a new United Nations mission with
police, military and civil components that would
support the stabilization and peacebuilding efforts.
They also expressed the willingness of their countries
to participate in such a mission.
A ministerial mission was dispatched to TimorLeste to assess the situation and to offer assistance to
the authorities in their efforts to restore stability and
pursue the path of development, which had been
interrupted by the events. The results of the ministerial
mission were reviewed by the Sixth Conference of
Heads of State and Government of the CPLP, held in
Bissau on 17 July 2006, which reaffirmed its solidarity
with the people and the authorities of Timor-Leste and
reiterated the right of Timor-Leste to the full exercise
of its national sovereignty in all respects, with the aim
of building its future in peace and independence and
without any restraints or limitations.
CPLP member States believe that they can make
a positive contribution to the international efforts to
bring peace, stability and democracy to Timor-Leste.
Our member States have shown their commitment to
and solidarity with Timor-Leste in the past by
contributing to the country’s development, both
bilaterally and through international initiatives in the
context of United Nations coordinated programmes.
They are prepared to continue to contribute to the
current international efforts within the United Nations
framework to restore stability in Timor-Leste.
We are pleased to note that the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2006/628) on the future role of
the United Nations in Timor-Leste contains positions
expressed by the CPLP Council of Ministers. The
report meets with our approval, and we support it. We

06-46776

S/PV.5512

note that the report also emphasizes that the actions of
the United Nations and of the rest of the international
community in Timor-Leste will be undertaken in
cooperation and coordination with the legitimate
national Government. We agree that there is a need to
establish a strong police force and a small military
force under United Nations command and control. Full
respect for the sovereignty of the independent nation of
Timor-Leste and for its institutions is, in our view, a
basic prerequisite for the success of our collective
endeavour.

should be reflected in the mission’s mandate, which
must stress the need for political good offices and
reconciliation. The CPLP ministers also underlined the
importance of holding general elections in 2007 with a
view to consolidating the democratic institutions of
Timor-Leste, and they expressed their readiness to
assist in ensuring the success of the electoral process.
Electoral support is part of the mission’s mandate,
which must be accompanied by a much-needed
programme promoting broad civic education and
democracy.

Reform of the security sector is a crucial task, on
which a large part of the mission’s attention and
resources will be concentrated. The SecretaryGeneral’s report acknowledges the difficulties in the
armed forces and the police force, requiring the
coordination of efforts to reform those sectors. This is
a matter of great importance about which serious
decisions should be made — decisions that will require
planning for the long term and careful thought as to the
role and responsibilities of military forces in TimorLeste’s future.

Human rights, the administration of justice,
institutional capacity-building, good governance,
gender issues and public information are issues central
to the mandate of the mission, whose structure will, we
hope, enable it to accomplish its purposes.

The report also fully recognizes the need for
better police training, for the strengthening of the
operational independence and internal accountability of
the police, and for credible, independent civilian
oversight of police operations. In response to the
observations and the appeal made in paragraphs 67 and
68 of the report, CPLP member States will consider
active participation in the provision of assistance to
that sector.
The assessment mission to Timor-Leste
acknowledged that sustainable economic development
must also be a central element in the mission’s mandate
and recognized the link between economic
development and security, pointing out that poverty,
high unemployment and a lack of foreseeable
opportunities are underlying causes of the conflict.
Another very sensitive issue stressed by the CPLP
is the dialogue among Timorese political forces, a
condition essential for the country’s development. That

We are aware that, at the present juncture in
world affairs, a number of more pressing issues are
attracting international attention. But that should not
cause us to forget the plight of the Timorese people or
the Timorese experience, which for some time
appeared to be — and, we are convinced, still can
be — a United Nations success story. The “compact”
proposed by the Secretary-General appears to be a right
step towards that goal.
Building a nation requires will, determination and
the democratic participation of all. Four years as an
independent nation is too short a period in which to
achieve such far-reaching accomplishments. What the
international community is expected to do is help the
Timorese people return to the path of reconciliation,
peace and development on which they embarked four
years ago. That is not beyond reach; it will consist
mostly of walking another mile in terms of the
commitment they undertook when the new nation was
welcomed as a Member of the United Nations. CPLP
countries wish to play an active part in the
international engagement to that end.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

06-46776

33
