S/PV.7997

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7997th meeting

Monday, 10 July 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Aboulatta
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Barro
Mr. Skoog
Mrs. Halchenko
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia
(S/2017/539)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-20867 (E)
*1720867*

S/PV.7997

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council
(S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in Colombia
(S/2017/539)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Colombia to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her Excellency
Ms. María Ángela Holguín Cuéllar, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2017/583, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by all the members of the Security
Council. I would like to thank them for submitting the
draft resolution.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/539, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission
in Colombia.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
The President (spoke in Chinese): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2366 (2017).
2/10

10/07/2017

Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by welcoming Foreign Minister Holguín Cuéllar
to the Security Council.
The United Kingdom welcomes the Council’s
unanimous adoption today of resolution 2366 (2017).
Last month, President Santos Calderón called on
the Council to continue its support for Colombia on
its journey towards peace. We are delighted that we
have collectively been able to respond so swiftly and
so positively to that call by establishing a second
United Nations mission to accompany the next
phase in Colombia’s implementation of Colombia’s
peace process.
We have witnessed an extraordinary journey in
Colombia since we established the first United Nations
mission in January 2016. That journey, beginning just
18 months ago, culminated with the FARC laying down
its weapons on 27 June and ending the days of Colombia
at war. We are privileged to have been able to play a
role in support throughout this momentous period.
I would also like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the work of the first United Nations Mission,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Arnault and his team in helping the parties reach this
remarkable achievement. They have truly exemplified
the best that the United Nations has to offer.
But experience from our own history in Northern
Ireland has taught us that the hardest part remains
ahead. A sustainable and lasting peace will depend on
the FARC’s successful reincorporation into civilian
life. So we welcome the leadership shown again by
both parties in calling for United Nations support to
accompany this next crucial phase in implementation
of the peace process.
As penholder on today’s resolution, we have of
course consulted closely with the Government of
Colombia and the FARC. We have every faith in the
commitment President Santos Calderón made during
our visit in May that every last comma of the Peace
Agreements will be implemented. The FARC leadership
told us that they are grateful for the support of the
Security Council, including the action it has taken
today. They told us that they look forward to the Council
17-20867

10/07/2017

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

S/PV.7997

continuing its support in the months and years ahead. I
am confident that we will not let the parties down.

parallel processes in the implementation of the various
points of the Agreement.

Colombia has offered a beacon of hope for the
world. This Chamber is no stranger to the worst
conflicts and crises of our time. In too many places war
is the norm and peace remains a distant dream. Thanks
in small part to our efforts and our unity, Colombia is
showing that peace is possible. I encourage all of us to
continue to demonstrate that unity and stand with all
of the people of Colombia during the next phase of the
peace process.

It is positive and encouraging that there are already
different actions all aiming towards the same goal. The
resolution adopted today is an example of this, as is the
creation of the Multi-Donor Trust Fund of the United
Nations for Post-Conflict in Colombia. The positive
results obtained in the first year of operations in the
selected areas as priorities are a major contribution to
stabilizing peace in Colombia. We also welcome with
great satisfaction the news of the decision taken by
the Secretary General to declare Colombia eligible for
additional support from the Peacebuilding Fund for a
five-year period.

Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to welcome the Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Colombia, Ms. María Ángela Holguín Cuéllar, and
express on behalf of Uruguay our great satisfaction at
the adoption by unanimity of resolution 2366 (2017).
We also congratulate and thank the United Kingdom
for the successful negotiation of the text.
For Uruguay, this resolution is a renewed
demonstration of the unequivocal support of the
Security Council for the peace process in Colombia and
recognition of the tenacious and indefatigable will of
the Colombian Government and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) to achieve a lasting and stable peace.
They have once again demonstrated their commitment
to peace and, at the same time, the trust they have in
the United Nations in by asking for fresh support, this
time focusing on the political, economic and social
reintegration of the FARC-EP and the implementation
of personal and collective security measures for their
members as well as comprehensive programmes
for security and protection of the communities and
organizations in the territories.
We are very pleased with the prompt response
of the Secretary-General, Mr António Guterres, and
the Security Council to the request of the parties,
which we consider to be very timely at this stage of
the peace process in Colombia, referring to aspects
that must be dealt with without delay to preserve and
strengthen the great achievement embodied in the
historic laying-down-of-arms ceremony that took place
on 27 June. These are aspects of a peace agreement
that the Government of Colombia and the FARC-EP
have been able make central to the potential, solidity,
stability and durability of the peace. To ensure success
in the implementation phase, we must not lose sight of
the comprehensive focus on making progress through

Once again, we must stress in this Chamber the
example that the will and the commitment of Colombians
in their unswerving pursuit of peace sets for the
world. As my colleague from the United Kingdom has
indicated, in this Chamber we are constantly talking
about war. Therefore, seeing the light of peace shine
in a Colombian process designed, adopted and guided
by Colombians — and of course put into practice by
Colombians — is a source of immense satisfaction for
us all.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation supported the adoption
of the resolution 2366 (2017) on the establishment of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
This new resolution symbolizes a new step on the
path to consolidating sustainable peace in the country
through a political process and national dialogue. This
has been possible exclusively thanks to the efforts of
the Colombians themselves.
We welcome the achievement by the participants of
a settlement that has led to the important result of the
laying down of weapons by the partisans of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC),
which has opened the path to their full integration into
civilian life. In this regard, we note the coordinating
role of the United Nations and the contribution of
guarantor countries, Cuba and Norway, together with
the assistance of Venezuela and Chile.
We welcomed the communiqué of the Government
and the FARC of 29 May and what followed on 7 June,
namely, the letter of the President of Colombia to the
Security Council on the achievement of additional
agreements supporting the peace process. We support
the request in these documents for the launch today,

17-208673/10

S/PV.7997

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

10 July, of a new phase of the special political mission,
in order for the parties to be able to look to tomorrow
with confidence and understand what international
assistance will be provided to them.
In working on today’s resolution, we assumed that
the synchronization of the Mission’s mandate with
progress in the peace process would be carried out
seamlessly. The current mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Colombia will therefore continue to act as
planned until September, and its financing and staffing
will be fully maintained. At the same time, in a stepby-step fashion, the Mission will move to fulfilling
isolated monitoring tasks associated with the next
step. We hope that this smooth transition will allow the
Mission to adapt without rush.
We will continue to carefully monitor the security
situation. It is important that we do not allow a vacuum
to form. We hope that the parties will work in good faith
and fulfil in a timely manner all of their obligations
according to the existing agreements. For our part, we
intend to continue our efforts, including along the lines
of the United Nations Mission in Colombia, to support
the Colombian people and Government in building a
stable peace and in post-conflict development.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan voted
today in favour of resolution 2366 (2017), which
establishes the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia for an initial period of 12 months. This new
mission is designed to be the second political mission
in the country.
The unanimous adoption of the resolution
demonstrates the commitment and determination of
the Security Council to ensure the comprehensive
and sustained implementation of the historic peace
agreement reached between the Government of
Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia (FARC). We believe that, through its
transparency, monitoring and verification mechanism,
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
will help the parties to attain the far-reaching political
and economic reforms agreed in the peace deal, including
the economic and social reintegration of former FARC
members into society. After successfully completing
the first stage of the peace process, which focused on
the completion of the disarmament process, Colombia
is now entering a new chapter of the peace agreement.
I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate the
Colombian Government and our colleagues Ms. Holguín
4/10

10/07/2017

Cuéllar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia and
Permanent Representative Mejía Vélez, who are present
today with us, and most warmly commend efforts to
bring lasting peace to the country. Colombia indeed
sets a fine example of what can be achieved in other
conflict zones and areas of tension in the world when
there is a political commitment and the goodwill of all
sides to achieve common goals.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2366
(2017), which it co-sponsored, and the establishment of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
mandated to observe and verify compliance with the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace. The Mission is entirely
consistent with the laying down of arms by the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia on 27 June,
which is a vital step in the establishment of a sustainable
peace in Colombia.
Once again, we welcome the efforts of the parties in
their pursuit of peace regardless of the challenges they
face. Colombia is proving to the world that it is able to
close the chapter of war and to move resolutely towards
peace. I reiterate my thanks to the parties in Colombia
and, in particular, hail the visionary and courageous
commitment of President Santos Calderón, whom the
Foreign Minister represents here today.
The peace process under way in Colombia represents
a great source of hope and encouragement for the
Council, which has seen so many crises in the course
of fulfilling its role as guarantor of the maintenance of
peace. Much is at stake and there will be challenges. It
is now a question not just achieving peace but, above
all, building it and allowing it to take root over the
long term. The remarkable commitment of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Arnault and
his team alongside the parties is a good example of our
ability and the ability of the United Nations to provide
support. The exemplary results on the ground of the
first Mission, deployed in a timely fashion, show that
the United Nations is up to the expectations and the
trust of the parties.
The adoption of the resolution, in response to the
request made last month, allows us to renew our resolute
commitment. The new mission that we are setting up at
the request of the parties will contribute to verifying
the implementation of the guarantees and dividends of
peace. France is gratified in that regard and would like
17-20867

10/07/2017

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

S/PV.7997

to thank the United Kingdom penholder. France is fully
invested in helping Colombia pave the way for peace
and will continue to provide its full support to sustain
that peace.

Japan will work closely with Colombia and the
United Nations to support the parties in implementing
the Peace Agreement and continues to stand with the
people of Colombia.

French aid now stands at €820 million in loans and
donations linked to post-conflict scenarios. We have also
contributed €3 million directly to the European Union
Emergency Trust Fund for Africa. The resolution that
we have just adopted represents an essential building
block for a process where the United Nations plays an
essential role in helping Colombia along the path to a
sustainable peace. Please be assured that the United
Nations will respond to the call that was made. France
will continue to mobilize decisively to ensure that the
process is a success, with a view to helping Colombia to
open and to win this new chapter in its history.

Ms. Sison (United States of America): I welcome
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia back to
the Chamber. We welcome this morning’s unanimous
adoption of resolution 2366 (2017).

Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to warmly welcome
Foreign Minister Holguín Cuéllar to the Chamber.
Japan welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution
2366 (2017) and is pleased to have co-sponsored it. We
commend the commitment of the parties in Colombia to
the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
The Council has responded to that commitment though
today’s resolution.
Japan congratulates Colombia on the historic
completion of the laying down of arms on 27 June.
That is a major step forward for reconciliation. The
path to lasting peace will rely on the firm commitment
of the parties. We hope that Japanese support for the
rehabilitation of victims, post-conflict assistance such
as demining and various other efforts, will contribute
to the peace process and ultimately to the social and
economic development of the people of Colombia.
Much hard work lies ahead. A successful
reintegration process is vital to sustaining peace.
We appreciate the Colombian initiative for the
socioeconomic reintegration of ex-Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) combatants, and
emphasize the importance of Government efforts to
foster self-sufficiency through capacity-building and
education. Proactive security efforts are also needed to
secure the vacated areas, deal with armed groups and
FARC dissidents, and protect community leaders and
human rights defenders. We will strongly support those
activities, including via the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, but the Government’s role will
be central.

Last year, we witnessed the entry into force of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace. The accord represents
a historic agreement that paves the way for lasting
peace for the Colombian people. We commend the
parties for their determination to persevere through the
implementation of the Peace Agreement. With the near
completion of the disarmament process, we now enter a
critical next stage.
The Security Council has recognized that the
successful reintegration of ex-combatants and
expanding the reach of the Colombian Government
to remote areas of the country are both necessary to
ensure the long-term success of the peace process.
Our own ongoing assistance to Colombia will
focus on, among other things, security, including the
Colombian Government’s counter-narcotics efforts, as
well as its support for the reintegration of ex-combatants,
expansion of State institutions and presence in former
rebel areas, including rural economic development,
justice services, the military’s civil engineering units,
and humanitarian demining.
We recognize that the road ahead will pose
challenges, but I assure you that the United States is fully
committed to the implementation of the peace accord
and to the promotion of security, justice, prosperity,
and respect for human rights for all Colombians.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We are delighted to have
Foreign Minister Holguín Cuéllar here today.
I want to begin by congratulating the Government of
Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia – Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) for reaching
another historic milestone in the peace process with the
successful laying down of individual arms by FARCEP on 27 June. We commend the strong commitment of
both sides and their efforts to overcome challenges in
the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace
that resulted in this historic achievement.

17-208675/10

S/PV.7997

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

The United Nations Mission in Colombia has played
an important role in support of the peace process. We
would like to thank the United Nations Mission in
Colombia and Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Jean Arnault, for their excellent work. A
second political mission in Colombia will support the
parties in building trust and overcoming challenges for
the next stage of this historic process.
Sweden voted in favour of resolution 2366
(2017). We are proud to sponsor it and would like to
take this opportunity to express Sweden’s continued
firm commitment to Colombia and to the United
Nations mission.
The political, economic and social reincorporation
of former combatants is now among the main challenges
moving forward. The violence against human rights
defenders and community leaders and the killings
of FARC-EP members and their families show the
urgent need for a second mission to also verify the
implementation of personal and collective security
guarantees, as requested by the parties. To this end,
the Mission must have sufficient presence locally and
regionally to fulfil its mandate.
A committed and sustained effort is now needed
from all parts of the State, as well as the United Nations
and the international community, in support of the
wider peace agreement, including comprehensive rural
reform, so that it can rapidly deliver tangible peace
dividends for all Colombians.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to seize the opportunity to welcome
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia to this
historic meeting of the Council. We are honoured to be
part of this event.
Resolution 2366 (2017), which was just adopted, is
the outcome of collective efforts for peace in Colombia.
It pushes the peace forward towards a new era, based
on solid ground and with the full and strong support of
the United Nations. It lays the foundation for sustaining
peace and prevents the relapse into conflict based on
national ownership which includes a clear strategy set
by the Government and other parties to the conflict.
I would like to commend the firm commitment of the
parties to the implementation of the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace, despite the major challenges that they
both faced throughout the past year.
6/10

10/07/2017

The adoption of this resolution highlights the
unanimous will to support the Government in its
efforts to achieve peace. Egypt therefore sponsored and
voted in favour of the resolution as an indication of our
firm support for the Colombian Government and for
bringing sustainable and lasting peace to that country.
Before I conclude, I would like to point out the
important lesson to be learned from the peace process
in Colombia. We should gather lessons that we can
use as we look into other dossiers on the Council’s
agenda. The experience of Colombia proved that
political solutions, the commitment of the parties to a
conflict, the support of regional States and the United
Nations, and coordination among the different parties
concerned, in addition to the unity of the Council as it
deals with certain topics, have all contributed directly
to ending the conflict and achieving sustainable peace.
In conclusion, once again, Egypt commends the
people and Government of Colombia on achieving this
historic agreement.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy welcomes the outcome of
today’s voting. It testifies once again to the unanimous
support of the Security Council to the peace process
in Colombia. Italy would like to praise the parties for
confirming, with the completion of the laying down
of arms and the start of the reintegration process, that
firm commitment and strong leadership are key to
the peaceful solution of conflicts. Also, we commend
the Security Council for showing its responsiveness
and capacity to take a unified, timely and contextspecific action.
Allow me to underline that peace is a process,
irreversible in this case, thanks to the strong resolve
of President Santos Calderón and of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia, but still
present challenges that must not be overlooked. We
especially commend in this respect the Government of
Colombia for its efforts in delivering security, services
and economic opportunities to the entire population
across the country. We also commend the Government
for the steps undertaken to curb illegal activities and
organized crime, and will continue to offer bilateral
cooperation to that end and also in the framework of
the European Union.
I would like to conclude by underscoring that the
role played by the United Nations in Colombia and
by the Council is setting an example of flexibility,
effectiveness and respect of the ownership of the
17-20867

10/07/2017

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

parties. The Council will continue to assist the peace
process in line with the principle guiding our joint effort
to strengthen the United Nations as, first and foremost,
a facilitator and a builder of peace. Italy will continue
to support the Security Council action in this direction.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2366 (2017) establishing the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia to
verify the implementation of the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace between the Government of Colombia and
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
(FARC). We express appreciation to the penholder for
its efforts in drafting and facilitating the negotiation
on this important resolution and we are pleased to
have co-sponsored it. Ensuring the continued and
united support of the Council will be critical for the
success of the Mission and the implementation of the
Peace Agreement.
Let me take this opportunity to express our
congratulations to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, who is at this meeting today for the adoption
of this important resolution, for the remarkable progress
that her country has achieved so far with regard to
turning the corner against conflict and embarking on
a path to sustainable peace. We commend the United
Nations Mission in Colombia for all the good work it
has been doing in support of those efforts.
Just a week ago, we had the opportunity to
discuss the situation in Colombia and we welcome
the important and historic milestone that the country
has reached in implementing the Peace Agreement
with the completion of the laying down of individual
weapons held by the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia and their return to the United Nations for
registration and storage. This significant development,
alongside the holding of the bilateral ceasefire and
cessation of hostilities between the Government and
FARC, strengthen our optimism for lasting peace in
the country.
Once again, we commend both the Government
and FARC for their political will and commitment to
advancing the implementation of the Peace Agreement.
Of course, we understand that this is only the beginning
of a long and arduous process and there are difficult
issues that lie ahead, including the implementation of the
amnesty law, the reintegration of the FARC combatants
to civilian life and the implementation of personal and

S/PV.7997

collective security and protection measures and others.
We also recognize the potential complication ahead in
relation to the upcoming general elections due to take
place in May 2018. Therefore, it is imperative that the
parties continue to stay the course and the positive
momentum generated recently is sustained to achieve
the difficult transition to peace. In this regard, the role
of the United Nations Mission in Colombia continues
to be critical to further consolidate the gains of the
Peace Agreement. That is why we have supported the
establishment of a second United Nations mission upon
the completion of the mandate of the current Mission.
Finally, we want to reaffirm our continued support
to the full implementation of the Colombian Peace
Agreement and express our solidarity with the people
and Government of Colombia as they continue their
efforts to make the transition towards sustainable peace.
Mrs. Halchenko (Ukraine) (spoke in Spanish):
Ukraine reiterates its support to Colombia’s efforts to
implement the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. We congratulate
the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejercito del Pueblo
for reaching, on 27 June, another historic milestone in
the peace process with the successful completion of the
laying down of individual weapons. At the same time
it is a source of pride for us that the United Nations,
through its Mission in Colombia, contributed to the
implementation of the agreements on the laying down
of weapons and the ceasefire. We would like the United
Nations to have more of this kind of achievement.
That is why we believe that the United Nations should
carefully study the lessons of Colombia so as to apply
its best practices in other parts of the world.
Effective reintegration is the key to lasting peace.
During its visit to Colombia in May, the Security
Council clearly demonstrated that in order to guarantee
a stable and lasting peace, it is essential to ensure
reintegration and reconciliation, with special attention
to the needs of the most affected and vulnerable groups.
In that context, we commend today’s historic adopt of
resolution 2366 (2017), establishing the second United
Nations mission in Colombia. At the same time, we
express our appreciation and gratitude to the British
delegation for its leadership and intense work, which has
culminated in the successful adoption of the document.
The Security Council should continue to play a
proactive role in supporting the parties on their path

17-208677/10

S/PV.7997

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

towards the implementation of the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace. Today’s decision will contribute to strengthening
the United Nations role in peacebuilding in postconflict situations, and provide the necessary support
to strengthen peace, human rights and development for
the benefit of all Colombian citizens.
Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I extend the condolences of Senegal to the
Government and the people of Egypt following the
violent terrorist attack targeting Egyptian soldiers on
7 July, killing 23.
We also welcome the presence among us of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia.
I further wish to thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for its excellent work as penholder and for
introducing resolution 2366 (2017), which we have
just adopted. We welcome the unity of the Council,
which must remain active in helping Colombia in this
crucial phase and in consolidating its gains. Senegal
welcomes the important progress that has been made in
the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace
between the Government and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC), ending a conflict
that lasted more than 50 years.
The people of Colombia owe this progress above
all to the commitment of the Government of Colombia,
as well as to the leaders of FARC, in particular in
the framework of the disarmament process. Through
these actions, both parties have shown their deep
commitment and devotion to peace. They deserve our
support and encouragement, particularly in overcoming
the few obstacles that remain on the long road to
sustainable peace.
I believe that the Security Council’s visit from 3 to
5 May made a significant contribution to establishing
a climate of trust between the parties. It is very
important that, at this stage of the implementation
process of the Peace Agreement, efforts be redoubled
with respect to building the FARC camps within the
relevant communities, while ensuring the security of
former FARC combatants and their reintegration into
society, not only as a political force but also as active
participants in economic life. Senegal reiterates its
full and unwavering support for the deployment of the
new United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
8/10

10/07/2017

whose ultimate objective is the follow-up of the
Peace Agreement.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Senegal’s support for
peace in Colombia, in the reasonable hope that, with
the Final Peace Agreement and the support of the
international community, Colombia will put an end to a
conflict that lasted too long.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Ms. María
Ángela Holguín Cuéllar, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia, for her presence in the Chamber today.
The Security Council has unanimously adopted
resolution 2366 (2017), establishing the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia to monitor the
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace, demonstrating its unshakeable support for the
peace process in Colombia. Bolivia is proud to have
co-sponsored the resolution.
As we have noted previously, this process is
succceeding because the Government and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejercito
del Pueblo (FARC-EP) are in ongoing dialogue
because their ultimate goal is peace. This attitude of
dialogue and understanding must now be maintained
and strengthened as we enter the most difficult part
of the process — the political, social and economic
reintegration of FARC-EP and the implementation of
personal and collective security guarantees. This phase
is a true challenge.
The killings of community leaders and human
rights champions linked to the guerrillas or their
families, dissidents who encourage hate speech and
non-reconciliation, the underground economy and other
factors are challenges that highlight the complexity of
the reintegration process. The Government and FARCEP have placed their trust once again in the Security
Council and the United Nations, and we welcome the
fact that the Council has demonstrated its unanimous
support for Colombia. We should like to see the process
held up as an example to the entire world.
We also wish to thank the current Mission, headed
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Jean Arnault and his team, for the commitment they
have shown to their work in the first stage. Their work is
critical and enjoys the unconditional support of Bolivia.
17-20867

10/07/2017

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

S/PV.7997

The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of China.

I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia.

China welcomes the presence of Ms. María Ángela
Holguín Cuéllar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, in today’s meeting. In January 2016, at the
request of the Government of Colombia and other parties,
the Council authorized for the first time the deployment
of the United Nations Mission in Colombia to support
the advancement of the peace process in the country.
Over the past year, the peace process in Colombia has
made important headway. China appreciates the efforts
of President Santos Calderón and the relevant parties
in Colombia, as well as the Government of Colombia.
We also thank the United Nations Mission in Colombia
and the relevant countries for contributing to the
advancement of the peace process in Colombia.

Ms. Holguín Cuéllar (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I thank you, Mr. President, the
Permanent Representative of the People’s Republic of
China, for having convened this meeting. I wish you
every success in your work.

The unanimous adoption of resolution 2366 (2017)
today by the Council on the deployment of the second
mission in Colombia — the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia—once again sends a positive
signal in support of that country’s peace process. It will
give strong impetus to the full implementation of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace in Colombia. The advance
of the peace process in Colombia not only is conducive
to maintaining peace and stability in Latin America,
but also has important reference value to the Council in
promoting solutions to hotspot issues in other countries
and regions.
We hope that Government of Colombia and other
parties will be united in promoting the advancement
of new achievements in the peace process and thereby
set a good example for the international community in
addressing conflicts appropriately. We also hope that
the Secretariat will continue to respect the leadership of
Colombia in the peace process, enhance communication
and coordination with the Government and the relevant
parties, put forward constructive options and proposals
regarding the size and mandate of the Verification
Mission, and make effective preparations for the peace
process in the country to yield greater results.
China will work with other members of the Council
in making new contributions to lasting peace security,
prosperity and development in Colombia.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

With regard to the work and preparations on
today’s resolution 2366 (2017), I would like to express
our particular gratitude to the Government of the
United Kingdom and to Ambassador Matthew Rycroft
and the diplomats at the Permanent Mission, as well
as especially to Ms. Catherine Carr for her availability
and role as penholder on the resolution.
I am very moved in thanking all of the members of
the Security Council for adopting this new resolution.
The Council has just adopted its third resolution in
support of peace in Colombia. We are grateful to the
members of the Council for remaining united on this
matter and for their ongoing dialogue over the past year
and a half. The Council’s visit to Columbia last May
allowed members to better understand the reality of
Colombia, the strength of our institutions, our desire
for peace and reintegration as well as the challenges
we have faced in the months of implementing the
Agreement. That understanding is fundamental to
maintaining support for the steps that Colombia is
continuing to take in order to consolidate peace and
build a prosperous, modern society throughout all
regions of the country, especially in the countryside,
which is our main challenge.
Fostering political participation, greater equity
and improved justice will be fundamental to become
the country that we want to be — one of opportunities,
growth and education, but above all a tolerant and
reconciled country. That vision is one of a nation that
seeks to overcome the dynamics of the conflict and
violence and that has tirelessly for decades sought
coexistence and peace. The participation of the Council
has between very important in strengthening the
building of trust between the two parties that negotiated
the peace. Likewise, the support of the international
community in the process has made it possible to
maintain the determination to overcome difficult
moments. As this resolution is adopted, the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) have handed over their individual
weapons — a process guaranteed by the first United

17-208679/10

S/PV.7997

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

Nations special Mission. The members of the FARC
must now turn over the remaining weapons in their
cashes, which the United Nations has been receiving.
The process should come to a conclusion in two months.
The second special political Mission, which begins
when the first one ends, will have a specific mandate to
verify the actions we will be taking in implementation
of the agreements related to political, economic and
social reintegration, security and protection guarantees.
This peace process has been built by Colombians for
Colombians. It should serve as a reason for all of us to
hope in a better future. Nevertheless, as in any robust
democracy, a lively debate is taking place. But, little by
little, people are beginning to see the benefits of peace
and are willing to give it a chance. The dividends of
peace are especially being felt in the countryside and
rural areas, where live millions of Colombians suffered
the consequences of the conflict much more than we
who live in the cities.
This peace and reconciliation process has had
unique characteristics, which we know the world
is watching as a model and which could be used as
lessons learned. Our process — according not to us,
but to experts on peace agreements — has been the
first in the world in which victims participated in
negotiations and were at the centre of the process.
The armed forces had direct participation and where
present during the negotiations, contributing their
knowledge and vision of the Agreement, especially

10/10

10/07/2017

with regard to the ceasefire and the laying down of
weapons. More than 70 per cent of the Peace Agreement
includes measures that will mean social and economic
transformations for Columbia. It has been crucial to
ensure the strengthening of institutions and legislative
development for sustainable implementation over time.
Lastly, the determination of the parties and the support
of the international community made it possible to
overcome challenges at critical moments.
Once again, we thank the Governments of Norway
and Cuba, as guarantor countries, as well as Chile and
Venezuela as accompanying countries of the process.
We are grateful to all of the members of the Security
Council, to the Secretary-General for his interest and
commitment and to the members of the special Mission
in Columbia, in particular Mr. Jean Arnault. Against
that backdrop, I would like to reiterate to the Security
Council and to the United Nations the unwavering
commitment of my Government to peace and to
implementing all aspects of the Agreement. In this the
final year of the current Government, we will not rest in
implementing the Agreement. We trust that Colombia’s
commitment to the Organization and our society will
continue under future Governments.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
determination to build a society that allows us to
dream and live in a Colombia that is at peace and
more equitable.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

17-20867
